CODE OF ORDINANCES TOWN OF BATESBURG-LEESVILLE, - SOUTH CAROLINA 
____________ 
Published in 2015 by Order of the Town Council 
____________ 

BATESBURG-LEESVILLE TOWN OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Marguerite J. Crapps 
Mayor 
____________ 
Rachel S. Taylor 
Todd O'Dell 
Stephen Cain 
Charles M. Simpkins 
Bob Penick 
Ella "Kathy" Mingo 
Meggie Ricard 
Frank Fox 
Town Council 
____________ 
William T. Luckadoo IV 
Town Manager 
____________ 
Christian Spradley 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Judy Edwards 
Municipal Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, South Carolina. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1996 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the town council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1996 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The various sections within each chapter have been provided catchlines to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Title, Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The title, chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in the 1996 Code. Each section number consists of three parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the title number, and the figure after the first dash refers to the position of the chapter within the title. The figure after the second dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Daniel F. Walker, Code Attorney, and Kayla Mahnken, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Ted Luckadoo, Town Manager, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, South Carolina. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, South Carolina. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, South Carolina. 2015. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 
Ordinance 
Number Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supplement 
Number Minutes of  6-16-2003 Omit 1 Ord. of  6-16-2003(1) Include 1 Ord. of  6-16-2003(2) Include 1 Minutes of  9- 8-2014 Omit 1 Ord. of  2- 9-2015 Include 1 Ord. of  3-26-2015 Include 1 Ord. of  6- 8-2015 Include 1 Ord. of  9- 9-2013 Include 2 Ord. of 10-12-2015 Include 2 Ord. of  1-11-2016 Include 2 Ord. of  2- 8-2016 Include 2 2016-006  7-11-2016 Omit 2 Ord. of  9-12-2016 Omit 2 Ord. of 10-10-2016 Include 3 Ord. of  6-19-2017 Include 3 17-01  9-18-2017 Include 3 Ord. of 10- 5-1998 Include 4 Ord. of  9- 9-2002 Include 4 Ord. of  5-10-2010 Include 4 Ord. of  9-10-2012 Include 4 Ord. of  9-10-2018(1) Include 4 Ord. of  9-10-2018(2) Include 4  
Title 1 - GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Powers conferred upon municipalities, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-30; general structure and functions of all municipalities, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-10 et seq.; municipal powers vested in council, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-160; local fee imposition limitations, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-1-330; appointment of municipal attorney, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-230; clerk duty to file certificate of existence of fire department, S.C. Code 1976, § 23-9-380; conflicts of interest of officers and employees, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-130; towns over 200 population must publish financial statements, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-21-50; Municipal Bond Act, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-21-210 et seq.; bonded indebtedness of political subdivisions, S.C. Const. art. X, § 14. 

CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1-1. - Form of government. 
    The present governing body of the town shall be that of the council-manager form of government, with a mayor and eight council members. 
(Code 1996, § 1-1-1) 
State Law reference- Requirement for selection of form of government, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-5-10 et seq.; council-manager form of government, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-13-10 et seq. 
CHAPTER 2. - GOVERNING BODY 

Sec. 1-2-1. - Election of governing body. 
    The mayor and council members of the town shall be elected for terms of four years. A general election for town council shall be held every two years to fill those offices available at that time, it being the intent and purpose of this section that the terms of council members be staggered so that not more than one-half of the council and mayor shall be elected in the same general election. 
(Code 1996, § 1-2-1) 
State Law reference- Terms of office of mayor and council members, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-40. 
Sec. 1-2-2. - Qualifications. 
(a)  The mayor shall be a qualified elector of the municipality. 
(b)  Each council member shall be a qualified elector and resident of the district he represents at the time he offers for election and during his entire term. 
(Code 1996, § 1-2-2) 
State Law reference- Qualifications of council members, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-20; municipal electors, S.C. Code 1976, § 7-5-610. 
Sec. 1-2-3. - Oath of mayor and council members. 
    The mayor and council members, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, shall take the following oath: 
    "I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I am duly qualified, according to the Constitution of this State, to exercise the duties of the office to which I have been elected and that I will, to the best of my ability, discharge the duties thereof and preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of this State and of the United States. 
    "As mayor (or council member) of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, I will equally, fairly and impartially, to the best of my ability and skill, exercise the trust reposed in me, and I will use my best endeavors to preserve the peace and carry into effect according to law the purpose for which I have been elected. So help me God (I so affirm)." 
(Code 1996, § 1-2-3) 
State Law reference- Constitutional oath of office, S.C. Const. art. VI, § 5; statutory oath, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-150. 
Sec. 1-2-4. - Compensation. 
    The mayor and council members shall receive as compensation such amount as shall be fixed from time to time by the council, in accordance with state law, and may also receive reimbursement for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2018(1)) 
Sec. 1-2-5. - Powers and duties. 
    All legislative powers of the municipality and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the town council, with each member, including the mayor, having one vote. 
(Code 1996, § 1-2-5) 
State Law reference- Powers and duties of municipal council under the council-manager form of government, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-13-30. 
Sec. 1-2-6. - Mayor; emergency powers and duties. 
(a)  In the event of a state of emergency, which shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times of great public crisis, disaster, rioting, civil disturbance, catastrophe or for any other reason, municipal public safety authorities are unable to maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives, safety, health, welfare or property, the mayor may: 
(1)  Issue a public proclamation declaring to all persons the existence of such a state of emergency; 
(2)  In order to more effectively protect the lives, safety and property of people within the town, define and impose a curfew applicable to all persons, within the jurisdiction of the town, during which it shall be unlawful for anyone subject to curfew to: 
a.  Be or travel upon any public street, alley or roadway or upon public property unless such travel is necessary to obtain medical assistance; 
b.  Possess off one's own premises, buy, sell, give away or otherwise transfer or dispose of any explosives, firearms, ammunition or dangerous weapon of any kind; 
c.  Sell beer, wines or intoxicating beverages of any kind, or possess or consume the same off one's own premises; or 
d.  Sell gasoline or any other similar petroleum products or any other combustible or inflammable substances, except as expressly authorized by the provisions of the curfew imposed; 
(3)  Limit the application of the curfew to any area specifically designated and described within the jurisdiction of the town and to specific hours of the day or night; 
(4)  Exempt from the curfew police officers, firefighters, doctors, nurses and such other classes of persons as may be essential to the preservation of public order and immediately necessary to serve the safety, health and welfare needs of the people within the town. 
(b)  The mayor shall call the town council into session within 24 hours after a state of emergency has been proclaimed and shall proclaim the end of any state of emergency and curfew as soon as circumstances warrant or when directed to do so by the town council. 
(Code 1996, § 1-2-6) 
Sec. 1-2-7. - Mayor pro tempore. 
    At the first meeting of each town council after its election, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable, the council shall elect one of its members as mayor pro tempore. The mayor pro tempore shall be vested with all the powers, duties and responsibilities attached to the office of mayor during the temporary absence or disability of the mayor, or when the office of mayor shall become vacant by reason of death, resignation, removal or permanent disability of the mayor or for any other reason, until a new mayor is duly elected and qualified. Should both the mayor and mayor pro tempore be absent or unable to act, the duties of mayor shall devolve upon and be performed by such member as the council shall designate. 
(Code 1996, § 1-2-7) 
State Law reference- Mayor pro tempore, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-190. 
CHAPTER 3. - RULES OF PROCEDURE AND ORDINANCES 
ARTICLE A. - MEETINGS OF GOVERNING BODY 

Sec. 1-3-1. - Council meetings. 
(a)  Regular meeting. Regular meetings shall be held at 7:00 p.m. on the second Monday of each month. 
(b)  Special meetings/works sessions. Special meetings of the council may be held on the call of the town manager or by four council members presenting a signed request to the town manager detailing the need. Notice of a special meeting shall be given immediately to all available members and the news media by the municipal clerk. Calls for special meetings of the council shall set forth the object or purpose for which the meeting is called and no other business shall be transacted at special meetings. 
(c)  Executive session. An executive session must be set by motion adopted at a regular or special public meeting for at least one reason permitted by the Freedom of Information Act. Council may not take any vote or action in executive session except to adjourn or to return to public session. 
(d)  Remote sites. Teleconferencing, Skype, speakerphone, or any form of audio/visual connectivity presents a challenge in establishing clear connectivity and communication that complies with the mandates of FOIA. Therefore, attendance for council meetings requires a council member's physical presence. 
(Ord. of 11-17-2014, exh. A, § 1-3-1) 
Sec. 1-3-2. - Quorum and rules of order. 
(a)  A majority of the members of council serving constitutes a quorum for the conduct of business at any meeting. The mayor shall preside at meetings, or mayor pro tempore in absence of mayor, except that, when both are absent, the members present shall elect a presiding member. A member present but disqualified from voting on a question by state law due to a conflict of interest shall be counted for purposes of a quorum. 
(b)  The mayor or presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum at town council meetings and decide all questions of order. 
(Ord. of 11-17-2014, exh. A, § 1-3-2) 
Sec. 1-3-3. - Parliamentary rules. 
    Except as otherwise required by state law or local ordinance, all proceedings of the council shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order (current edition) and the municipal attorney shall act as parliamentarian. The presiding officer, without debate, will decide questions of order. The decision is subject to appeal of council, with the advice of parliamentarian, to which council can take a vote to override the presiding officer. 
(Ord. of 11-17-2014, exh. A, § 1-3-3) 
Sec. 1-3-4. - Agenda. 
    Matters to be considered by council at a regular or special meeting shall be placed on a written agenda prepared by the town manager and publicly posted by the municipal clerk 24 hours prior to the meeting. Matters not on the agenda shall not be considered by council. However, a council member may request during a public meeting of council that an item be placed on the agenda of a future meeting of council. The requested item shall be added to the agenda of the future meeting if approved by a majority vote of council. 
(Ord. of 11-17-2014, exh. A, § 1-3-4) 
Sec. 1-3-5. - Order of proceedings. 
    The order of the proceedings of the council shall be as follows: 
(1)  Invocation and Pledge of Allegiance; 
(2)  Approval of agenda; 
(3)  Adopting the minutes of last council meeting; 
(4)  Presentation of awards, proclamations, and resolutions; 
(5)  Reports from department heads and council committees; 
(6)  Public comment regarding items on the agenda; 
(7)  Introduction of ordinances and other business; 
(8)  Reports from executive staff; 
(9)  Potential agenda items for next month's meeting; 
(10)  Executive session; 
(11)  Possible actions by council in follow up to executive session; 
(12)  Adjournment. 
(Ord. of 11-17-2014, exh. A, § 1-3-5) 
Sec. 1-3-6. - Recognition of speakers. 
(a)  Every member of the council when about to speak shall address the mayor as "Mr. or Madam Mayor" and in speaking shall avoid all disrespect to the council and all personalities, and shall confine himself to the subject under consideration. 
(b)  The presiding officer, when addressed by a member who rises in order, shall name the member, using no title but that of Mr./Mrs./Ms. The member who shall rise first in order, shall be first heard. If several members rise about the same time, the mayor shall decide who shall speak first. 
(c)  No member shall speak more than twice on the same question without leave of the council, except to explain. 
(Ord. of 11-17-2014, exh. A, § 1-3-6) 
Sec. 1-3-7. - Voting requirements. 
(a)  All actions of the council shall be by majority vote of members present at a public meeting. No proxy, mail, telephonic, facsimile, electronic or absentee vote may be cast. 
(b)  Every member of council present, including the mayor, shall vote on every question except when required to abstain from voting by state law. 
(c)  The vote on every question shall be by a roll call or show of hands. 
(d)  The vote on every question shall be recorded in the minutes. 
(e)  No member of the council may leave the council chamber while in public session without permission of the presiding officer. 
(Ord. of 11-17-2014, exh. A, § 1-3-7) 
Sec. 1-3-8. - Motions. 
    Motions are to be made orally, and are to be made in the affirmative. 
(Ord. of 11-17-2014, exh. A, § 1-3-8) 
Sec. 1-3-9. - Minutes. 
(a)  Minutes must be taken of all public meetings. Minutes are not required of executive sessions and shall not be taken. 
(b)  The municipal clerk shall keep minutes of all public meetings, which shall be a matter of permanent public record. At each regular council meeting the minutes of the previous meeting must be presented for approval. Minutes do not constitute the official record of a meeting until approved by council. A member of council may place a written expression of position on a matter in the minutes no later than the next regular meeting. A written expression must be voted on by a majority of council to reflect a revision of the minutes that include the written insertion. 
(c)  Minutes are not required to be verbatim. Audio and video recordings of each meeting represent a verbatim recording of such events, thereby negating the need for an exact written record. Minutes will reflect the council members in attendance, transactions occurring, record of motions, votes cast, and a synopsis of any discussions. 
(Ord. of 11-17-2014, exh. A, § 1-3-9) 
Sec. 1-3-10. - Executive sessions. 
(a)  By majority vote in a public meeting, council may hold an executive session as permitted by the South Carolina Freedom of Information Act, S.C. Code 1976, § 30-4-70. 
(b)  No vote or formal action shall be taken in executive session except to adjourn and return to public session, S.C. Code 1976, § 30-4-70(b). 
(c)  Minutes of executive session will not be taken. 
(d)  It shall be unethical for a member of council or person in attendance to disclose to another person or make public the substance of matters discussed in executive session. Sanctions shall be a vote of council. 
(e)  No audio or visual recording devices shall be used by any member of council or persons present during executive sessions. 
(Ord. of 11-17-2014, exh. A, § 1-3-10) 
Sec. 1-3-11. - Code of conduct. 
(a)  Council meetings will be conducted with respect, showing consideration for all in attendance. 
(b)  It is the responsibility of each council member, and the mayor, to be on time and present for every regular or special meeting. 
(c)  Council members who are unable to attend regular or special meetings are to notify the town manager well in advance of the meeting. In an emergency, the town manager must be notified as soon as possible. 
(d)  Council members who arrive after a regular meeting or special meeting has begun shall not interrupt discussions in order to catch up on what has been missed. 
(e)  Cell phones, PDAs, laptops, tablets, or any other form of electronic communication will be turned to silent or off for the duration of all council meetings. Phone calls or texting of any nature is prohibited during council meetings. If a council member must participate in a phone call, in an emergency, that council member must first seek permission from the presiding officer to leave the meeting. 
(f)  The following conduct may be considered disruptive during a meeting and subject the offending council member to sanctions up to, but not limited to, removal from the meeting: carrying on private conversations, speaking out of turn when not recognized by the presiding officer, making frivolous motions, arguing with the presiding officer, making political speeches, involving personalities in comments, making comments not relevant to the business at hand, or refusing to abide by a legitimate ruling of order from the presiding officer. 
(Ord. of 11-17-2014, exh. A, § 1-3-11) 
Sec. 1-3-12. - Removal procedure for disruptive actions. 
(a)  The presiding officer must first ask the council member to come to order. 
(b)  If the council member refuses to come to order, the presiding officer must rule the council member out of order. 
(c)  If the council member continues to be disruptive, the presiding officer can order the removal of the council member from the council chambers until council can assess what penalties should be enforced. Penalties include, but are not limited to, allowing the council member to return to the meeting after having had a chance to calm down, censuring the council member, or removing the council member from the remainder of the meeting. 
(d)  Any penalties assessed must be voted on by each member of council. Assessment of penalty will be by majority vote. 
(Ord. of 11-17-2014, exh. A, § 1-3-12) 
Sec. 1-3-13. - Appearance of citizens. 
(a)  Any citizen of the municipality may address council at any regular council meeting. Discussion is limited to items on the current agenda. Those who request to speak must sign in with the municipal clerk no later than ten minutes prior to the beginning of the regular meeting indicating their name, address and agenda item on which they intend to comment. Each person who gives notice may speak at a designated time and will be limited to a three-minute presentation at the discretion of the presiding officer. 
(b)  No questions shall be entertained and this is not a forum for debate. Individual council members, and the mayor, may be directly addressed before or after each meeting. The presiding officer may limit the number of speakers. One speaker may not defer his/her allotted time to another speaker. 
(Ord. of 11-17-2014, exh. A, § 1-3-13) 
Sec. 1-3-14. - Town manager to attend. 
    The town manager shall attend all meetings of the council unless notification of absence is provided to the presiding officer. In the absence of the town manager, the assistant town manager shall attend. 
(Ord. of 11-17-2014, exh. A, § 1-3-14) 
Sec. 1-3-15. - Town attorney to attend; parliamentarian. 
    The town attorney shall attend all regular meetings of council, and special meetings unless excused by council. The attorney shall act as parliamentarian. The attorney shall review all ordinances, resolutions and documents presented to council and give opinions upon questions of procedure, form and law to any member of council. 
(Ord. of 11-17-2014, exh. A, § 1-3-15) 
Sec. 1-3-16. - Town clerk to attend. 
    The municipal clerk is the ex officio clerk of council. The clerk shall give notices of meetings, post agendas, attend regular and special meetings, record votes of council, keep minutes of council meetings and perform such other duties as may be assigned by the town manager. 
(Ord. of 11-17-2014, exh. A, § 1-3-16) 
Sec. 1-3-17. - Public hearings. 
(a)  Town council shall hold public hearings for those matters required by law and may hold public hearings for any purpose council deems appropriate. 
(a)  Public hearings shall be advertised as required by law, with notices and agenda publicly posted 24 hours before the hearing. 
(b)  A public hearing is understood to be a forum for people interested in the subject matter to present information to town council for its consideration as it deliberates an issue. It is not a forum for debate or argument between members of the council and opponents or proponents, or each other. 
(c)  Each speaker shall be limited to three minutes. The time allowed to any one speaker may be increased or decreased by a majority vote of council. by a majority vote, council may also allow groups of citizens to join together for longer presentations under special circumstances. 
(d)  One speaker may not defer his/her allotted time to another speaker. 
(e)  The presiding officer may terminate a presentation which addresses the same information as presented by a previous speaker to avoid continuous repetition of information. Such speakers shall be encouraged to simply state their agreement with a previous speaker and bring new information to the subject. 
(f)  Public hearings will be held before a regular meeting, but may be held at a time separate from other meetings of town council. 
(g)  Public hearings will be orderly, allowing all who wish to speak to do so without interruption. The presiding officer will take necessary measures to assure all citizens who wish to be heard are allowed to speak. Council members may not speak as an opponent or proponent at any public hearing. 
(Ord. of 11-17-2014, exh. A, § 1-3-17) 
Sec. 1-3-18. - Powers and duties in absence of mayor. 
    Town council shall, at the first meeting after installation, elect a member of council as mayor pro tempore. It shall be the duty of the mayor pro tempore to act as the presiding officer in the absence or inability of the mayor from the municipality or when the mayor is incapable of the duties of his office. In the absence or inability of both the mayor and mayor pro tempore, the duties of the mayor shall devolve on and be performed by such council member as the council shall temporarily appoint. Appointment shall be by nomination and majority vote. 
(Ord. of 11-17-2014, exh. A, § 1-3-18) 
Sec. 1-3-19. - Investigative powers of council members. 
    By majority vote of council at a properly noticed meeting of council, council members can be granted investigative authority and have the power to inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the municipality, make investigations as to municipal affairs and give the public information concerning them. This does not grant authority for council or any of its members to interfere with daily municipal operations nor shall council or any of its members deal with municipal officers or employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the manager except through the manager, and neither the council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
(Ord. of 11-17-2014, exh. A, § 1-3-19) 
Sec. 1-3-20. - Council compensation. 
    Monthly compensation shall be paid monthly at a rate established in accordance with state law by council. 
(Ord. of 11-17-2014, exh. A, § 1-3-20) 
Sec. 1-3-21. - Voting. 
    The "yeas" and "nays" of any question shall always be recorded, when required by any member. When the question has been stated, and the first response has been made to the call of the clerk-treasurer, all debate shall cease, and no member shall say more than "yea" or "nay." During the call, no member shall leave the council chamber. Every member present shall, when his name is called, give his vote, unless excused by the council or prohibited by law. 
(Code 1996, § 1-3-9; Ord. of 11-17-2014, exh. A, § 1-3-21) 
Sec. 1-3-22. - Reasons for voting may be recorded. 
    Any member of the council may, if he desires, have his reasons for voting for or against any measure recorded on the minutes. 
(Code 1996, § 1-3-10; Ord. of 11-17-2014, exh. A, § 1-3-22) 
Sec. 1-3-23. - Interested member not to vote. 
    No member of council shall vote on any questions in which he is personally or pecuniarily (of or relating to money) interested. 
(Code 1996, § 1-3-11; Ord. of 11-17-2014, exh. A, § 1-3-23) 
State Law reference- Municipal officers prohibited from contracting with municipality, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 5-7-130, 5-21-30. 
Sec. 1-3-24. - Repeal, suspension, or alteration of rules. 
    Any of the provisions of this chapter pertaining to meetings, rules of order, and conduct of meetings may be suspended at any meeting of the council by a consenting vote of two-thirds of council members present. 
(Code 1996, § 1-3-12; Ord. of 11-17-2014, exh. A, § 1-3-24) 
Secs. 1-3-25-1-3-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Acts of council which are required to be done by ordinance, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-260. 

Sec. 1-3-41. - Ordinances for benefit of town. 
    It shall be the duty of the council to pass from time to time such ordinances as in their judgment shall best promote the interest of the citizens and property holders of the town. 
(Code 1996, § 1-3-21) 
Sec. 1-3-42. - Style of ordinances. 
    The style of all ordinances shall be: "Be It Ordered and Ordained by the Town Council of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, South Carolina, in Council Assembled and by the Authority Thereof." 
(Code 1996, § 1-3-22) 
Sec. 1-3-43. - Introduction of ordinances and resolutions. 
(a)  All ordinances shall be prepared by the town attorney, and introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. 
(b)  All ordinances, resolutions, contracts and other documents shall, before presentation to the council, be approved as to form and legality by the town attorney or his authorized representative. 
(c)  Ordinances, resolutions, contracts and other documents that involve substantive matters of administration shall further be examined and approved by the town manager or his designate, after first having been referred to the head of the department under whose jurisdiction the administration of the subject matter would devolve. If the department head does not approve, he shall return the instrument to the town manager with a written memorandum of the reasons why approval is withheld. If the instrument is not redrafted to meet the objection, or if written approval is not obtained, the town manager shall so advise the council. 
(d)  Ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects requiring action by the council must be initiated, introduced and sponsored by a member of the council, except that the town attorney may, on his own initiative, prepare and present ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects to the council, and any council member may assume sponsorship by moving adoption. 
(Code 1996, § 1-3-23) 
Sec. 1-3-44. - Procedure for enacting ordinances; effective date. 
(a)  No ordinance or amendment thereto shall have the force of law until it shall have been read two times on two separate days with at least six days between each reading, and shall have received a favorable majority vote after each reading. 
(b)  Unless specifically provided to the contrary, all ordinances shall take effect and be in force from and after their adoption. 
(Code 1996, § 1-3-24) 
State Law reference- Form and procedures for introducing and passing ordinances, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-270. 
Sec. 1-3-45. - Emergency ordinances. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, an ordinance to meet public emergencies affecting life, health, safety or the property of the people (but in no event ordinances to levy taxes, grant, renew or extend a franchise or impose or change a service rate) shall have the force of law when adopted by an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the members of council present. An emergency ordinance is effective immediately upon its enactment without regard to any reading, public hearing, publication requirements or public notice requirements, and shall expire automatically as of the 61st day following the date of enactment. 
(Code 1996, § 1-3-25) 
State Law reference- Emergency ordinances, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-250. 
Sec. 1-3-46. - Ordinances entered in book. 
    The clerk-treasurer shall enter, in a well-bound book, copies of all ordinances passed by the council. The book in which the ordinances are thus entered shall be known as the "Ordinances at Large of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville," and shall be indexed. 
(Code 1976, § 2-23; Code 1996, § 1-3-26) 
Sec. 1-3-47. - Notation of amendment or repeal. 
    The clerk-treasurer shall write on the first page of every ordinance, if the same has been amended or repealed, as the case may be, the words "amended" or "repealed" with a reference to the page of the ordinance book where the amending or repealing ordinance can be found. 
(Code 1996, § 1-3-27) 
Secs. 1-3-48-1-3-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE C. - USE OF CODE AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 1-3-61. - How Code cited and designated. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Ordinances of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, South Carolina," and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as "Batesburg-Leesville Town Code." 
(Code 1978, § 1-1; Code 1996, § 1-3-41) 
Sec. 1-3-62. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)  In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the town, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the town council or the context clearly requires otherwise. 
    And, or . The word "and" may be read as "or" and the word "or" may be read as "and," where the sense requires it. 
    Bond . When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
    Computation of time . The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, and if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded. 
    Council or town council . The term "council" or "town council" means the town council of Batesburg-Leesville, South Carolina. 
    Gender . Words importing masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
    Month . The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Number . Words used in the singular number include the plural and the plural shall include the singular number. 
    Oath, swear, sworn . The terms "oath," "swear" and "sworn" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Owner . The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part-owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or part of such building or land. 
    Person . The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, limited liability company, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
    Personal property . The term "personal property" includes every species of property, except real property, as defined in this section. 
    Preceding, following . The terms "preceding" and "following" mean the next before and the next after, respectively. 
    Property . The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
    Real property and real estate . The terms "real property" and "real estate" include lands, tenements, and hereditaments (heritable property). 
    S.C. Code 1976 . This abbreviation refers to the South Carolina Code of Laws, 1976. 
    S.C. Code Reg. This abbreviation refers to the South Carolina Code of Regulations. 
    Roadway . The term "roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    Shall, may . The term "shall" is mandatory. The term "may" is permissive. 
    Sidewalk . The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curb line, or the lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription . The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State . The term "state" or "this state" means the State of South Carolina. 
    Street . The term "street" includes avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and approaches thereto and all other public thoroughfares in the town, and shall mean the entire width thereof between abutting property lines; the term "street" shall be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the town council. 
    Tenant or occupant . The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Time . Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Town . The term "town" means the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, South Carolina. 
    Writing . The terms "writing" or "written" include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
    Year . The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(b)  In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the town, all officers, agents, employees and other persons, together with all things and places therein referred to, shall, unless a contrary intention appear, be construed to mean the officers, agents, employees and other persons, things and places situated in the town or employed by or appertaining to the town. 
(Code 1996, § 1-3-42) 
Sec. 1-3-63. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The underlined catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
(Code 1996, § 1-3-43) 
Sec. 1-3-64. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued, any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When an ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without expressed words to that effect. 
(Code 1996, § 1-3-44) 
Sec. 1-3-65. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code of Ordinances, so far as they are the same as prior existing ordinances, shall be considered as a continuation of such existing ordinances and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1996, § 1-3-45) 
Sec. 1-3-66. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the town council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code of Ordinances are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1996, § 1-3-46) 
Sec. 1-3-67. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances, which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof repealed by subsequent ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of the subsequent ordinances until the time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That Section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, South Carolina, is hereby amended to read as follows: ____________ ." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as enacted. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, South Carolina is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows: ____________ ." The new section shall then be set out in full as enacted. 
(d)  In lieu of the foregoing subsection, when the town council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in the Code, but which the town council desires to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made a part of the ordinance: "It is the intention of the town council, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made part of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, South Carolina, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish that intention." 
(e)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(f)  When necessary, sections and subsections to the Code may be renumbered by the official codifier for the town to fulfill the intent of the governing body, but all such changes shall be approved in advance by the town attorney. 
(Code 1996, § 1-3-47) 
Sec. 1-3-68. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the Code in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the town to be misrepresented thereby. Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-3-69. 
(Code 1996, § 1-3-48) 
Sec. 1-3-69. - General penalty. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the town, or rule, regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the town under authority duly vested in him or it, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, or the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, and no specific penalty is provided for the violation thereof, the violation of such provisions of this Code, or any such ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 and/or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days; provided, however, that no penalty shall exceed the penalty provided by state law for similar offenses. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or any such ordinance, rule or regulation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1996, § 1-3-49) 
Sec. 1-3-70. - Liability of corporations and/or agents for violations. 
    Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall, in every case, also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. The individual shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provision of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order of any such person. 
(Code 1996, § 1-3-50) 
Sec. 1-3-71. - Certain ordinances, rights, etc., not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code, or the ordinance adopting this Code, shall affect any of the following ordinances or previous Code's sections in effect at the time of adoption of this Code, until later amended or repealed: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of the ordinance from which this Code is derived; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the town, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town or any evidence of the town's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the town; 
(3)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the town not in conflict with the provisions of this Code; 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution fixing salaries of officers or employees of the town, unless superseded; 
(5)  Any appropriation ordinance or resolution, including tax levies and other charges; 
(6)  Any right of franchise granted by the council to any person, firm or corporation; 
(7)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, closing, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the town; 
(8)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing the street grades of any streets in the town; 
(9)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements, or assessing taxes therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the town, or providing regulations for the same; 
(11)  Any ordinance annexing property to the town; 
(12)  Any zoning ordinance, development standards, or amendments thereto; 
(13)  Any ordinance or resolution regulating the erection, alteration, repair, demolition, moving, or removal of buildings or other structures; 
(14)  Ordinances or resolutions prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles, or loading zones, not inconsistent with this Code; 
(15)  Any ordinance or resolution fixing utility rates and charges; 
(16)  Any ordinance of agreement with another political subdivision; 
(17)  Any ordinance concerning the issuance of tax anticipation notes or other debt; or 
(18)  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature, or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect; 
and all such ordinances and resolutions are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances and resolutions are on file in the clerk's office. 
CHAPTER 4. - OFFICERS AND DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 1-4-1. - Council's powers. 
    The town council may by ordinance, upon recommendation of the town manager, create, change and abolish offices, departments or agencies of the municipal government in addition to those created by this chapter and may prescribe the functions of all departments, offices and agencies, except that no function assigned by law to a particular department, office or agency may be discontinued or assigned to any other agency. The head of each department shall be designated director thereof and shall have supervision and control over his department subject, however, to the direction of the manager. 
(Code 1996, § 1-4-1) 
State Law reference- Authority to establish offices, departments and agencies, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-13-100. 
Sec. 1-4-2. - Creation of specific departments. 
    There are hereby established and created the following departments for the town: 
(1)  Police; 
(2)  Fire; 
(3)  Administration; 
(4)  Sewer and water; 
(5)  Street; 
(6)  Maintenance; 
(7)  Planning/zoning. 
(Code 1996, § 1-4-2) 
Sec. 1-4-3. - Town manager-Appointment, salary and term. 
    The town council shall select and appoint a manager whose salary shall be fixed by the council and whose term of office shall be indefinite. 
(Code 1996, § 1-4-3) 
State Law reference- Employment of manager, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-13-50; term, compensation, and removal, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-13-70. 
Sec. 1-4-4. - Same-Qualifications. 
    The town manager shall be employed solely on the basis of his executive qualifications. He need not be a resident of the town or state at the time of appointment, and he may reside outside the town while in office with the approval of the council. 
(Code 1996, § 1-4-4) 
State Law reference- Qualifications of manager, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-13-50. 
Sec. 1-4-5. - Same-Bond. 
    The town manager shall provide a bond for the faithful performance of his duties in such amount as may be determined by the council, the premium for which shall be paid by the town. 
(Code 1996, § 1-4-5) 
State Law reference- Surety bonds of manager, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-13-60. 
Sec. 1-4-6. - Same-Powers and duties. 
(a)  The town manager shall be the chief executive officer of the town and head of the administrative branch of the municipal government. 
(b)  The town manager shall be responsible to the council for the proper administration of all affairs of the municipality and his responsibilities shall include: 
(1)  Appointing (and removing, when necessary) appointive officers and employees of the municipality, and fixing the salaries of such officers and employees, unless otherwise provided by law; provided, that he may authorize heads of departments or offices to appoint and remove subordinates in their respective departments or offices; 
(2)  Preparing the municipality's annual budget, submitting it to the council and administering the budget as adopted; 
(3)  Preparing and submitting to the council a complete annual report on the finances and administrative activities of the town at the end of each fiscal year; 
(4)  Making such other financial reports as may be required by the council from time to time; 
(5)  Keeping the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the municipality and making such recommendations as he may deem desirable; and 
(6)  Performing such other duties as may be required by law or assigned by the council. 
(Code 1996, § 1-4-6) 
State Law reference- Responsibilities of manager, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-13-90. 
Sec. 1-4-7. - Acting town manager. 
(a)  By letter filed with the town clerk-treasurer, the manager shall designate a qualified administrative officer to perform his duties during his temporary absence or disability. 
(b)  In the event of the manager's failure to make such designation, the council may, by resolution, appoint an officer of the municipality to perform the duties of the manager until he shall return, or his disability shall cease. 
(Code 1996, § 1-4-7) 
State Law reference- Similar state law, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-13-80. 
Sec. 1-4-8. - Removal of town manager. 
    The town council may remove the town manager at any time upon giving him written notification of the reasons for the proposed removal and the right to a public hearing before council. Within five days after such notice is delivered to the manager, he may file with the council a written request for a public hearing, such hearing to be held not less than 20, nor more than 30, days after the request is filed. The manager may file with the council a written reply no later than five days before the hearing. Removal shall be stayed pending the decision at the public hearing. 
(Code 1996, § 1-4-8) 
State Law reference- Removal of town manager, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-13-70. 
Sec. 1-4-9. - Town clerk-treasurer-Term. 
    The town manager shall appoint a clerk-treasurer for the municipality who shall hold office for a term of two years. 
(Code 1996, § 1-4-9) 
State Law reference- Appointment of municipal clerk, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-220. 
Sec. 1-4-10. - Same-Bond. 
    Before entering upon the duties of his office, the clerk-treasurer shall enter into a bond, in such sum as may be required and with such surety company as shall be approved by the council, for the faithful performance of his duties. 
(Code 1978, § 2-71; Code 1996, § 1-4-10) 
State Law reference- Surety bonds of municipal employees, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-13-60. 
Sec. 1-4-11. - Same-Duties. 
    The clerk-treasurer shall: 
(1)  Attend all meetings of the council and keep all records of the proceedings of the council in a book that shall be kept for that purpose; 
(2)  Give notice of council meetings to its members and the public; 
(3)  Collect and record all taxes and fees due the town and keep a record of all moneys belonging to the town and pay out same upon proper authority of the council; 
(4)  Submit to council a monthly statement of the financial condition of the town showing the balance on hand at the commencement of the month, all receipts and disbursements during the month, and the current balance; and 
(5)  Perform such other duties as assigned. 
(Code 1996, § 1-4-11) 
State Law reference- Duties of municipal clerk, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-220. 
Sec. 1-4-12. - Town attorney. 
    At its first regular meeting after a general election, the town council shall elect a lawyer, who has had at least two years' experience at the bar, as the town attorney. The attorney shall hold office for two years or until his successor is elected and qualified and shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by council. The town attorney shall not be considered an officer of the municipality. 
(Code 1996, § 1-4-12) 
State Law reference- Municipal attorney, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-230. 
Sec. 1-4-13. - Enforcement of ordinances, laws, etc. 
    All officers and employees of the town shall enforce obedience to such statutes, provisions of this Code or any other ordinances, resolutions, regulations, or orders issued thereunder, as may relate to their regular duties, or with whose enforcement they are properly chargeable, by properly reporting any violation thereof and instituting such proceedings as may be necessary to such enforcement. 
(Code 1996, § 1-4-13) 
Sec. 1-4-14. - Right of entry. 
    Whenever any officer or employee of the town is required or authorized by statute, the provisions of this Code, or any thereunder to enter any premises or vehicle, he shall have the right to enter the premises or vehicle at any reasonable time in pursuance of such duties, except as prohibited by the Constitution or laws of this state or of the United States. 
(Code 1996, § 1-4-14) 
Sec. 1-4-15. - Resisting or interfering with officers or employees. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to resist or interfere with any member of the police department, any member of the fire department, or any other municipal officer or employee in the discharge of his lawful duties. 
(Code 1996, § 1-4-15) 
Sec. 1-4-16. - Municipal officers may not contract with town; exception. 
    No municipal officer shall take a contract to perform work or furnish material for the town, and no officer shall receive any compensation on any such contract, except any municipal officer may enter into a contract awarded to him as low bidder after a public call for bids and which is allowed by unanimous vote of the town council upon each particular contract, such vote to be taken by yeas and nays and entered upon the council's minutes. 
(Code 1996, § 1-4-16) 
State Law reference- Municipal officers prohibited from contracting with municipality, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-21-30; conflict of interest, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-130. 
CHAPTER 5. - FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Council to provide for annual independent audits, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-240; adoption of annual budget and tax levy, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-11-40; collection of delinquent ad valorem property taxes by municipalities, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-300; local fee imposition limitations, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-1-330; towns over 200 population must publish financial statements, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-21-50; Municipal Bond Act, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-21-210 et seq.; bonded indebtedness of political subdivisions, S.C. Const. art. X, § 14. 

Sec. 1-5-1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the town shall be July 1 to June 30 of each year. 
(Code 1996, § 1-5-1) 
Sec. 1-5-2. - Adoption of budget. 
    The prepared budget and the estimated revenue for payment of budgeted expenses are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this Code as fully as if incorporated herein. 
(Code 1996, § 1-5-2) 
Sec. 1-5-3. - Form of budget; transfers of appropriations; lapse of appropriations. 
(a)  The annual budget shall take the form of an appropriation ordinance, setting out the estimated revenues in detail by source and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose or activity as set out in the budget document. The amounts thus set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit, purpose or activity shall then constitute the annual appropriation for such item and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriation to which it is chargeable. No interdepartmental transfers of the appropriations from one line item account to another line item account in the operating funds of the town shall be made, unless upon approval by majority vote of the total membership of the town council. This approval shall be in the form of an amendment to the annual operating budget ordinance. 
(b)  The council shall adopt the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year in the form of an ordinance. No appropriations provided for in the capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned. Provided, however, any member of the council may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, which amendments may be accompanied by recommendations thereon by the town manager or the town planner. Any amendments to the capital improvements budget ordinance shall become effective only upon adoption by a majority of the total members of the council. 
(c)  Following adoption by ordinance of the annual operating and capital improvements budget for each fiscal year, the council shall levy by ordinance a tax upon all real and personal property within the city. The rates to be set by the ordinance shall be such that a reasonable estimate of cash revenues of the levy shall be at least sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances and applicable reserves to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget ordinance for defraying the expense of the city. 
(d)  Upon a certification of the clerk-treasurer that the revenues or any other resources actually realized with respect to any fund shall be less than was anticipated and will be insufficient to meet the amounts appropriated from the funds, it shall be the duty of the council to impound any appropriations as may be necessary to prevent a deficit operation. 
(e)  The town council may make appropriations in addition to those contained in the current operation budget and capital improvements budget ordinance at any regular or special meeting called for such purpose. 
(f)  All unencumbered balances of appropriations in the current operating budget at the end of the fiscal year shall lapse into the general fund of the town and be expended as the council may direct. 
(Code 1996, § 1-5-3) 
Sec. 1-5-4. - Annual property tax. 
    The council shall impose by ordinance, a copy of which shall be published at least ten days before the adoption thereof and setting forth the amounts levied for the several purposes for which levies may be made, an annual tax on all real estate lying within the corporate limits and on all personal property within the corporate limits and on all personal property within the town, including bonds and stocks of banks, insurance companies and other corporations and the real estate of churches and school associations from which the church and school associations draw a revenue or which is intended to be rented out for that purpose, except property that is exempt from taxation under the constitution and laws of this state, as will yield an amount necessary for the general fund operating purposes and for debt service requirements of the town. A change in the tax shall be by ordinance and in accordance with the above notice requirement for such. 
(Code 1978, § 21-1; Code 1996, § 1-5-4) 
Sec. 1-5-5. - Town credit card. 
(a)  The town council and mayor have decided that it is appropriate to have a town credit card through a local bank. 
(b)  The authorized signatories on said credit card shall be the town manager and the mayor. 
(c)  The town shall secure a credit card from and through a local bank for use of town purposes with the persons authorized to sign for charges made to said credit card being the town manager and the mayor. 
(Code 1996, § 1-5-5) 
Secs. 1-5-6-1-5-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - COLLECTION OF PROPERTY TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Pursuant to authority provided by state law, municipal property taxes are collected by Lexington County. 
State Law reference- Collection of delinquent ad valorem taxes by municipalities, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-300. 

Sec. 1-5-11. - Basis of assessment. 
    The annual property tax shall be levied on property within the corporate limits as assessed for taxation for state and county purposes, adopting as a basis for such assessment the return and assessment for the current year in the office of the county auditor and treasurer for the county for the purpose of levying state and county taxes for the current year. 
(Code 1996, § 1-5-11) 
State Law reference- Municipal authorities may copy assessment from county books, S.C. Code 1976, § 12-37-40. 
Sec. 1-5-12. - Due date of taxes. 
    All taxes, except those on motor vehicles, shall be due and payable between October 1 and January 15 (of the following year) after assessment in each year. 
(Code 1996, § 1-5-12) 
State Law reference- Municipal taxes on motor vehicles, S.C. Code 1976, § 12-37-2690. 
Sec. 1-5-13. - Penalties. 
    There shall be added to all delinquent taxes the following penalties: 
(1)  Three percent of the tax if paid between January 16 to February 1; 
(2)  Ten percent if paid between February 2 to March 16; and 
(3)  15 percent plus a $15.00 execution charge if paid on March 17 or later. 
(Code 1976, § 21-21; Code 1996, § 1-5-13) 
CHAPTER 6. - MUNICIPAL COURT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- The municipal court may (1) Under S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-6150, try and determine criminal cases involving violations of S.C. Code 1976, Title 56, Chapter 5, occurring within the respective limits of this municipality, when the penalty prescribed by Title 56, Chapter 5 for such violations does not exceed 30 days' imprisonment nor a $100.00 fine, and may have trial jurisdiction over such criminal cases the same as magistrates; (2) Under S.C. Code 1976, § 61-6-4500, try and determine all cases involving a violation of S.C. Code 1976, § 61-6-13, except § 61-6-4720, per § 61-6-4500; (3) Maintain jurisdiction for trial of persons under 17 years of age, for alleged violations of S.C. Code 1976, Title 50, when the court would have jurisdiction if the offense charged was committed by an adult; and (4) Try a first offense for violation of S.C. Code 1976, § 47-1-40 (ill-treatment of animals). 
State Law reference- Municipal courts, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-5 et seq.; powers, duties and jurisdiction of municipal court, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-45; trial jurisdiction of municipal courts for violations of Uniform Act Regulating Traffic, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-6150; trial of persons charged with violations of ordinances or state law, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-90; municipal judges generally, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-15; appointment and duties of clerk of court, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-35; appointment, duties and powers of ministerial recorder, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-115; maximum penalties imposed by municipal court, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-65; judge may suspend sentences, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-75; disposition of fines and penalties, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-85; appeals to Court of Common Pleas, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-95; municipal judge to make return, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-105; jury commissioners, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-135; demand for jury trial; composition, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-125. 

Sec. 1-6-1. - Creation. 
    There is hereby established a municipal court for the town, which shall be a part of the unified judicial system of the state, pursuant to Action No. 480 of 1980, for the trial and determination of all cases within its jurisdiction. 
(Code 1996, § 1-6-1) 
Sec. 1-6-2. - Jurisdiction. 
    The municipal court shall have jurisdiction to try all cases arising under the ordinances of the town. The court shall also have all such powers, duties and jurisdiction in criminal cases made under state law and conferred upon magistrates. The court shall have the power to punish for contempt of court by imposition of sentences up to the limits imposed on municipal courts. The court shall have no jurisdiction in civil matters. 
(Code 1996, § 1-6-2) 
Sec. 1-6-3. - Judge-Term; compensation. 
    The court shall be presided over by the municipal judge, who shall be appointed by the council for a term of two years, and until his successor is appointed and qualified. The compensation of the municipal judge shall be determined by the council from time to time. 
(Code 1996, § 1-6-3) 
Sec. 1-6-4. - Same-Powers and duties. 
    The municipal judge shall have such powers and duties as provided by the Constitution and Code of Laws of South Carolina and such other duties, not inconsistent therewith, as may be ordained by the town council. 
(Code 1996, § 1-6-4) 
Sec. 1-6-5. - Clerk. 
    The council shall designate a clerk of the municipal court who shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by the municipal judge or the state court administrator. The council may designate the municipal clerk-treasurer or any other municipal employee to serve as clerk of the court. 
(Code 1996, § 1-6-5) 
Sec. 1-6-6. - Disposition of fines and penalties. 
    All fines and penalties collected by the municipal court shall be turned over to the municipal clerk-treasurer for deposit to the general fund of the town. 
(Code 1996, § 1-6-6) 
Sec. 1-6-7. - Penalties imposed. 
    Whenever the municipal judge or a jury finds a party guilty of violating a municipal ordinance or the state law within the jurisdiction of the court, he may impose a fine or imprisonment or both, not to exceed $500.00 or 30 days. 
(Code 1996, § 1-6-7) 
Sec. 1-6-8. - Suspend sentence. 
    The municipal judge may suspend sentences imposed by him upon such terms and conditions as he deems proper including, without limitation, restitution or public service employment. 
(Code 1996, § 1-6-8) 
Sec. 1-6-9. - Notice of appeal. 
    Any party shall have the right to appeal from the sentence or judgment of the municipal court to the Court of Common Pleas. Notice of intention to appeal, setting forth the grounds for appeal, shall be given in writing and served on the municipal judge or the clerk of the municipal court within ten days after sentence is passed or judgment rendered, or the appeal shall be deemed waived. The party appealing shall enter into a bond, payable to the town to appear and defend such appeal at the next term of the Court of Common Pleas or shall pay the fine assessed. 
(Code 1996, § 1-6-9) 
Sec. 1-6-10. - Appeal. 
    In the event of an appeal, the municipal judge shall make a return to the Court of Common Pleas as provided by S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-95. 
(Code 1996, § 1-6-10) 
Sec. 1-6-11. - Jury trial. 
    Any person to be tried in the municipal court may, prior to trial, demand, in writing, a jury trial, and such jury, when demanded, shall be composed of six persons prescribed by law. The right to a jury trial shall be deemed to have been waived unless a written demand is made prior to trial. 
(Code 1996, § 1-6-11) 
Sec. 1-6-12. - Ministerial recorder. 
    There is hereby established the office of ministerial recorder. Ministerial recorders shall be elected from time to time by council, and shall serve at its pleasure or until the office is vacated when employment with the municipality is terminated. Ministerial recorders shall perform the powers provided by law, and shall be subject to the supervision of the municipal judge. Ministerial recorders shall not be law enforcement officers. 
(Code 1996, § 1-6-12) 
Sec. 1-6-13. - Contempt of court. 
    Any person failing to maintain proper decorum, or failing to have the proper attire or refusing to obey the orders of the recorder, while acting in his official capacity, shall be guilty of contempt of court. 
(Code 1996, § 1-6-13) 
Sec. 1-6-14. - Failure to obey a subpoena or summons. 
    Any person that is summoned or subpoenaed to appear in recorder's court shall do so unless he has a just and legal excuse. If any person fails to appear, he shall be guilty of contempt of court and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days. 
(Code 1996, § 1-6-14) 
Sec. 1-6-15. - Prosecution in magistrate's courts. 
    The town, pursuant to the authority of Act No. 480 of 1980, may prosecute all of its cases arising under the ordinances of the town or traffic laws of this state in the magistrate's courts of Lexington County or Saluda County. Such courts are hereby vested with the authority to try and determine all cases arising under municipal ordinance or state law within the jurisdiction of municipal or magistrate's courts. 
(Code 1996, § 1-6-15) 
CHAPTER 7. - ELECTIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Nominations and elections for municipal offices, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-20 et seq. 

Sec. 1-7-1. - Election at large. 
(a)  The mayor shall be elected by the town at large. 
(b)  The members of council shall be elected by districts. 
(Code 1996, § 1-7-1) 
Sec. 1-7-2. - Districts. 
    The town shall be divided into eight election districts, the boundaries of which shall be as shown on an official map duly adopted by the town council on file in the office of the town clerk-treasurer and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Code 1996, § 1-7-2) 
Sec. 1-7-3. - Method of election. 
(a)  All regular and special elections for the offices of mayor and town council shall be nonpartisan, using the election and runoff method pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-62. 
(b)  Nomination petitions for the offices of mayor shall be filed with the Municipal clerk-treasurer at least 45 days prior to the date of the election concerned and shall bear the signatures of not less than five percent of the qualified voters. They shall be delivered by the clerk-treasurer for examination, its validity determined not later than 30 days prior to the election. 
(c)  Nomination petitions for the offices of council members shall be filed with the municipal clerk-treasurer at least 45 days prior to the date of the election concerned and shall bear the signatures of not less than the five percent of the qualified electors of the district. The municipal clerk-treasurer shall deliver the petition for examination of the petition and determine its validity not later than 30 days prior to the election. 
(d)  No political party affiliation shall be placed on any ballots for any candidate. 
(Code 1996, § 1-7-3) 
Sec. 1-7-4. - When held. 
(a)  All general elections to fill the offices of mayor and council members shall be held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November of each odd-numbered year. 
(b)  In case a vacancy shall occur in the office of mayor or any of the council members, an election shall be held to fill such vacancy; provided that the vacancy occurs 180 days or more prior to the next general election. 
(Code 1996, § 1-7-4) 
State Law reference- Filling vacancies, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-200. 
Sec. 1-7-5. - Notice of elections. 
    At least 60 days public notice of every general or special election shall be given by publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. 
(Code 1996, § 1-7-5) 
State Law reference- Public notice of election, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-50. 
Sec. 1-7-6. - Where held. 
    All elections shall be at such places in the town as shall be designated by the town council in accordance with the state law. 
(Code 1996, § 1-7-6) 
Sec. 1-7-7. - Transfer of authority for conducting municipal elections to the Lexington County Registration and Election Commission. 
(a)  The Lexington County Voter Registration and Elections Commission shall advertise municipal elections, prepare and distribute ballots and election materials, appoint managers of election for each polling place, and otherwise supervise and conduct all municipal elections within the town. 
(b)  Immediately upon the closing of the polls at any municipal election in the town, the Lexington County Voter Registration and Elections Commission shall begin to count and continuously count the votes cast and make a statement of the whole number of votes cast in such election together with the number of votes cast for each candidate for mayor and councilperson, canvass the vote and publicly display the unofficial results. 
(c)  The voter registration and elections commission shall thereafter certify the results of the elections and transmit the certified results to the town council or an appointed authority representing the town government as soon as practicable following the certification. 
(d)  Accept candidate filings, and filing fees/petitions, including, but not limited to, notices of candidacy, candidacy pledges, hear and decide protests and certify the results of municipal elections. 
(e)  Utilize an automated election system and computer counting with the count publicly conducted. 
(f)  The town election commission is hereby dissolved. 
(Code 1996, § 1-7-7; Ord. of 10-12-2015) 
State Law reference- Home Rule Act of 1975, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 5-7-30, 5-7-260, 5-15-145. 
Title 2 - PUBLIC SAFETY 
CHAPTER 1. - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal police officers, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-110. 

Sec. 2-1-1. - Composition of department. 
    The police department shall consist of one chief and such other police officers as from time to time the town council shall deem necessary for the safety and good order of the town. 
(Code 1996, § 2-1-1) 
Sec. 2-1-2. - Appointment. 
(a)  The chief of police shall be appointed by the town manager. 
(b)  The other police officers shall be appointed by the town manager upon recommendation of the chief. 
(c)  In case of an emergency, the town manager may appoint as many special police officers as he deems necessary. Special officers shall be administered an oath of office by the mayor. 
(Code 1996, § 2-1-2) 
Sec. 2-1-3. - Terms. 
    Each police officer shall serve and continue to serve for so long a period as he shall perform his duties and does not violate any rule, regulation or policy of the department or of the town. Special police shall serve as such only for the period stated in their appointment. 
(Code 1996, § 2-1-3) 
Sec. 2-1-4. - Compensation. 
    The compensation of all police officers, including the chief of police shall be determined by the town manager. 
(Code 1996, § 2-1-4) 
Sec. 2-1-5. - Swearing in and empowering. 
    Each member of the department shall be sworn in and thereupon vested with all the powers of constables within the corporate limits of the town or its police jurisdiction, and shall also have the power to carry out all duties assigned to him by statute, ordinance, resolution, directive, rule, or regulation as is necessary, specifically or by implication. 
(Code 1996, § 2-1-5) 
Sec. 2-1-6. - Bond required. 
    The chief of police shall be required to enter into bond, in such sum as shall be set by council from time to time for the faithful performance of his duties and his personnel. 
(Code 1996, § 2-1-6) 
Sec. 2-1-7. - Policies, rules and procedures. 
(a)  The council, with the advice of the chief of police and the town manager, shall prescribe policies, rules and regulations for the department. 
(b)  A compilation of all policies, rules and regulations, plus a list of the shift and officers in charge shall be made by the chief of police and posted in a conspicuous place within the police department. This list shall be kept current. 
(Code 1996, § 2-1-7) 
Sec. 2-1-9. - Obedience to chief. 
    The chief of police at all times shall be recognized and respected by each member of the department as his commander and superior officer. All disregard, inattention or disobedience of the proper general or special orders of the chief shall be reported to him. 
(Code 1996, § 2-1-9) 
Sec. 2-1-10. - Supervision by chief. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police to distribute the members of his department over the town to obtain the best results and most efficient service. He shall initiate such programs as will provide him with information and reports and shall maintain regular contact with members of the department. 
(Code 1996, § 2-1-10) 
Sec. 2-1-11. - Duties of police. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each police officer to arrest and/or report any person for violating in any manner the laws of ordinances of the town and failure or neglect to do so shall make him liable to fine, suspension or discharge. 
(b)  All members of the police department must be made aware of the fact that they are the representatives to the public at large of the town and that their actions and appearances must at all times reflect credit on the town. 
(c)  A copy of this chapter, together with all current rules, regulations and policies, shall be read to each new member of the police department at the time he is sworn in and shall also be read to all members of the police department once each year by the chief of police. 
(Code 1996, § 2-1-11) 
Sec. 2-1-12. - Resisting, interfering with officer in execution of warrant; other process. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to resist, assault, obstruct, hinder, prevent or in any manner interfere with any officer or other person charged with the execution of any lawful warrant or other process in arresting any person for whose apprehension the warrant has been issued; or to rescue or attempt to rescue any person from the custody of an officer or person lawfully arresting him; or directly or indirectly to aid, abet or assist any person so arrested to escape from custody; or to harbor or conceal any person for whose arrest a warrant or other process shall have been issued, so as to prevent the discovery of the person, after notice or knowledge of the fact of the issuing of the warrant or other process. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully approach nearer than 20 feet to any police officer who is making or attempting to make an arrest or while on his way to jail with his prisoner. All police officers shall have the right to order all persons away from the vicinity of the jail while any person is being placed therein or being held in custody. Any person violating any part of this section or refusing to leave the vicinity of the jail when ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1996, § 2-1-12) 
Sec. 2-1-13. - Municipal court powers and duties. 
    The chief of police or his designee shall attend all sessions of the municipal court. The chief of police and police officers shall be subject to the orders of the court and shall execute the orders, writs and mandates thereof, and perform such other duties in connection with the court as may be prescribed by ordinance. The chief of police and police officers shall also be invested with the same powers and duties as are devolved upon magistrates' constables. 
(Code 1996, § 2-1-13) 
Sec. 2-1-14. - Bond for person arrested; imprisonment upon failure to post. 
    Each member of the police force shall, upon the arrest of any person for violating any ordinances of the town or state laws, require such person to give a valid bond or pledge for his appearance at recorder's court for trial and, upon failure to secure such bond or pledge, to imprison such person. 
(Code 1996, § 2-1-14) 
CHAPTER 2. - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Giving false alarms, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-17-570; interference with fire alarm boxes, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-17-570; fireworks, S.C. Code 1976, § 23-35-10 et seq.; following or parking near fire apparatus, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-1960; driving over fire hose, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-3850; interfering with fire hydrants, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-31-1110; operation of emergency vehicles, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-760 et seq. 

ARTICLE A. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of municipality to establish fire department, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-25-20. 

Sec. 2-2-1. - Chief; appointment; term; duties and powers. 
(a)  The town manager shall appoint a chief of the fire department. The chief shall hold office at the pleasure of the town manager. 
(b)  The chief shall have general superintendence and control of the stations, subject to the direction of the town manager. During the progress of a fire or emergency scene, he shall have all rights and powers. He shall have power to make rules and regulations governing departmental procedures and the prevention of fires. 
(Code 1996, § 2-2-1) 
State Law reference- Chief of fire department, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-25-110. 
Sec. 2-2-2. - Membership. 
(a)  The volunteer fire department shall consist of no more than 60 members, excluding the chief. 
(b)  Membership and service shall be determined in accordance with current department rules and regulations. 
(Code 1996, § 2-2-2) 
Sec. 2-2-3. - Duties of members. 
    The members of the volunteer fire department shall be subject for call to duty at any time when needed to extinguish fires or for any other emergency that may arise. While endeavoring to control or extinguish fires, the firefighters, under order of the chief, or officer in charge, may pass through and enter any adjacent buildings or property. 
(Code 1996, § 2-2-3) 
Sec. 2-2-4. - Compensation; reimbursement for expenses. 
    The town shall compensate each volunteer in such amount as council may determine from time to time for each call and training meeting at which he was actually in attendance, such sum to be paid at the department's direction, as a partial reimbursement of the actual expenses incurred by the members of the volunteer fire department in the exercise of their duties. 
(Code 1996, § 2-2-4) 
Sec. 2-2-5. - Interfering with firefighters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to hinder or obstruct any firefighter or other authorized person while such person is answering a fire call or other emergency call, or to hinder or obstruct such person who is attempting to extinguish a fire or remedy any emergency while acting in an official capacity. 
(b)  The failure to obey any lawful order of any official of the fire or police department at the scene of any emergency shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(Code 1996, § 2-2-6) 
Sec. 2-2-6. - Tampering with fire equipment. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to use, borrow or tamper with any equipment of the fire department without the express consent of the chief or battalion chief. 
(b)  The term "equipment" shall be construed to mean all vehicles, firefighting apparatus, supplies, facilities or other material belonging to the fire department. 
(Code 1996, § 2-2-7) 
Secs. 2-2-7-2-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 2-2-21. - Fire limits. 
    The corporate limits of the town shall constitute the fire district. 
(Code 1996, § 2-2-21) 
Secs. 2-2-22-2-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE C. - FIREMEN'S INSURANCE AND INSPECTION FUND 

Sec. 2-2-31. - Acceptance of benefits. 
    The town hereby accepts the benefits of S.C. Code 1976, §§ 23-9-310 to 23-9-470, as may be amended from time to time, relative to disposition of funds arising from insurance companies doing business in this state. 
(Code 1996, § 2-2-31) 
Sec. 2-2-32. - Trustees. 
    The mayor, the chief of the fire department and the town manager shall serve as trustees of the Firemen's Insurance and Inspection Fund and shall have control and direct disbursement under such rules and regulations as they adopt in accordance with state law. Trustees shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1996, § 2-2-32) 
Sec. 2-2-33. - Receipt and disbursements of funds. 
    The town clerk-treasurer is hereby authorized to receive the benefits of the Firemen's Insurance and Inspection Fund from the state treasurer. All money so collected shall be set apart, and shall be paid out only upon the orders of the board of trustees under the rules and regulations adopted by them. 
(Code 1996, § 2-2-33) 
Sec. 2-2-34. - Report to state fire marshal. 
    The clerk-treasurer shall file with the state fire marshal on or before October 31 of each year on a blank furnished by him, a certificate that the town has an organized fire department and also a list of the equipment and other facts that may be required. Failure to submit the certificate by the required date in any year will constitute a waiver of rights in the fund for that year. 
(Code 1996, § 2-2-34) 
Secs. 2-2-35-2-2-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE D. - OUTDOOR BURNING 

Sec. 2-2-41. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-3-69. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2010) 
Sec. 2-2-42. - Compliance with article provisions. 
    No person shall kindle or maintain any open burning or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained within the limits of the town, except as stated in this article. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2010) 
Sec. 2-2-43. - Location of residential yard debris burning. 
(a)  Open burning of leaves, tree branches or yard trimmings on the premises of private residences and burned on those premises, must be located not less than 50 feet from any structure and not less than 50 feet from the property line. Adequate provision must be made to prevent the fire from spreading within 50 feet of any structure. Open burning for the purpose of land clearing or right-of-way maintenance must be conducted in accordance with the S.C. Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC) Air Quality Regulations, S.C. Code Reg. 61-62.2 and 61-62.4. 
(b)  Exception. The minimum required distance from a structure or property line shall be 25 feet where the pile size is three feet or less in diameter and less than two feet in height, or in an approved container. The same provisions as above shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading within 25 feet of any structure or property line. Only one such pile or container shall be burned at a time. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2010) 
Sec. 2-2-44. - Attendant and fire extinguishment equipment required; notice to fire code official; adherence to state law. 
    The burning must be constantly attended by a competent person until such fire is extinguished. Such person shall have a garden hose connected to a water supply, or other fire extinguishing equipment readily available for use. Proper notification shall be given to the fire code official or his duly authorized representative or other persons designated by the fire code official. The notice shall contain all information required by the fire code official or his representative. The burning must be conducted in accordance with related state laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, DHEC Air Quality Regulations, S.C. Code Reg. 61-62.2 and 61-62.4. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2010) 
Sec. 2-2-45. - Fires shall be prohibited as follows. 
(a)  The fire code official may prohibit open burning when atmospheric conditions, local circumstances or other conditions exist that would make such fires hazardous. 
(b)  The following materials shall not be burned in an open fire: Asphalt and asphaltic materials, shingles, insulation, paint, plastics, metals, treated wood, paper, petroleum products, demolition debris, dead animals, construction debris, household chemicals, household garbage, tires or other rubber products, trade waste and cardboard. 
(c)  Open burning for the purpose of land clearing and right-of-way maintenance, except as specified by DHEC Air Quality Regulations, S.C. Code Reg. 61-62.2 and 61-62.4. 
(d)  Open burning for the purpose of land clearing, and right-of-way maintenance shall be prohibited during the ozone season (April 1 through October 30). 
(Ord. of 11-8-2010) 
Sec. 2-2-46. - Criteria for determining hazards. 
    Reasonable criteria shall be established by the town council to assist in determining when outdoor fires may be hazardous. These criteria may include air quality standards as well as various fire danger indexes. 
Sec. 2-2-47. - Prohibited on town roads, drainage rights-of-way and adjacent areas. 
    Open burning shall be prohibited on all town roads, sidewalks, alleyways, and drainage rights-of-way, or within an area that may cause damage to such areas. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2010) 
Sec. 2-2-48. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article does not apply to vegetative debris burning related to forestry, wildlife and agricultural burns, as authorized by the state forestry commission or the fire code official. 
(b)  This article is not meant to restrict open burning in connection with the preparation of food for immediate consumption, or campfires and fires used solely for recreational purposes, ceremonial occasions or human warmth that are done in a safe manner. 
(c)  Fires set for the purpose of training public firefighting personnel when authorized by the appropriate governmental entity, and fires set by a private industry as part of an organized program of drills for the training of firefighting personnel. These will be exempt only if the drills are solely for the purposes of firefighting training and the duration of the burning is held to the minimum required for such purposes. Prior approval by DHEC is required only for sites which are not established training sites. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2010) 
Sec. 2-2-49. - Restrictions; exceptions. 
    Smoke production must be ended and no combustible material may be added to the fire between official sunset of one day and official sunrise of the following day with the exception of fires in connection with the preparation of food for immediate consumption, or campfires and fires used solely for recreational purposes, ceremonial occasions, or human warmth, and fires where time parameters are already regulated by the Department of Environmental Control Regulation, S.C. Code Reg. 61-62.2. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2010) 
Sec. 2-2-50. - Hazardous or toxic materials. 
    Hazardous or toxic materials shall not be burned. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2010) 
Sec. 2-2-51. - Civil and criminal liability. 
    The authorization to conduct an open burn does not relieve the individual responsible from civil or criminal liabilities resulting from the burning. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2010) 
Sec. 2-2-52. - Conflicts of article with state law. 
    The provision of this article shall prevail and be controlling over provisions of state law if such is allowed by state law. Otherwise, if any conflict arises between the provisions of this article and any state law, the provisions of state law shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Ord. of 11-8-2010) 
CHAPTER 3. - FALSE ALARMS; USER FEES 

Sec. 2-3-1. - Purpose. 
    The town maintains a fully equipped public safety complex for the purpose of protecting life and property and the expense of mobilizing the forces for the public safety complex for calls must be incurred by the town and the individuals and volunteers of the departments; and numerous responses by the town public safety complex to false alarms is a substantial waste of public resources; and it is the desire of the mayor and town council to provide for a method of recovery of a portion of the public funds needlessly expended in responding to false alarms by imposition of a user fee system. 
(Code 1996, § 2-3-1) 
Sec. 2-3-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, installed by a fire alarm business, arranged to signal the occurrence of a police, fire, smoke, water flow or other condition to which the public safety department may be expected to respond. 
    Alarm user means a person that is in control of any building, structure or facility where an alarm system is present. 
    False alarm means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical failures, malfunction, improper installation, improper maintenance, or the negligence of the owner or lessee of the alarm system or of his employees or agents. The term "false alarm" does not include alarms caused by unauthorized tampering with an alarm system by anyone other than the alarm user or his agent. 
    Year means a 12-month period beginning with the first day of January and ending on the last day of December of each year. 
(Code 1996, § 2-3-2) 
Sec. 2-3-3. - False alarm procedure and user fee. 
(a)  Whenever public safety personnel respond to an activated alarm, the official in charge of the incident shall determine if the response was caused by a false alarm and shall indicate that fact upon the incident report. 
(b)  The public safety personnel shall regularly review incident reports to monitor the accumulation of false alarms at any one location. When two false alarms have occurred at the same location within one year and the location is within the incorporated area of the town, the public safety office shall recommend that appropriate action be taken on the part of the alarm user to alleviate the causes of false alarms and shall include a statement that an accumulation of more than three false alarms within a year shall result in a charge for services. Another similar letter shall be sent when three false alarms have occurred at the same location within the year. 
(c)  When four false alarms have occurred at one location within a year, a user fee as established by council for service for false alarm response shall be billed to the property owner. Each additional false alarm within the year shall require the billing of an additional $100.00 user fee. However, no alarm user shall be charged with accumulating more than one false alarm in any 24-hour period. The fee hereby established affords only partial recovery of the expenses incurred in responding to the false alarm. In the event payment of the fee, in full, has not been received within 30 days of billing, the fee shall increase to an amount established by council. 
(Code 1996, § 2-3-3) 
Sec. 2-3-4. - Evidence of repair accepted in lieu of fee. 
(a)  An alarm user may submit evidence that a malfunctioning system has been repaired in lieu of paying a user fee within ten days of the date of notification of the fee. Evidence such as a receipt from a licensed alarm business with a statement of repairs made to the system is acceptable. For a repeated problem with a system after a repair is alleged to have been made, the chief or his designee may decide not to accept an alternative to paying the fee. 
(b)  Any person may appeal the imposition of a false alarm user to the town manager or his designee. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be made to the town manager within ten days of the date of notification of the fee. 
(Code 1996, § 2-3-4) 
Title 3 - PUBLIC WORKS 
CHAPTER 1. - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of streets, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-30; putting foreign substances on highways, S.C. Code 1976, § 57-7-20; obstructions in highways, S.C. Code 1976, § 57-7-210. 

ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 3-1-1. - Control over maintenance and construction. 
    The street superintendent shall supervise the construction and maintenance of streets and shall employ such number of persons to work on the streets as may be needed, with approval of the town manager. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-1) 
Sec. 3-1-2. - Approval of names of new streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to lay out any new street within the town without first procuring from the town council approval of the name to be assigned to such new street. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-2) 
Sec. 3-1-3. - Street and roadway acceptance. 
    No street or roadway shall be accepted until it has been paved or surface-treated in a manner acceptable to the town. Any roadway or street right-of-way must be deeded to the town in a width of 60 feet. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-3) 
Sec. 3-1-4. - Duty of adjacent property owners to keep sidewalks clear. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all owners of lots of lands within the corporate limits shall keep the sidewalks adjacent to their lots clear of all obstructions that render the passage of persons or other travel thereon difficult, inconvenient, dangerous, or impossible. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-4) 
Secs. 3-1-5-3-1-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - EXCAVATION AND OBSTRUCTION 

Sec. 3-1-11. - Excavation permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, mutilate or make an excavation in any paved or unpaved street or sidewalk for any purpose without a permit from SCDOT or Batesburg-Leesville DPW. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-11) 
Sec. 3-1-12. - Danger signals required at excavations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any trench, ditch or excavation in any street, sidewalk or public place to remain open between sunset and sunrise, unless such trench, ditch or excavation has a sufficient number of lights properly displayed around it as danger signals to prevent accidents to persons or property. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-12) 
Sec. 3-1-13. - Removing danger signals at excavations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or extinguish any light which may be placed as a signal at night to warn persons of danger from ditches, trenches, building materials, scaffolds, excavations, impediments or obstacles of any description whatsoever. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-13) 
Sec. 3-1-14. - Obstructions prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place any obstruction upon or cause to be obstructed in any manner any street, sidewalk or public way or part thereof, so as to render the passage of persons, vehicles, or other travel thereon difficult, inconvenient, dangerous or impossible, except as otherwise provided in this chapter; provided, that this section shall not apply to any employee of the town, county or state while such employee is immediately and actively engaged in the maintenance, improvement or construction of any street, sidewalk or public way in the town. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-14) 
Sec. 3-1-15. - Trees and shrubs obstructing vision. 
    It shall be unlawful to plant, place or cause to grow any tree or shrub on any roadway or street right-of-way or in any area between a sidewalk and a curb of such street or roadway within the town limits, and the town council may order the removal of any such tree or shrub growing in those areas upon a determination by the chief of police that such tree or shrub is hazardous to traffic. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-15) 
Secs. 3-1-16-3-1-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE C. - UNLAWFUL ACTS 

Sec. 3-1-21. - Damaging municipal property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to mutilate, deface or injure any public property within the corporate limits, or any trees, buildings or other property, or to obstruct any street, alleyway, avenue, bridge, ditch or public road within the corporate limits. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-21) 
Sec. 3-1-22. - Games in streets prohibited. 
    No person shall play any games, or throw any rocks or missiles on any public street within the town. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-22) 
Sec. 3-1-23. - Throwing glass, nails, dangerous substances on streets, sidewalks. 
    Any person who shall throw or place on any of the streets or sidewalks of the town any glass, in any shape or form, tin cans, nails, brick, pieces or iron, sticks or any other obstruction or substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle shall be charged with a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-23) 
Sec. 3-1-24. - Vehicles leaking or scattering load prohibited. 
    The owner or operator of every cart or other vehicle employed in removing or carrying any dirt, sawdust, sand, concrete, rock, rubber debris or materials liable to be blown by the wind, or any manure or filth or offensive matter of any kind or description, along or over any of the streets of the town, shall have and keep the same in such tight and secure condition that such matter shall not be scattered or permitted to fall on any of the streets. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-24) 
Sec. 3-1-25. - Vehicles prohibited on sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive or park any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle upon any sidewalk of the town, except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-25) 
Sec. 3-1-26. - Breaking, removing streetlights. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to break any lamp or electric light or to remove any electric light bulb or otherwise to tamper with any streetlights within the town limits. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-26) 
Sec. 3-1-27. - Breaking, destroying curbing prohibited; permit required for entrance to property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to break or destroy the curbing of any street or to otherwise deface the same, or to construct any entrance into property on any of the paved streets of the town, unless such person shall have first obtained a permit in writing to do so from SCDOT or Batesburg-Leesville DPW. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-27) 
Sec. 3-1-28. - Burning matter on streets or sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful to burn leaves or other matter on the streets or sidewalks of the town. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-28) 
Sec. 3-1-29. - Trash on streets and sidewalks prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to discard or deposit any trash or waste material of any nature whatsoever upon the streets and sidewalks of the town. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-29) 
Sec. 3-1-30. - Removing manhole covers. 
    It is unlawful for any person to remove any manhole cover from any street unless authorized by SCDOT or Batesburg-Leesville DPW. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-30) 
Secs. 3-1-31-3-1-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE D. - BUILDING NUMBERING 

Sec. 3-1-42. - Building numbering requirements. 
    The relevant provisions of the International Fire Code and the International Property Maintenance Code provide the requirements for the proper numbering of buildings. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2010(03)) 
Sec. 3-1-43. - Duty of property owners to apply for numbers; assignment by town clerk. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the property owner to apply at town hall for an assignment of a number for each house, building or lot. It shall be the duty of the town clerk to assign or cause to be assigned to the owner of each house, building or lot the proper number; and he shall inform the owner, agent or person in possession of the premises as to the number assigned. It shall be the duty of such owner to purchase and install the number so assigned. 
(b)  Any owner of property abutting on any street, avenue or alley in the town who fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-43) 
Sec. 3-1-44. - Changing numbers. 
    Where any house or building shall have been numbered or renumbered in accordance with this article, such number shall not be changed or altered without the consent of the town clerk, and in the event such change is authorized by him, he shall furnish to the owner or agent of such building a new number. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-44) 
Sec. 3-1-45. - Adjustment and reassignment. 
    In any case where numbers have been assigned on any street, avenue or alley in pursuance of this article, it shall be the duty of the town clerk thereafter to adjust and reassign such numbers as the same may be required from time to time. In any case where there is a mistake or conflict in numbers, the town clerk is hereby authorized to make proper adjustment of the same. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-45) 
Sec. 3-1-46. - Posting of addresses on new principal buildings. 
    Final approval of any major structure erected, altered, repaired or modified after March 10, 1986, shall be withheld by the mayor and the council until the address is posted on the structure as outlined in this article. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-46) 
Sec. 3-1-47. - Posting of addresses on existing principal buildings. 
    The council will encourage all owners of existing principal dwellings or buildings, by adoption of this article, to post the assigned address numbers in the manner outlined in this article. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-47) 
Sec. 3-1-48. - Posting of addresses at existing collective developments. 
    All mobile home parks, apartment developments, office parks, and condominium developments will post the assigned address numbers in the manner outlined in this article. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-48) 
Sec. 3-1-49. - Establishment of a uniform numbering system. 
    The mayor and council shall develop and maintain a uniform system of numbering properties and principal building which shall be known as the "Guidelines for Addressing in the Town of Batesburg-Leesville." These guidelines, which may be changed from time to time, shall be used by the mayor and town council in designing addresses for the properties as required by this article. 
(1)  Roads must be named in accordance with the guidelines set by the department of public works in order to be assigned addresses. 
(2)  If duplication of a road name exists within the zip code area, the staff will make an attempt to eliminate the duplication. This applies to road names within municipal boundaries and neighboring county boundaries as well. 
(3)  Addressing by the county staff will be done only in the unincorporated areas of Lexington County. 
(4)  No correctly assigned address will be changed unless necessary to the functionality of the addressing system. These guidelines are designed primarily for structures with previously unassigned addresses. 
(5)  An address will be available for all dwellings and buildings. All eligible streets, avenues, and public ways will be addressed accordingly. 
(6)  Each new dwelling or building will be assigned an address at the time that a permit is issued. 
(7)  All addresses will be shown on the county tax maps. 
(8)  Streets or private roads that do not meet the post office guidelines for delivery will not be assigned addresses. Buildings on those roads must be assigned addresses on the main access road. 
(9)  All numbers will be assigned on the basis of one number for every 50 feet of frontage along the street. This may vary to accommodate previous addressing. 
(10)  All buildings north of east-west streets and east of north-south streets will be given even-numbered addresses, and all buildings south of east-west streets and west of north-south streets will be given odd-numbered addresses. 
(11)  All streets running more nearly north and south will be numbered from north to south, and those streets running more nearly east and west will be numbered from east to west. 
(12)  Block numbers will be changed to the nearest multiple of 100 within a maximum distance of 2,500 feet, if possible, at clear points of transition. 
(13)  When developments such as mobile home parks, condominiums, apartments, or office parks lack sufficient road frontage to provide addresses for each building or dwelling, each building and/or dwelling will be designated separately (example: lot 1, lot 2, etc.) in addition to the assigned number given to the development as a whole. 
(14)  In the event of a conflict in either addressing or street naming, the county staff will use its best judgment to resolve the situation. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-49) 
Sec. 3-1-50. - Provision of addresses. 
    An address shall be available for all principal dwellings and buildings within the incorporated area of the town. All eligible streets and roads will be assigned addresses accordingly. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-50) 
Sec. 3-1-51. - Road names. 
    Addresses will be provided only on those roads which have been assigned a name in accordance with the guidelines set forth by the town. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-51) 
Sec. 3-1-52. - Duplication of road names. 
    New road names will not be allowed if they duplicate existing municipal road names, including road names within zip code areas that cross municipal boundaries into neighboring municipalities. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-52) 
Sec. 3-1-53. - Renaming of roads where names duplicated. 
    Any duplication of road names presently in existence will be revised by the mayor and council so that there will be no duplication of road names in the town. 
(Code 1996, § 3-1-53) 
Title 4 - PUBLIC UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Electricity, water, natural gas and sewerage systems, S.C. Code 1976, Title 5, Chapter 31; sewage collection, treatment and disposal by governmental entities, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-15-10 et seq.; furnishing electric current and water beyond city limits, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-31-1910; extension of municipal water and sewer system, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 5-31-1510-5-31-1600; municipality may purchase or construct utility systems and plants, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-21-50. 

CHAPTER 1. - SEWERAGE SYSTEM[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to enact ordinances concerning sewerage system, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-31-900; enumerated powers regarding schedule of sewer service and connection fees, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-31-2030. 

ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 4-1-1. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the town and enables the municipality to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 (33 USC 1251) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403). 
(b)  The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system; and 
(4)  To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal wastewater system. 
(c)  This chapter provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that existing customer's capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(d)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the town and to persons outside the town who are, by contract or agreement with the municipality, users of the town water system. Except as otherwise provided herein, the town manager, or his designate, shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-1) 
Sec. 4-1-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
    Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
    Approval authority means the commissioner of the state department of health and environmental control. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user . An authorized representative of an industrial user may be: 
(1)  A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation; 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; or 
(3)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees centigrade expressed in terms of weight (pounds) and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)). 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means a sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the system. 
    Categorical standards means the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or pretreatment standard. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Control authority refers to the approval authority, defined hereinabove; or the town manager if the town has an approved pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11. 
    Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
    Domestic waste means household waters principally from dwellings, business buildings, institutions, etc. The term "domestic waste" also includes similar wastes from industries when separated from industrial waste. 
    Environmental Protection Agency , or EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term "EPA" may also be used to designate the administrator or other duly authorized official of that agency. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation of cooking and dispensing of food from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Gender. A word importing masculine gender only, shall extend and be applied to females and firms, partnerships, and corporations as well as to males. 
    Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Indirect discharge means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act, into the system, including holding tank waste discharged into the system. 
    Industrial user means a source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
    Industrial waste means liquid wastes from industrial processes. 
    Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge process, use or disposal; and 
(2)  Is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation, or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly known as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
    National categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
    National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive discharge standard means any regulation developed under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    New source means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of proposed regulations under section 307(c) of the Act prescribing categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section. 
    National pollution discharge elimination system permit or NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act. 
    Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into the waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
    pH is the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
    Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid wastes, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
    Pollution means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water. 
    Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a system. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the waste from the preparation of cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and is controlled by public authority. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means as defined by Section 212 of the Act, (33 USC 1292) which is owned in this instance by the municipality. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. 
    Municipal wastewater treatment system (system) means the treatment work system owned by the town. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "system" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewater to the system from persons outside the town who are users of the system. 
    Treatment plant means that portion of the system designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage to which stormwaters, surface waters and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means a term which can be interchanged with wastewater. See Wastewater . 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of the devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage or industrial wastewater. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Sewer surcharge means a charge for sewer service and treatment service for wastes which have characteristics different from sanitary wastes and for which additional charges must be assessed in order for the dischargers to make compensation for additional expenses incurred in handling these different wastewaters. 
    Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
    Significant industrial user means any person discharging into the public sewer which: 
(1)  Is subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR Part 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N as promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; 
(2)  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the town's sewage treatment plant; 
(3)  Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater, excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater; or 
(4)  Has, in the opinion of the town, a reasonable potential to adversely affect the operation of the town's sewage treatment plant or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6)). 
    Significant violation means a violation of discharge limitations that meet one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the limitation for the same parameter; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violation in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed limitation by a magnitude of the TRC [TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease; TRC = 1.2 for all other parameters, except pH.] 
(3)  Any violation of a discharge limitation which the town believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the exercise of the town's emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Any violation by 90 days or more after the scheduled date of any compliance schedule milestone contained in the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Failure to provide the required pretreatment program reports within 30 days of the due date; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which the town determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the pretreatment program. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flow during normal operation. 
    State means the State of South Carolina. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
    Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer") means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    Street . The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, drives, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes and viaducts, and all other public highways in the sanitary area. 
    Superintendent means the director of public works for the town. 
    Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Total solids means the sum of suspended matter, settleable matter and dissolved matter, both volatile and nonvolatile and as further defined in Standard Methods. 
    Town means the Town of Batesburg-Leesville or its town council. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of section 307(a) of the Act or other acts. 
    Treatment works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage or industrial wastewaters. 
    User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the system. 
    Wastewater means the liquid and water carrying industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated. See Sewage . 
    Watercourse means a channel in which flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
    Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourse, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
    Wastewater discharge permit means as set forth in section 4-1-39. 
(b)  All other words shall be construed as having the meaning in Glossary Water and Sewage Control Engineering, published by the Water Pollution Control Federation, Washington, D.C., or by their general usage, if undefined. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-2) 
Sec. 4-1-3. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
(1)  BOD - Biochemical oxygen demand. 
(2)  CFR - Code of Federal Regulations. 
(3)  COD - Chemical oxygen demand. 
(4)  DHEC - Department of Health and Environmental Control. 
(5)  EPA - Environmental Protection Agency. 
(6)  l - Liter. 
(7)  mg/l - Milligrams per liter. 
(8)  NPDES - National pollutant discharge elimination system. 
(9)  SIC - Standard industrial classification. 
(10)  SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC 6901 et seq. 
(11)  USC - United States Code. 
(12)  TSS - Total suspended solids. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-3) 
Secs. 4-1-4-4-1-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - USE OF SEWER SYSTEM 

Sec. 4-1-11. - Use of public sewers required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Place, deposit, or permit to be deposited, in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within or under the jurisdiction of the town, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste; 
(2)  Discharge to any natural outlet, including storm sewers, within the town or under the jurisdiction of the town, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with this chapter; or 
(3)  Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage, where public sewers are available. In situations where connection is not technically feasible, the town may waive this requirement. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-11) 
Sec. 4-1-12. - Connection to sewer system required. 
    The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose situated within the town and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there shall be located a public sanitary sewer of the town is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with provisions of this resolution within 60 days after written notice from the town to the property owner requiring such property owner to make connection thereto, provided that said public sewer shall be within 300 feet of the property line. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-12) 
Sec. 4-1-13. - Sewer extensions. 
(a)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and all septic tanks, cesspools, and other private sewage works shall be abandoned and, where required, cleaned of sludge, and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt within 60 days of notification to do so by the town. Where gravity connection to a public sewer is not technically feasible, the owner shall be required to construct as much pumping facilities as necessary to connect to the public sewer in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to nullify any additional requirements that may be imposed by the appropriate state or county health officer. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-13) 
Sec. 4-1-14. - Permit required. 
    No person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof, without first obtaining a written permit from the town. Permits shall be at construction sites at all times. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-14) 
Sec. 4-1-15. - New developments-Construction and costs of connection. 
(a)  Construction of sewage works in any new development shall be the responsibility of the person performing such development. 
(b)  The town may share in the costs of connecting industrial and large-scale residential and commercial developments to the town sewer system if the town council determines that a sharing of costs will aid in large-scale economic development and further benefit the town. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-15) 
Sec. 4-1-16. - Same-Approval. 
(a)  Prior to connecting to the town sewer system, the developer shall obtain the approval of the director of public works, by taking the following steps: 
(1)  Submit to the town two preliminary sets of construction plans prepared by a registered professional engineer in sufficient detail to indicate location, system layout, line sizes, service connections, flows, character of sewage, and relationship with connection to the town sewers or other sewage works if applicable. 
(2)  Receive preliminary approval from the town and other jurisdictional agencies. 
(3)  Prepare construction drawings and documents for the town's approval. 
(4)  Secure all other agency approvals of construction drawing and contract documents, and obtain all required permits. 
(5)  Request final approval to proceed with construction, and furnish the town with a construction schedule. 
(6)  Provide the town and its authorized representatives with permission for on-site inspection during construction. 
(7)  Request, in writing, connection to the existing sewer line, manhole or pump station. Failure to do so may result in a penalty for unauthorized use, plus cost of repairs, if necessary. 
(b)  Upon completion of construction, the engineer employed by the developer shall inspect and furnish to the town at no cost, his certificate of completion indicating that the subject sewage works has been constructed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, and shall provide four prints and one reproducible sepia print of as-constructed drawings. The developer shall provide the town with a certified letter stating that all future cost incurred by the town for the installation of additional service laterals not shown on the plans will be paid by the developer within 30 days after receipt of invoice. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-16) 
Sec. 4-1-17. - Building sewers-Generally. 
(a)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building. Where one building stands to the rear of another on a single lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard, or driveway, the town may grant permission for the building sewer from the front building to be extended to the rear building sewer, upon a showing by the applicant that it is not feasible that the two buildings so connected will ultimately be on separate building lots. However, billing will be based on water consumption for both structures. For new construction which will involve more than one residential or commercial unit in a single building, branch lines with individual cutoffs shall be run from the building sewer to each unit of the building; provided that in lieu of installing such branch lines and individual cutoffs, an owner may sign a written agreement with the town, accepting full responsibility for payment of all sewer charges incurred by any occupant of the building in the event of nonpayment by that occupant. 
(b)  Old building sewers shall be used in connection with new buildings when they are found to meet all of the requirements of this chapter. The actual cost of a new sewer connection or an additional connection will be paid for by the applicant. 
(c)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall conform to the requirements of applicable ASTM Specifications and/or the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 and/or the International Plumbing Code and shall be subject to the express written approval of the town inspector. In no case shall the size of the pipe installed be less than six-inch nominal diameter, except that four-inch nominal diameter pipe may be used to serve a building containing no more than no. 9 and/or the plumbing code. The minimum slope of a building sewer shall be such as to produce a velocity of at least two feet per second. The following materials may be used in the construction of the building sewer: Vitrified clay, PVC solid wall plastic, cast iron or ductile iron pipe, as specified by ASTM specifications cited in the latest revision to the plumbing code. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-17) 
Sec. 4-1-18. - Same-Connection fees. 
(a)  All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer to the property line shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the town for any loss or damage that may, directly or indirectly, be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(b)  A connection fee must be paid to the town before making connection to the public sewer and is based upon the following conditions related to the construction of sewer service lines: 
(1)  Construction shall be limited to open trench excavation across two lanes of paved roadway surface having a maximum width of 26 feet, excluding curb, gutter and sidewalks. Construction shall be limited to one sewer service per lot. 
(2)  Construction shall not require the relocation of existing underground or overhead utilities, i.e., water mains, gas mains, sewers, telephone and electrical power cables and wires or the relocation of existing structures located within public rights-of-way. 
(3)  Construction shall not require the relocation or reconstruction of existing storm sewers or drainage structures due to grade conflicts which may exist between existing storm sewers and proposed sewer service lines. 
(c)  Construction of sewer service lines involving work in excess of that as set forth in this section must be paid by the applicant upon presentation of an estimate by the town before construction can begin. The applicant may contract to have such work done at his expense and subject to town inspection and approval. The sewer connection fee shall be paid by the applicant if connection is made at his expense. 
(d)  Where conflicts between storm drainage piping and sanitary sewer laterals become apparent in the course of new sewer construction or reconstruction of highway facilities and the sanitary sewer facilities of the town lie within the highway right-of-way, the junction box will be constructed by the town at its expense. 
(e)  Where a private property owner, at his own expense, installs storm drainage piping in a ditch in the public right-of-way in front of his property, and the proposed storm drainage piping installation will conflict with the town's sanitary sewer lateral, the town will pay 50 percent of the cost of constructing the junction box, but in no instance shall payments by the town exceed $150.00. The cost of the junction box shall be verified as a bid item or firm quotation by the contractor doing the construction of the pipe line. 
(f)  If a conflict exists between any new storm drainage piping and any town sewer which lies within the town's sewer easements, the town will pay nothing toward the cost of a junction box. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-18) 
Sec. 4-1-19. - Same-Installation. 
(a)  Sewers will be installed in accordance with the latest ASTM for the type of pipe material being used. 
(b)  Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the first floor. No building sewer shall be made parallel to or within three feet of any load-bearing wall which might be weakened thereby. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from live loads (automobiles, etc.) which may be superimposed. The building sewer shall be made at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. The building sewer shall be constructed to such a point as directed by the town. When the lowest floor of a building is at an elevation level to or lower than the top of the next upstream manhole in the sewer system, the building sewer must include backflow preventers or checkvalves and relief overflows. 
(c)  No person shall maintain or make a connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, area-way drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(d)  Before any underground portions are covered, the applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the town inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made to the public sewer by the property owner and only after inspection. The inspection shall be made within two working days of the receipt of notice by the inspector, who shall check the building sewer for excessive inflow. Any pipe having excessive inflow will not be connected to the sewer. Excessive inflow will be that inflow above 200 gallons per inch diameter per mile per day. 
(e)  All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the town. 
(f)  The town shall keep a permanent and accurate record of the location and direction of all new sewer connections, including such landmarks as may be necessary to make an adequate description. 
(g)  On any service call, the town will investigate the condition of the sewer in the street. If the street sewer is functioning properly, the following procedure will be followed: 
(1)  Only licensed plumbers or persons approved in advance by the director of public works shall be allowed to investigate a problem or perform work in the town right-of-way. 
(2)  The licensed plumber or other person approved in advance by the director of public works shall investigate the problems that may exist in the portion of the building sewer lying in the public right-of-way. 
(3)  If the sewer trouble is found in the building sewer within the street and is attributed to the town, the town shall be notified and shall take corrective action. If there is no trouble source found in the street and is attributable to a trouble source originating on private property, the customer shall bear the full cost of repair of the sewer line and restoration of the street surface. 
(4)  In no instance shall the town be responsible for expenses incurred by the plumber or other authorized person acting on behalf of the customer. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-19) 
Sec. 4-1-20. - Hold harmless agreement required. 
    Prior to connection to the town's sewer system, the property owner shall be required to execute a hold harmless agreement with the town to the effect that the town will not be held responsible for any damage occurring from connection to the sanitary sewer system. Such agreement shall be made on a form prepared by the town attorney and provided to the property owner and shall be recorded in the Register of Mesne Conveyance Office for Lexington County. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-20) 
Sec. 4-1-21. - Extensions of lines outside of town. 
    Upon the request of the owner of property located outside of and not contiguous to the town limits that sewer service be extended to such property, and when the town deems it feasible to so extend its sewer service, the town will so extend its sewer service upon the condition that the property owner enters into an agreement with the town wherein and whereby the property owner agrees as follows: 
(1)  At such time, if any, that the property, or any part thereof, to which such sewer service is extended becomes contiguous to or abuts on the town limits, the property owner will make application to the town for annexation of the property into the town limits. 
(2)  When sewer service is made available to the property, the owner thereof will pay to the town a connection fee and the use or service fees set out in the town's sewer ordinances for property located outside the town limits. 
(3)  The property owner shall be subject to all the rules, regulations and ordinances of the town pertaining to sewer use and service. 
(4)  In the event sewer service fees and charges become delinquent, the town shall have the right and privilege to come upon the property to such extent as is necessary for the purpose of disconnecting the sewer service by plugging the sewer line leading thereto, and in the event of such plugging, sewer service will be restored only after all the expenses incurred by the town in plugging and unplugging the sewer line, and a new connection fee, has been paid by the property owner to the town. 
(5)  In the event the property owner fails or refuses to make application for annexation within 60 days from the date the property becomes contiguous to or abuts the town limits, then the agreement to be executed by the property owner and the town shall be deemed a good and sufficient application for such annexation, and upon acceptance thereof by the town council, the property shall become annexed into the town. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-21; Ord. of 7-31-1989) 
Sec. 4-1-22. - Conveyance to town; bond required. 
(a)  Sewage works to be conveyed to the town shall be accomplished by the owner preparing and submitting to the town an instrument conveying the constructed system to the town free and clear of all liens, at no cost to the town, and the system shall thereafter be owned, operated and maintained by the town as provided for in this chapter. The instrument of conveyance shall also include permanent easements and rights-of-way fully described and duly recorded at the county R.M.C. office. 
(b)  Simultaneous with the execution of the instrument, the owner shall enter into a one-year maintenance bond, in an amount equal to 25 percent of the total construction cost as determined upon completion of construction. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-22) 
Sec. 4-1-23. - Hazardous waste-Notifications. 
(a)  Each industrial user shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the industrial user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the industrial user: An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharge during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place within 180 days of the effective date of this rule. Industrial users who commence discharging after the effective date of this rule shall provide the notification no later than 180 days after the discharge of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste. Any notification under this subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. 
(b)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (a) of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(c)  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management, waste division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(d)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-23) 
Sec. 4-1-24. - Same-Other requirements. 
(a)  Persons responsible for an accidental spill or discharge of any substance into the treatment works which may adversely effect operation of the treatment works shall immediately notify the town of such a discharge. 
(b)  In interpretation of this article, availability of public sewage will be limited to those houses, buildings or properties which can discharge into the public sewer by gravity flow from said houses, buildings or other properties. 
(c)  Property owners are required to properly maintain the service laterals on their property such that excessive amounts of infiltration and inflow do not enter the town's sewer system. Should the town discover a faulty service line through the town's regular maintenance program, the property owner will be required to make the necessary repairs at his own expense to place the line in a condition satisfactory to the town. 
(d)  Any sewer service connecting to the town's sewer system shall install a sewer cleanout at the property line and will be constructed with a direction of access toward the town main. 
(e)  All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in with the latest amendments to 40 CFR 136 "Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for the Clean Water Act" as promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods so as to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazard of life, limb, and property. In order for the town to properly evaluate the effect of the waste on the system, an industry may be required to submit an industrial waste questionnaire summary describing maximum, minimum and average wastewater characteristics. 
(f)  Routine self-monitoring. The wastewater of each industrial user is subject to routine self-monitoring and reporting requirements. 
(1)  All sampling and analysis shall be in conformance with subsection (e) of this section. 
(2)  If any industrial user samples more frequently than required by the town, the results of such sampling shall also be reported to the town. 
(3)  If sampling indicates a violation of this article or of any conditions of the wastewater discharge permit, the user must notify the town within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the analysis to the town within 30 days. 
(g)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any user who is found to have violated an order of the town council or who willfully or negligently fails to comply with any provisions of this article, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereinunder, shall be fined an amount not exceeding $1,000.00 for each offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the town may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporter's fees, and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this article or the order, rule, regulation and permit issued hereunder. 
(2)  Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document files or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or wastewater contribution permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-24) 
Secs. 4-1-25-4-1-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE C. - PROHIBITED USES 

Sec. 4-1-31. - General discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutants or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the system. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the system whether or not the user is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. Prohibited discharges include the following: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the system or to the operation of the system. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system, or at any point in the system, be more than five percent nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any other substances which the town, the state or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system. 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes, or cotton fibers, textile additives, starch or dye. 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than 9.0 or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the system. 
(4)  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constituting a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the system, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the Act. 
(5)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(6)  Any substance which may cause the system's effluent or any other product of the system such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged cause the system to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the Act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(7)  Any substance which will cause the treatment plant to violate its NPDES and/or state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(8)  Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(9)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment system resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature at the treatment plant exceeds 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit) unless SCDHEC, upon request from the town, approves alternate temperature limits. 
(10)  Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the system. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentration or quantities of pollutants that exceed, for any time period longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration, quantities, or flow during normal operation. 
(11)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent, in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(12)  Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance. 
(13)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(14)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through, but in no case in amounts greater than 100 mg/l. 
(15)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the town. 
(16)  General prohibitions. A user may not introduce into the POTW any pollutants which will cause pass through or interference. These general prohibitions and the specific prohibitions in this article apply to each user introducing pollutants into the POTW whether or not the user is subject to other national pretreatment standards or any national, state, or local pretreatment requirements. 
(b)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the town, that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment having an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming their opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the town will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows, and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor in amounts which will inhibit biological activity at the treatment plant, resulting in interference or causing damage, but in no case in such quantities that the temperature exceeds 150 degrees Fahrenheit at the town sewage system or 104 degrees Fahrenheit at the treatment plant unless SCDHEC, upon request of the town, approves alternate temperature limits. 
(2)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 or 150 degrees Fahrenheit or 0 and 65 degrees Celsius. 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths hp or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the town. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solution, whether neutralized or not. 
(5)  Any substances in excess of the amount set forth in the discharge permit. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits, which may be established by the town as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage to meet requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction of such discharge of the receiving waters. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the town in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes having a pH outside of the range of 6.0 to 9.0. 
(9)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentration of inert suspended solids; such as, but not limited to, earth, lime slurries, and lime residues or of dissolved solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate. 
b.  Excessive discoloration, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting slugs as defined herein. 
(10)  Waters and wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant cannot meet the requirements of other state or federal agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(c)  When the director of public works determines that a user is contributing to the system any of the above enumerated substances in such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the system, he shall: 
(1)  Advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the system; and 
(2)  Develop effluent limitations for such user to correct the interference or compensate the town for required corrective action. 
(d)  If any water or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (b) of this section, which in the judgment of the town may have a deleterious affect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving water, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the town may: 
(1)  Reject the waste and/or suspend sewage service and/or revoke pretreatment permits. 
(2)  Require pretreatment to reduce the waste to an acceptable condition prior to discharge to the public sewers. 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge. 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastewater not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under provisions of section 4-1-136. But in no case will a waste be permitted in the sewage system which will cause a violation of the town's NPDES permit or is not in agreement with state or federal pretreatment requirements. If the town permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plant and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the town subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(e)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the town, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the town and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All interceptors shall be supplied and properly maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(f)  Where preliminary treatment for flow-equalizing facilities is provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(g)  It shall be required by the town that the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes, install a suitable control manhole. When deemed necessary, the town may require additional waste metering devices and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate preservation, sampling and measurement of the waste. Such manhole shall be readily accessible for representatives of the town and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the town. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(h)  All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereof, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods so as to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazard to life, limb and property. 
(i)  In order for the town to properly evaluate the effect of the waste on the system, an industry must submit, along with the plans, etc. required in section 4-1-62(b), an industrial waste questionnaire summary describing maximum, minimum, and average wastewater characteristics. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-31) 
Sec. 4-1-32. - Federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this chapter. The director of public works shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-32) 
State Law reference- General pretreatment regulations for existing and new sources of pollution, S.C. Code Reg. 61-9.403.1 et seq. 
Sec. 4-1-33. - Modification of federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
    When the system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the town may apply to the approval authority for authority to grant removal credits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.7. The term "consistent removal" shall mean the average of the lowest 50 percent of the removal measured according to 40 CFR 403.7(b)(2). 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-33) 
Sec. 4-1-34. - Specific pollutants limitations. 
    No discharge shall contain pollutant concentrations exceeding the maximum limits and other criteria established by DHEC concerning NPDES permits. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-34) 
Sec. 4-1-35. - State requirements. 
    State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than town or federal requirements and limitations. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-35) 
Sec. 4-1-36. - Right of revision. 
    The town may implement and enforce limitations or requirements that are more stringent than state or federal limits if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives of this title. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-36) 
Sec. 4-1-37. - Excessive discharge. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the town or state. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-37) 
Sec. 4-1-38. - Spill prevention and countermeasures. 
(a)  Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this chapter. In addition, each significant industrial user (SIU) shall develop a plan to control spills and slug discharges. No SIU shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until such a plan has been approved by the town. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. The plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharge; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the town manager of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under section 4-1-31, with procedures for follow-up written notification within five days; 
(4)  If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(b)  If identified in the plan or deemed to be necessary by the town, facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be approved by the town before construction of the facility. 
(c)  In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the director of public works of the incident. The notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective action. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the town a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(d)  Notices to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental or dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-38) 
Sec. 4-1-39. - Wastewater discharges. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to discharge without a town permit to any natural outlet within the town, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, and/or to the system any wastewater, except as authorized by the director of public works in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Administration and implementation of wastewater discharge into the town's treatment system shall be governed by the previously adopted ordinance authorizing the town to develop a sewer pretreatment program, providing for rules and regulations in connection therewith and for penalties for violations thereof. Administration procedures accompanying this chapter may be obtained from the town's pretreatment program. 
(b)  Any wastewater user who violates the parameters set forth in the wastewater contribution permit and this chapter shall be subject to a fine of at least $1,000.00, but not more than $2,000.00. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-39) 
Sec. 4-1-40. - Prohibition of unpolluted water. 
    Unpolluted water, including, but not limited to, cooling water, process water or blow-down from cooling towers or evaporative coolers shall not be discharged through direct or indirect connection to a town sewer unless a permit is issued by the town. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-40) 
Sec. 4-1-41. - Compliance data reporting requirements. 
    Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the town sewer, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the town a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O & M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, and certified to by a qualified professional. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-41) 
Sec. 4-1-42. - Compliance schedule development. 
    If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, a schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment shall be developed by the town. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). 
(2)  No increment referred to in subsection (1) of this section shall exceed nine months. 
(3)  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the director of public works, including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress report to the director of public works. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-42) 
Sec. 4-1-43. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(a)  Any user subject to a pretreatment standard after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the approving authority during the months of March, June, September and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the approving authority, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flow reported in section 4-1-41. At the discretion of the approving authority and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the approving authority may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. 
(b)  The approving authority shall impose mass and/or concentration limitations on users. In such cases, the report required by subsection (a) of this section shall indicate the mass and/or concentration of pollutants regulated in pretreatment standards in the effluent to the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow, nature and concentration, or production and mass, where requested by the town, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. All analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the approving authority pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the authority. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the approving authority. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-43) 
Sec. 4-1-44. - Confidential information. 
    Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction, unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the town that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-44) 
Sec. 4-1-45. - Pretreatment violations. 
    The town shall annually publish in the state newspaper a list of the users which were in significant noncompliance with any applicable pretreatment requirements or standards at least once during the previous 12 months. The notification shall also summarize enforcement actions taken against the users during the same 12 months. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-45) 
Secs. 4-1-46-4-1-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE D. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 4-1-62. - Private system compliance. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 4-1-12, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Before commencement of construction of private sewage disposal system other than a septic tank, privy, privy vault, or cesspool, for a single-family dwelling, the owner shall first obtain written approval by SCDHEC; the application for such permit shall be made in writing by the applicant and shall include any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by SCDHEC. 
(c)  A permit for private sewage system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the town. The town shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the town when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within two working days of the receipt of notice by the town. 
(d)  The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage system shall comply with all recommendations of the SCDHEC. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the town. 
(f)  At such time as a public sewer comes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in subsection (d) of this section, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this resolution. Any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned, cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt within 60 days of notification to do so by the town. 
(g)  No statement contained in this article shall be construed to nullify any additional requirements that may be imposed by the appropriate state or county health officer. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-46) 
Secs. 4-1-63-4-1-78. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE E. - BUILDING SEWER AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 4-1-79. - Permit types and requirements. 
(a)  There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  Residential and commercial service; and 
(2)  Service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application in writing to the town. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the town. A permit and inspection fee for a residential, commercial building sewer permit or an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the town at the time the application is filed. 
(b)  The installation and connection of the building sewer to the property line should be completed by a person properly licensed by the town to perform such service. 
(c)  All pertinent OSHA requirements must be met during the construction of any portion of the treatment works. 
(d)  Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provision of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the town. Permits may contain the following: 
(1)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer; 
(2)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge and sampling facilities; 
(4)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(5)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
(6)  Compliance schedules; 
(7)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports; 
(8)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the town and affording town access thereto; 
(9)  Requirements for notification of the town or any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character or the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system; 
(10)  Requirements for notification of slug discharges; and 
(11)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the town to ensure compliance with this article. 
(e)  Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the town. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-47) 
Secs. 4-1-80-4-1-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE F. - POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS 

Sec. 4-1-96. - Conditions for investigation authority. 
(a)  The town or duly authorized representatives of the town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this resolution. The town or its representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the town or duly authorized representatives of the town, shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the town's representative. The town shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by the town's representative and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging, sampling operations, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 4-1-31(g). 
(c)  The town or duly authorized representative of the town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the town holds duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the treatment works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(d)  In order to obtain immediate emergency relief from any noncompliance by a discharger, the town may summarily stop or prevent the discharge when necessary to protect the system's wastewater collection and treatment system or when the same endangers the public health. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-48) 
Secs. 4-1-97-4-1-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE G. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 4-1-113. - Schedule of water and sewer charges. 
(a)  A monthly sewer charge is hereby imposed upon all users of the town's sewer system; such charge shall be fixed from time to time by the council. 
(b)  In addition, users will be billed an amount set by the council in relation to their water usage. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-51) 
Sec. 4-1-114. - Service fee. 
(a)  New users shall be required to place with the town a deposit fee, as shall be fixed by the council, which will not be refunded until all indebtedness to the town has been cleared. 
(b)  A new user is any user who establishes a new or different residence which is or becomes connected to the town system. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-52) 
Sec. 4-1-115. - Tap fees. 
(a)  No sewer connection or tap may be made into the town's sewer system without obtaining a permit therefor. All connections must be made according to the requirements of the town and inspected by a representative of the town before the ditch has been backfilled. No permit will be issued or any connection permitted until a tap fee, as set by the council, has been paid for or an agreement to make monthly installment payments has been signed, six months to be the maximum length of installment payment. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the term "sewer tap" shall mean the addition of each family unit to the town's sewer system, regardless of the method used to transport the waste to the system. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-53) 
Sec. 4-1-116. - Billing; penalties and late charges. 
(a)  Bills for sewer service charges shall be rendered on a monthly basis, and bills will be mailed by the first of each month. Payments made after the 25th of the month will have a ten percent late charge added. If not paid within ten working days after the 25th, service will be disconnected until full payment is made (past due bill, current bill, late charge of ten percent, reconnection fee during working hours as established by council; reconnection fee after working hours as established by council). 
(b)  Penalties and late charges, as set by the council, shall be assessed against and added to all delinquent bills. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-54; Ord. of 2-14-2011, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 4-1-117. - Disconnection; reconnection; lien. 
(a)  The town reserves the right to discontinue sewer and/or water service, after notice, to any user whose bill remains unpaid after the due date, and will assume no liability for damage to the customer's property resulting from such disconnection. Bills not paid on the 15th of the next month by 5:00 p.m. will result in services being disconnected the following morning at 9:00 a.m. until full payment is made; full payment being the past due bill, current bill and the ten percent late charge with a reconnection fee for in-town customers and out-of-town customers and after hours (when it occurs), a reconnection fee and no reconnections after 9:00 p.m. If the 15th falls on a Friday or weekend, cut-offs will be on the following Tuesday at 9:00 a.m. and on holidays, the second working day. 
(b)  A customer may apply for a reconnection of service by paying: 
(1)  All outstanding bills, including penalties and late charges thereon; 
(2)  A reconnection fee as established by council; and 
(3)  Any and all costs incurred by the town in disconnection or reconnection of sewer service. 
(c)  In addition to discontinuance of service, all unpaid charges shall constitute a lien against the property served, which may be enforced in the same manner and to the same extent as liens for unpaid property taxes. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-55; Ord. of 2-14-2011, §§ 3, 4) 
Sec. 4-1-118. - Cost recovery. 
    In addition to the fees and charges described in this article, the town council shall provide for the recovery of costs from users of the town's wastewater treatment system by adopting a schedule of charges which include fees for: 
(1)  Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating its pretreatment program; 
(2)  Monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures; 
(3)  Reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for permit applications; 
(5)  Fees for filing appeals; and 
(6)  Other fees as the town may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-56) 
Sec. 4-1-119. - Users outside town. 
    The town may provide service to users outside the town limits, and the town council shall determine and fix by contract the charges and other conditions thereof. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-57) 
Secs. 4-1-120-4-1-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE H. - FEES 

Sec. 4-1-136. - Fees; surcharges. 
(a)  The permit and inspection fee required for an establishment producing industrial waste shall be based on a percentage of the actual cost of operating the town's pretreatment program and shall be adjusted as necessary. 
(b)  Persons living within the corporate limits desiring to connect a building sewer to the town's treatment works shall pay to the town a tap fee as described in table B below. 
(c)  Surcharges. A schedule of surcharges has been established which takes into consideration the total costs for the treatment wastes. This schedule can be amended from time to time by resolution of the town council. In this schedule, a BOD 5 concentration of 0 to 225 ppm, a total solids concentration of 0 to 225 ppm and a pH in the range of 6.0 through 9.0 units is considered to be standard sewage waste. Any sewage having a concentration in excess of 225 ppm BOD 5 , 225 ppm total solids, or having a PH of less than 6.0 units or greater than 9.0 units is subject to a surcharge in accordance with the schedule set forth below. This surcharge schedule is based on the equitable recovery of waste treatment costs as required for those municipalities receiving federal assistance for the construction of wastewater treatment facilities and is in compliance with the regulations of 40 CFR 35. The issuance of this surcharge schedule does not in itself permit or does it imply that any such waste will be received by the town for treatment. In each instance, the actual acceptance of the waste for treatment is subject to review and evaluation by the town. In some instances, pretreatment may be required before acceptance of the waste for final treatment by the town. 
(1)  The surcharge for BOD 5 shall be as established from time to time by the council. 
(2)  The surcharge for suspended solids shall be as established from time to time by the council. 
(d)  In all cases where residential, commercial or industrial premises or facilities are connected to the town's sewage disposal system and are not supplied water by the town, the town shall require that the water used be measured by a water meter acceptable to the town and that sewer service charges and sewer surcharges be assessed against that quantity and quality of sewage flow in exactly the same manner as if the water were being supplied from the town. The cost of the installation and maintenance of the water meter will be borne exclusively by the customer. 
(e)  Sewer service charge. 
(1)  The standard residential water connection fee and standard residential sewer connection fee per residential unit within the town limits shall be as established from time to time by the council. A residential unit is a single unit, home, apartment, condominium, etc. 
(2)  Fees in all other instances shall be calculated either using a residential equivalent average daily usage of 300 gallons per day or the connection fee shall be determined by the director of public works. This determination shall be made by estimating the average daily usage and dividing by the average residential usage of 300 gallons per day and multiplying by the standard residential connection fees. 
(3)  All water and sewer connection fees shall consist of a physical attachment fee per unit as established from time to time by the council that shall be placed in the Department of Public Works Operation and Maintenance Fund. The balance shall be an impact and improvement fee and shall be placed in the Department of Public Works Capital Improvement Fund. 
(4)  No connection fee shall be less than the physical attachment fee. 
(5)  For connections outside the town limits, fees will be increased 50 percent. For other than single unit residential connections, connection fees can be evaluated after 12 months to determine if appropriate fees have been collected, and adjustments to those fees can then be made. 
Table B Demand Water Tap (DWT) Fee Formula: Gallons per Minute (gpm) (Water tap fee gpd) x (Demand meter size EQ) = TOTAL WATER TAP FEE A. 3/4"- 30 gallons per min. (AWWA flows) divided by 30 gpm (3/4" meter flow) = 1 meter equivalent (M.E.). B. 1"- 50 gallons per min. (AWWA flows) divided by 30 gpm (3/4" meter flow) = 1.6 meter equivalent (M.E.). C. 11/2"-100 gallons per min. (AWWA flows) divided by 30 gpm (3/4" meter flow) = 3.3 meter equivalent (M.E.). D. 2"- 160 gallons per min. (AWWA flows) divided by 30 gpm (3/4" meter flow) = 5.3 meter equivalent (M.E.). E. 3"- 320 gallons per min. (AWWA flows) divided by 30 gpm (3/4" meter flow) = 10.6 meter equivalent (M.E.). F. 4"- 500 gallons per min. (AWWA flows) divided by 30 gpm (3/4" meter flow) = 16.6 meter equivalent (M.E.). G. 6"-1,000 gallons per min. (AWWA flows) divided by 30 gpm (3/4" meter flow) = 33.3 meter equivalent (M.E.). H. 8"-1,600 gallons per min. (AWWA flows) divided by 30 gpm (3/4" meter flow) = 53.3 meter equivalent (M.E.).  
(f)  The town shall notify each user of its sewage system annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charge which are attributable to wastewater treatment services. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-58) 
Secs. 4-1-137-4-1-152. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE I. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 4-1-153. - Unlawful to tamper with system. 
    It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to tamper with or change any sewer meter, or to make any connection to the system, or to reconnect service when it has been discontinued for nonpayment, without written permission from the town. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-71) 
Sec. 4-1-154. - Occupancy of premises without proper sewerage disposal prohibited. 
    No owner or other person having the rental or disposal of the occupancy of any dwelling shall allow the same to be occupied, unless proper sewage disposal is provided in accordance with this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-72) 
Sec. 4-1-155. - Building contracts to provide for sewage disposal. 
    All building contracts for the erection of structures anticipated for human residence must provide for adequate and sanitary sewerage disposal. If no sewerage connection is available to such a building, the contract must provide for the construction of a septic tank in accordance with the standards as prescribed by DHEC. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-73) 
Sec. 4-1-156. - Use of septic tanks. 
(a)  Septic tanks approved by the state department of health and environmental control and kept in good sanitary condition will be permitted where sewer connection is not available or feasible. 
(b)  All septic tanks and drain fields shall be maintained so that they shall not constitute a nuisance or health hazard. No septic tank shall be allowed to overflow onto the surface of any property, including streets and walkways. The discharge of septic tank effluent or cesspool overflow to any open drain, ditch, stream or well penetrating water-bearing formations where cesspools and septic tanks are allowed is prohibited. The occupants of the premises shall be responsible under the terms of this section. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-74) 
Sec. 4-1-157. - Inspections. 
    The town may perform inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures in order to ensure compliance with this chapter, and shall further have the right to enter upon the premises to inspect, to collect samples, to set up and to use monitoring equipment and to inspect and to copy records. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-75) 
Sec. 4-1-158. - Relief for noncompliance. 
    The town shall have the right to seek injunctive relief and may sue for and recover civil damages for noncompliance by a discharger in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-76) 
Sec. 4-1-159. - Obligations of out-of-town customers. 
(a)  No person, corporation or entity with property outside of the town shall receive water and/or sewer services from the town without the express, irrevocable promise (which shall be expressed in writing and signed by such property owner) that they will bind themselves and any persons, corporations or entities acquiring the property after them, to petition for annexation into the town as soon as their property is contiguous to the town. 
(b)  The landowner shall sign such agreement as the town administrator shall deem appropriate to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-77) 
Secs. 4-1-160-4-1-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE J. - SEWER SERVICE 

Sec. 4-1-176. - Monthly charge. 
    Until changed pursuant to action of the town council or pursuant to any covenant made by the town, the criteria and rates for sewer service shall be as established from time to time. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-78) 
Secs. 4-1-177-4-1-192. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE K. - WASTEWATER SERVICE 

Sec. 4-1-193. - Suspension. 
(a)  Enforcement . The town may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater contribution permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the town, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare or persons, to the environment, or causes the town to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or wastewater contribution permits shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the user to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the town shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The town shall reinstate the wastewater contribution permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the town within 15 days of the date of occurrence. 
(b)  Renovation of permit . Any user who violates the following conditions of this article or applicable state and federal regulations is subject to having his permit revoked: 
1.  Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge; 
2.  Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
3.  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection of monitoring; or 
4.  Violation of conditions of the permit. 
(c)  Legal action . If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the town's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this chapter, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the town, the town attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the circuit court of this country. 
(d)  Penalties . Any user who is found to have violated an order of the town or who willfully or negligently fails to comply with any provisions of this chapter, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereinunder, shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the CPW may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporters' fees, and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this chapter or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder. Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document files or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or wastewater contribution permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine or not more than $1,000.00. 
(Code 1996, § 4-1-79) 
CHAPTER 2. - WATER SYSTEM 

Sec. 4-2-1. - Installation of utility service. 
    The town shall provide necessary utility service to the customer at the point of street right-of-way or property line easement established for the utility service. Service lines and collection lines from the right-of-way or property line easement shall be installed, owned and maintained by the customer subject to regulations given in this article. 
(Code 1996, § 4-2-1) 
Sec. 4-2-2. - Meter responsibility. 
    The town shall be responsible for all damaged meters due to ordinary wear, improper installation or servicing by the town. The customer shall be responsible for all damaged or destroyed meters resulting from negligence and shall be charged for repairs or replacement based on the current prevailing prices and repair rates. 
(Code 1996, § 4-2-2) 
Sec. 4-2-3. - Tampering with meter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any persons to alter, tamper with, straight line a water service, or bypass a meter which has been installed for the purpose of measuring water service. Any meter found in a condition which would cause such meter to inaccurately measure the use of water of the attachment to a meter or distribution wire of any device, mechanism or wire which would permit the use of unmetered water or would cause a meter to inaccurately measure the use thereof shall be evidence that either the person in whose name such meter was installed or the person for whose benefit it was diverted caused the water to be diverted from going through the meter or the meter to inaccurately measure the use of water. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than authorized town personnel to restore water service when said service was discontinued for nonpayment. If any person other than authorized personnel causes water service to be restored prior to paying in full the outstanding balance, then it shall be evidence that either the person in whose name such meter was installed or the person who benefited caused the service to be restored. 
(Code 1996, § 4-2-3) 
Sec. 4-2-4. - Water service. 
    No water service shall be furnished to any lot or house from an existing service. 
(Code 1996, § 4-2-4) 
Sec. 4-2-5. - Shortages. 
    When it shall be determined by the town that a water supply shortage is imminentfor any reason, the town may, by resolution, restrict the quantity of water furnished to any customer and such restrictions may be imposed on customers outside the town limits before restricting the quantity of water furnished to any customer and such restrictions may be imposed on customers outside the town limits before restricting the quantity of water furnished within the town limits. 
(Code 1996, § 4-2-5) 
Sec. 4-2-6. - Maintenance; operation; service. 
    The town shall provide personnel to maintain, operate and service the system as required by the rules and regulations of the state department of health and environmental control and the state water pollution control authority. The town agrees to use reasonable diligence in providing a regular and uninterrupted supply of potable water and services, but in case the supply of water shall be interrupted or fail by accident, deficiency or any cause whatsoever, the town shall not be liable for such interruption or failure and the town shall not be liable for any damages sustained by the customer by reason thereof. 
(Code 1996, § 4-2-6) 
Sec. 4-2-7. - Water customer accounts. 
    All services will be metered and shall be read and billed monthly as previously stated. Where water meters fail to register or operate correctly, bills shall be arrived at by computing an average bill based on the immediate past two or three billings for the account. 
(Code 1996, § 4-2-7) 
Sec. 4-2-8. - Hazardous connections. 
    The town shall make inspections of existing buildings' plumbing and if any condition is found which constitutes a health hazard or potential health hazard to the water supply, the town shall require immediate corrective action be taken by the customer or sever the water connection until the hazard is corrected by the customer to the satisfaction of the town. 
(Code 1996, § 4-2-8) 
Sec. 4-2-9. - Cross connection. 
    Under no circumstances shall any part of the water system be cross connected in any way with any other water source, except as specifically approved by the state department of health and environmental control. Any hazardous cross connection between the water system and any source of contamination is prohibited. 
(Code 1996, § 4-2-9) 
Sec. 4-2-10. - Public health and safety. 
    In the interest of the public health and safety, the town shall be permitted to take such emergency action as may be deemed necessary in the operation of the water system, including the right to close down any water line or portion of the water system for the purpose of making corrections, alterations, or repairs. 
(Code 1996, § 4-2-10) 
Sec. 4-2-11. - Records and billing. 
    While the town will make every reasonable effort to see that each customer receives his bill, no responsibility will be assumed for non-delivery where the bill has been mailed at the post office, provided the bill has been mailed to the address which the customer has reported to the town. All records of business transactions, billings, and receipt of funds shall be maintained by the clerk. 
(Code 1996, § 4-2-11) 
Sec. 4-2-12. - Interpretation of the provisions. 
    In interpretation of the provisions contained in this title, availability of the public sewer will be limited to those houses, buildings or properties which can discharge into the public sewer by gravity flow from said houses, buildings or other properties. 
(Code 1996, § 4-2-12) 
Sec. 4-2-13. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person violating any provision of the town pertaining to public utilities shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. 
(Code 1996, § 4-2-13) 
Sec. 4-2-14. - Non-service. 
    In addition to penalties as set forth the town reserves the right to sever a water connection or remove a water meter if it is found that any provision of this chapter has been violated. 
(Code 1996, § 4-2-14) 
Sec. 4-2-15. - Service discontinuance. 
    When service has been discontinued for violation of this chapter, all charges for services to date become immediately due and payable. Service will not be reinstated until payment in full has been made for all charges, including bills, cost of repairs, service charges, reconnection fees and penalties. 
(Code 1996, § 4-2-15) 
CHAPTER 3. - DROUGHTS 
ARTICLE A. - DROUGHT MANAGEMENT PLAN 

Sec. 4-3-1. - Declaration of purpose and intent. 
    The Town of Batesburg-Leesville understands the fundamental need to make efficient use of the limited and valuable water resource under its stewardship in order to protect the public's health and safety and environmental integrity. The purpose of this document is to establish a plan and procedures for managing water demand and evaluating supply options before and during a drought-related water shortage. The intent is to satisfy the requirements of the Drought Response Act of 2000 (Code of Laws of South Carolina, 1976, Section 49-23-10, et seq., as amended) with the goal of achieving the greatest public benefit from domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection and to provide water for other purposes in an equitable manner. Therefore, the Town of Batesburg-Leesville has adopted this drought management plan and drought response ordinance that provide the policies and the authority to fulfill this obligation. The drought management plan outlines the framework by which the town of Batesburg-Leesville will internally prepare for water shortages. The article provides the regulations by which the Town of Batesburg-Leesville will manage and control its customer water usage during various levels of a drought. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2003(1), § 1) 
Sec. 4-3-2. - Definition of terms. 
    For the purposes of this plan and the accompanying article, the following definitions will apply: 
    Aesthetic water use: Water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools and waterfalls. 
    Commercial and industrial use: Water use integral to the production of goods and/or services by any establishment having profit as its primary aim. 
    Conservation: Reduction in water use to prevent depletion or waste of the resource. 
    Customer: Any person, company or organization using finished water owned or supplied by the Town of Batesburg-Leesville. 
    Domestic water use: Water use for personal needs or for household purposes such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation or for cleaning a residence, business, industry or institution. 
    Drought alert phases: There are four drought alert phases to be determined by the drought response committee for the State of South Carolina. The four phases are: 
(1)  Incipient drought. 
(2)  Moderate drought. 
(3)  Severe drought. 
(4)  Extreme drought. 
    Drought response management areas: There are four drought management areas corresponding to the major river basins in South Carolina. The four areas are: 
(1)  West or Savannah. 
(2)  Central or Santee. 
(3)  Northeast or Pee Dee. 
(4)  Southern or Ashepoo, Combahee, and Edisto. 
In order to prevent overly broad response to drought conditions, drought response measures shall be considered within individual drought management areas or within individual counties, as applicable. 
    Drought response committee: A committee composed of state and local representatives created for the purpose of coordinating responses to water supply shortages within drought management areas and making recommendations for action to the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources and/or the governor. The committee is composed of State agency representatives from the South Carolina Emergency Management Division of the Office of the Adjutant General, South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control, South Carolina Department of Agriculture, South Carolina Forestry Commission, and South Carolina Department of Natural Resources, as well as local committees representing counties, municipalities, public service districts, private water suppliers, agriculture, industry, domestic users, regional councils of government, commissions of public works, power generation facilities, special purpose districts and soil and water conservation districts. 
    Essential water use: Water used specifically for fire fighting, maintaining in-stream flow requirements and to satisfy federal, state or local public health and safety requirements. 
    Finished water: Water distributed for use after treatment. The terms "water use," "water user," and "water customer" refer to finished water use unless otherwise defined. 
    Institutional water use: Water used by government, public and private educational institutions, churches and places of worship, water utilities, and organizations within the public domain. 
    Irrigation water use: Water used to maintain gardens, trees, lawns, shrubs, flowers, athletic fields, rights-of-way and medians. 
    Non-essential water use: Categories of water use other than essential water use. Examples of non-essential water use include landscape irrigation and the washing of buildings, parking lots, automobiles, etc. 
    Residential equivalent unit (REU): An equivalency unit defined to be equal to one single-family residence. ________________________'s (water system) allocated water capacity equals _____________ gallons per day per REU. 
    SC Dept. of Natural Resources: The state agency with primacy to implement the provisions of the Drought Response Act. 
    Water supply shortage: Lack of adequate, available water caused by drought to meet normal demands. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2003(1), § 2) 
Sec. 4-3-3. - Drought management plan. 
A.  Introduction: To ensure that the Town of Batesburg-Leesville adequately manages its water system during drought-related conditions, an organized plan is necessary for system operation and reliability, proper communications, effective coordination and ultimate allocation of water use. Prior planning will compliment the Town of Batesburg-Leesville ability to respond to drought conditions and to enforce the related article. 
B.  Designation of water system drought response representative: Administrating a drought plan requires the skills needed to undertake a comprehensive public information program and the judgment required to deal with equity issues arising from enforcement of a mandatory program. Someone who has these skills will be selected by the water system to manage the water system's program and serve as the principal contact for the news media as the water system's drought response representative. The drought response representative for the Town of Batesburg-Leesville is the Town Manager, 244 West Columbia Avenue, Batesburg-Leesville, SC, 803-532-8301. 
C.  Description of water system layout, water sources, capacities and yields: The Town of Batesburg-Leesville is located in the Central or Santee Drought Response Management Area of South Carolina. The system serves: A population of approximately 6,400 persons located both in and adjacent to the corporate limits. The service area is defined as the Lexington County School District 3 located in western Lexington County and extends into Saluda County. Briefly, describe the layout of the water system: The Batesburg-Leesville water system consists of a 2.4 million gallon per day conventional surface water treatment facility. The town maintains a 20-acre raw water reservoir located in town and supplements the reservoir with a 2.0 million gallon per day raw water pumping facility located on Brodie Creek. System storage is accomplished via three parallel clear wells (two reservoirs at 300,000 gallons, one reservoir at 400,000 gallons) located at the treatment plant. The distribution system is supplied finished water by five high service pumps that deliver water to three elevated storage tanks, Ridgell St. Tank-100,000 gallons, Wellington Tank-150,000 gallons and the Granite St. Tank-100,000 gallons. The distribution system consists of approximately 54 miles of water mains ranging in size from 6 to 12 inches. (Include pumping capability, elevated and ground storage capacity, reservoir capacity, aquifer storage and recovery capability, main transmission piping and plant capacity.) The water supply sources available to the system are: The raw water reservoir and the Brodie Road raw water pump station. The SCDHEC total permitted capacity of the water system operated by the Town of Batesburg-Leesville is 2.4 million gallons per day. If the system produces drinking water from various sources, provide the SCDHEC permitted capacity for each source: Batesburg-Leesville Water Treatment Plant, System No. 321002, Permitted Capacity 2.4 MGD. 
D.  Identification of water system specific drought or water shortage indicators: Operators of every water system must develop historical trends that are valuable indicators of a system's ability to meet demand when demand begins to outpace supply. The Town of Batesburg-Leesville has developed triggers for use during drought or demand water shortages that describe when specific phases of the drought response ordinance are implemented. The system triggers are as follows: 
Moderate drought phase: 
1.  Town Pond Reservoir 4/5 full. 
2.  Brodie Creek flow below 5.0 cubic feet per second. 
3.  Sixty days of raw water supply available. 
4.  Average daily use greater than 1.3 mgd for 45 consecutive days. 
5.  Local average rainfall less than 6 inches for sixty days. 
Severe drought phase: 
1.  Town Pond Reservoir 3/5 full. 
2.  Brodie Creek flow below 3.0 cubic feet per second. 
3.  Forty-five days of raw water supply available. 
4.  Average daily use greater than 1.5 mgd for 30 consecutive days. 
5.  Local average rainfall less than 2 inches for ninety days. 
Extreme drought phase: 
1.  Town Pond Reservoir 1/2 full. 
2.  Brodie Creek flow below 1.5 cubic feet per second. 
3.  Twenty-one days of raw water supply available. 
4.  Average daily use greater than 1.5 mgd for 30 consecutive days. 
5.  Local average rainfall less than 1 inch for 120 days. 
E.  Cooperative agreements and alternative water supply sources: Successful drought management requires a comprehensive program by the water utility. In many situations administrative agreements are required with other agencies to fully implement the Plan. Agreements with other water purveyors may be necessary for alternative water supply sources. Other agreements that strengthen conservation efforts by large users may be necessary. The Town of Batesburg-Leesville identifies the following agreements that are in place to facilitate the implementation of this plan: Presently the Town of Batesburg-Leesville maintains no agreements for alternative sources of supplies of potable water. 
Agreements that are being negotiated or considered with other entities are: None. 
F.  Description of pre-drought planning efforts: Before the occurrence of a water supply shortage and the need to implement the emergency provisions of the article, it is important that certain pre-response measures be taken with the aim of conserving the system's source water, as well as the water distributed to the customer. In regards to the conservation measures listed below, the Town of Batesburg-Leesville has taken the following actions: 
1.  Identification of all major water users of the system: Town of Ridge Spring, S.C., J. B. Martin Company, Offray and Sons Manufacturing, Wellington Synthetics and Shealy's Barbeque. 
2.  Identification of those users with whom there are conservation agreements: Not applicable. 
3.  A vigorous public education program is critical for achieving substantial water use reductions. An effective public outreach program will keep the public informed about the water supply situation, what actions will mitigate drought emergency problems, and how well the public is doing in terms of meeting the program goals. Keeping the public involved, informed, and participating in the decision-making process is key to implementing an effective drought management plan. Provide a description of your utility's efforts to develop an effective drought- 
G.  Description of capital planning and investment for system reliability and demand forecasting: Water utilities routinely find that capital improvements to the system strongly enhance their ability to get through times of drought. It is important that every water utility aggressively plan and build for future needs. The utility must continue to provide for system operation flexibility, improved pumping and storage capacity and new technologies to meet the demands of tomorrow. Describe the utility's capital improvement program and how past efforts have enhanced your system's ability to meet demand during drought conditions: Alternative water sources have been addressed with the possibilities of groundwater near Interstate 1-20, utilizing Lake Murray as the surface water source, and early stage discussions with adjacent water providers for possible future system connections for emergency purposes. 
H.  Describe other system improvements the utility should consider to prepare for future droughts and increasing water demands: Pursue additional or alternative raw water sources. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2003(1), § 3) 
Secs. 4-3-4-4-3-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - DROUGHT RESPONSE ORDINANCE 

Sec. 4-3-16. - Declaration of policy and authority. 
    The objective of this drought response ordinance is to establish authority, policy and procedure by which the Town of Batesburg-Leesville will take the proper actions to manage water demand during a drought-related shortage. The ordinance satisfies the requirements of the Drought Response Act of 2000 and has the goal of achieving the greatest public benefit from limited supplies of water needed for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection and of allocating water for other purposes in an equitable manner. 
    This article outlines the actions to be taken for the conservation of water supplied by the Town of Batesburg-Leesville. These actions are directed both towards an overall reduction in water usage and the optimization of supply. 
    To satisfy these goals, the Town of Batesburg-Leesville hereby adopts the following regulations and restrictions on the delivery and consumption of water. This article is hereby declared necessary for the protection of public health, safety and welfare and shall take effect upon its adoption by the Town of Batesburg-Leesville. 
    If it becomes necessary to conserve water in its service area due to drought, the Town of Batesburg-Leesville is authorized to issue a proclamation (a "proclamation") that existing conditions prevent fulfillment of the usual water-use demands. The proclamation is an attempt to prevent depleting the water supply to the extent that water-use for human consumption, sanitation, fire protection, and other essential needs becomes endangered. 
    Immediately upon issuance of such a proclamation, regulations and restrictions set forth under this article shall become effective and remain in effect until the water supply shortage has ended and the proclamation rescinded. 
    Water uses that are regulated or prohibited under this article are considered to be non-essential and continuation of such uses during times of water supply shortages is deemed to constitute a waste of water, subjecting the offender(s) to penalties. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2003(2)) 
Sec. 4-3-17. - Moderate drought phase. 
    Upon notification by the drought response committee that a moderate drought condition is present and is expected to persist and/or upon determination by the Town of Batesburg-Leesville that a moderate water supply shortage exists based on trigger levels, the Town of Batesburg-Leesville will seek voluntary reductions from its customers in the use of water for all purposes and voluntary reductions on using water during certain peak water demand periods. Specifically, the goal during this phase is to achieve a reduction of 20% in residential water use and 15% in other water uses such as commercial, industrial, institutional and irrigation; and a reduction in overall water use of 15%. 
    To accomplish this, the Town of Batesburg-Leesville will take the following actions: 
(1)  Issue a proclamation to be released to local media, Town of Batesburg-Leesville's customers and to the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Drought Information Center that moderate drought conditions are present. 
(2)  Provide written notification to the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Drought Information Center and routinely publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the service area of the water system the voluntary conservation measures that the customers are requested to follow during moderate drought conditions, including: 
a.  Reduce residential water use to 65 gallons per person per day and a maximum of 200 gallons per household per day; 
b.  Eliminate the washing down of sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts and other hard surfaced areas; 
c.  Eliminate the washing down of buildings for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
d.  Eliminate the flushing of gutters; 
e.  Eliminate the domestic washing of motorbikes, boats, cars, etc.; 
f.  Eliminate the use of water to maintain fountains, reflection ponds and decorative water bodies for aesthetic or scenic purposes, except where necessary to support aquatic life; 
g.  Reduce watering of lawns, plants, trees, gardens, shrubbery and flora on private or public property to the minimum necessary. Encourage outdoor watering to be done during off-peak hours; 
h.  Reduce the amount of water obtained from fire hydrants for construction purposes, fire drills or for any purpose other than fire-fighting or flushing necessary to maintain water quality; and 
i.  Limit normal water use by commercial and individual customers including, but not limited to, the following: 
i.  Stop serving water in addition to another beverage routinely in restaurants; 
ii.  Stop maintaining water levels in scenic and recreational ponds and lakes, except for the minimum amount required to support aquatic life; and 
iii.  Cease water service to customers who have been given a 10-day notice to repair one or more leaks and have failed to do so. 
(3)  Intensify maintenance efforts to identify and correct water leaks in the distribution system. 
(4)  Cease to install new irrigation taps on the water system. 
(5)  Continue to encourage and educate customers to comply with voluntary water conservation. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2003(2)) 
Sec. 4-3-18. - Severe drought phase. 
    Upon notification by the drought response committee that a severe drought condition is present and is expected to persist and/or upon determination by the Town of Batesburg-Leesville that a severe water supply shortage exists based on trigger levels, Town of Batesburg-Leesville will seek voluntary reduction in the use of water for all purposes and mandatory restrictions on non-essential usage and restrictions on times when certain water usage is allowed. Specifically, the goal during this phase is to achieve a reduction of 25% in residential water use, 20% in all other water use categories, and a reduction in overall water use of 20%. To accomplish these goals, the Town of Batesburg-Leesville will take the following actions: 
(1)  Issue a proclamation to be released to the local media, Town of Batesburg-Leesville's customers and to the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Drought Information Center that severe drought conditions are present. 
(2)  Provide written notification to the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Drought Information Center and routinely publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the service area of the water system the voluntary conservation measures and mandatory restrictions to be placed on the use of water supplied by the utility, including: 
a.  Voluntary reduction of residential water use by the utility's customers to 55 gallons per person per day and a maximum of 170 gallons per household per day. 
b.  Control landscape irrigation by the utility's customers by staggering watering times. 
c.  Mandatory restrictions on the use of water supplied by the utility for activities including: 
i.  Eliminate the washing down of sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts and other hard surfaced areas; 
ii.  Eliminate the washing down of buildings for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
iii.  Eliminate the flushing of gutters; 
iv.  Eliminate domestic washing of motorbikes, boats, cars, etc.; 
v.  Eliminate the use of water to maintain fountains, reflection ponds and decorative water bodies for aesthetic or scenic purposes, except where necessary to support aquatic life; 
vi.  Eliminate filling or maintaining public or private swimming pools; 
vii.  Eliminate obtaining water from fire hydrants for construction purposes, fire drills or any purpose other than fire-fighting or flushing necessary to maintain water quality; and 
d.  Limit use of water by commercial and individual customers including, but not limited to, the following: 
i.  Stop serving water in addition to another beverage routinely in restaurants; 
ii.  Stop maintaining water levels in scenic and recreational ponds and lakes, except for the minimum amount required to support aquatic life; 
iii.  Limit irrigating golf courses and any portion of its grounds; 
iv.  Cease water service to customers who have been given a 10-day notice to repair one or more leaks and have failed to do so; and 
v.  Limit expanding commercial nursery facilities, placing new irrigated agricultural land in production or planting or landscaping when required by site design review process. 
(3)  Intensify maintenance efforts to identify and correct water leaks in the distribution system. 
(4)  Continue to cease installation of new irrigation taps on the water system. 
(5)  Publicize widely the penalties to be imposed for violations of mandatory restrictions and the procedures to be followed if a variance in the restrictions is requested. 
(6)  Expand the use of education and public relations efforts and emphasize the penalties associated with violating the mandatory restrictions. 
(7)  Provide written notification monthly to the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Drought Information Center regarding the success of the voluntary and mandatory restrictions. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2003(2)) 
Sec. 4-3-19. - Extreme drought phase. 
    Upon notification by the drought response committee that an extreme drought condition is present and is expected to persist and/or upon determination by the Town of Batesburg-Leesville that an extreme water supply shortage exists based on the trigger levels, the Town of Batesburg-Leesville's will impose mandatory restrictions in the use of water for all purposes and on the times when certain water usage is allowed. Specifically, the goal during this phase is to achieve a reduction of 30% in residential water use, 25% in all other categories of water uses and a reduction in overall water use of 25%. To accomplish these goals, the Town of Batesburg-Leesville will take the following actions: 
(1)  Issue a proclamation to be released to the local media, the Town of Batesburg-Leesville customers and to the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Drought Information Center that Extreme drought conditions are present; 
(2)  Provide written notification to the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Drought Information Center and routinely publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the service area of the water system the mandatory restrictions to be placed on the use of water supplied by the utility, including: 
a.  Limiting residential water use to 45 gallons per person per day and a maximum of 150 gallons per household per day. 
b.  Eliminate landscape irrigation by the utility's customers. 
c.  Mandatory restrictions on the use of water supplied by the utility for activities including: 
i.  Eliminate the washing down of sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts and other hard surfaced areas; 
ii.  Eliminate the washing down of buildings for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
iii.  Eliminate the flushing of gutters; 
iv.  No domestic washing of motorbikes, boats, cars, etc.; 
v.  Eliminate the use of water to maintain fountains, reflection ponds, and decorative water bodies for aesthetic or scenic purposes, except where necessary to support aquatic life; 
vi.  Eliminate filling or maintaining public or private swimming pools; 
vii.  Eliminate obtaining water from fire hydrants for construction purposes, fire drills, or any purpose other than firefighting or flushing necessary to maintain water quality; and 
d.  Limit normal water use by commercial and individual customers including, but not limited to, the following: 
i.  Stop serving water in addition to another beverage routinely in restaurants; 
ii.  Stop maintaining water levels in scenic and recreational ponds and lakes, except for the minimum amount required to support fish and wildlife; 
iii.  Limit irrigating golf courses and any portion of their grounds; 
iv.  Cease water service to customers who have been given a 10-day notice to repair one or more leaks and have failed to do so; and 
v.  Limit expanding commercial nursery facilities, placing new irrigated agricultural land in production, or planting or landscaping when required by site design review process. 
(3)  Intensify maintenance efforts to identify and correct water leaks in the distribution system. 
(4)  Continue to cease installation of new irrigation taps on the water system. 
(5)  Outline other conservation measures, examples are: 
a.  Place a moratorium on the issuance of all new water service connections and contracts for all new water main extensions. As part of the public information process, provide notice to developers of the moratorium; 
b.  Encourage all residential water customers to voluntarily reduce overall monthly water usage to 70% of the customer's monthly average. If voluntary reduction of usage is not successful, the Town of Batesburg-Leesville may, at its option, implement the following excessive use rate schedule for water: 
Tier I 0-5,000 gallons per month Regular rate Tier II 5,000-7,000 gallons per month 2 times regular rate Tier III Over 7,000 gallons per month 3 times regular rate  
c.  Impose a drought surcharge per thousand gallons of water that increases with higher usage. The general principle behind the drought surcharge is that the fee is imposed on water use in excess of 10,000 of normal monthly use. The drought surcharge is a temporary fee imposed during the current water supply shortage and is not a cost-based rate. The drought surcharge is temporary and will be terminated at such time as the Town of Batesburg-Leesville determines the water supply is above the trigger levels. 
d.  If the conservation measures of the ordinance or plan prove inadequate to mitigate the effects of the drought conditions or water supply availability, the Town of Batesburg-Leesville may take additional actions including, but not limited to: 
i.  Decreasing the gallon/REU limits in the different tiers; and 
ii.  Reduction of water system pressure as needed. 
(6)  Publicize widely the penalties to be imposed for violations of mandatory restrictions and the procedures to be followed if a variance in the restrictions is requested. 
(7)  Expand the use of education and public relations efforts as conducted under the Moderate and Severe drought phase and emphasize the penalties associated with violating the mandatory restrictions. 
(8)  Provide written notification monthly to the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Drought Information Center regarding the success of the mandatory restrictions. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2003(2)) 
Sec. 4-3-20. - Rationing. 
    If a drought threatens the protection of public health and safety, the Town of Batesburg-Leesville is hereby authorized to ration water. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2003(2)) 
Sec. 4-3-21. - Enforcement of restrictions. 
    If any customer of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville fails to comply with the mandatory water use restrictions of this article, the customer shall be given a written notice of such failure to comply, which cites the date of said violation, and shall be assessed surcharges in accordance with the following schedule: 
First violation-$75.00 surcharge shall be added to the customer's water bill; 
Second violation-An additional $250.00 surcharge shall be added to the customer's water bill; 
Third violation-The customer's water service shall be terminated and restored only after payment of a surcharge of $500.00 in addition to all previously assessed surcharges. 
    Law enforcement agencies and other authorized agencies or designated employees in the respective jurisdiction that is being supplied water by the Town of Batesburg-Leesville shall diligently enforce the provisions of the drought response ordinance. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2003(2)) 
Sec. 4-3-22. - Variances. 
    Customers, who in their belief are unable to comply with the mandatory water use restrictions of this drought response ordinance, may petition for a variance from restrictions by filing a petition with the Town of Batesburg-Leesville within ten working days after the issuance of the proclamation requiring water use restrictions. All petitions for variance shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name and address of the petitioner; 
B.  Purpose of water usage; 
C.  Special provision from which the petitioner is requesting relief; 
D.  Detailed statement as to how the curtailment declaration adversely affects the petitioner; 
E.  Description of the relief desired; 
I.  Restrictions with which the petitioner is expected to comply and the compliance date; 
J.  Steps the petitioner is taking to meet the restrictions from which the variance is sought and the expected date of compliance; and 
K.  Other information as needed. 
    In order for the variance to be granted, the petitioner must demonstrate clearly that compliance with the article cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage without having an adverse impact upon the best interests of the community. The Town of Batesburg-Leesville is authorized to grant the request for variance. 
    In addition, the Town of Batesburg-Leesville is authorized to grant temporary variances for existing water uses otherwise prohibited under the article if it is determined that failure to grant such variances could cause an emergency condition adversely affecting health, sanitation and fire protection for the public. No such variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this article occurring prior to the issuance of the variance. Variances granted by the Town of Batesburg-Leesville shall include a timetable for compliance and shall expire when the water supply shortage no longer exists, unless the petitioner has failed to meet specified requirements. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2003(2)) 
Title 5 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT 
CHAPTER 1. - PLANNING COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Planning by local governments, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 6-7-10 et seq., 6-29-510 et seq.; planning commissions, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 5-23-410 et seq., 6-29-310 et seq. 

Sec. 5-1-1. - Created. 
    In order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and harmonious development of the municipality which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, the town planning commission, hereinafter referred to as "the commission," is hereby created and established as authorized by state law. 
(Code 1996, § 5-1-1) 
State Law reference- Planning Commissions, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-310 et seq. 
Sec. 5-1-2. - Membership. 
    The commission shall consist of nine members to be appointed by mayor and town council. The members shall serve staggered terms of four years and until their successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term by the town council who shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. Members shall receive such compensation as determined by the council and may be reimbursed for actual expense incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 1996, § 5-1-2) 
State Law reference- Membership, terms and compensation, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-350. 
Sec. 5-1-3. - Organization, meetings, rules, staff and finances. 
    The commission shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among its members. The term of officers shall be one year with eligibility for re-election. It shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or an employee of the town council or of the commission. The commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its recommendations, transactions, findings and determinations; and shall meet at the call of the chairperson and at such times as the chairperson or commission may determine. All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public, except as otherwise permitted by state law and all records of the commission shall be a public record. The commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may make expenditures for salaries of any employees and staff, contracts with consultants, and for the purchase of required equipment and supplies. The expenditures of the commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for such purposes by the town council. 
(Code 1996, § 5-1-3) 
State Law reference- Organization, rules, staff and finances of planning commission, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-360. 
Sec. 5-1-4. - Powers and duties. 
    The commission shall have such powers and duties as provided by law. In general, the commission shall have the power and responsibility to: 
(1)  Prepare and revise periodically a comprehensive plan and program for the development of its jurisdiction. 
(2)  Prepare and recommend for adoption to the appropriate governing authority as a means for implementing the plan and program: 
a.  Zoning ordinances or resolutions, and maps and appropriate revisions thereof for its jurisdiction; 
b.  Regulations for the subdivision of land and appropriate revisions thereof within its jurisdiction, and to administer the regulations that may be adopted; 
c.  An official map and appropriate revision thereof showing the exact location of existing or proposed public building sites, together with regulations to control the erection of buildings or other structures or changes in land use within such rights-of-way, building sites or open spaces within its political jurisdiction or a specified portion thereof; and 
d.  A capital program for its jurisdiction based on the comprehensive plan and the capital improvements necessary to implement the plan. The capital program shall include an annual capital budget based on estimates of the cost of proposed projects and the means of financing them. The commission shall submit the capital program, including the budget, to the town council. 
(3)  Establish principles and policies for guiding action in the development of the area. 
(4)  Prepare and recommend to the town council for adoption ordinances promoting orderly development in accordance with the comprehensive plan, other than those previously mentioned. 
(5)  Determine whether specific proposed developments conform to the principles and requirements of the comprehensive plan for the growth and improvement of the area. 
(6)  Review and recommend to the town council any needed changes in the zoning ordinance and the map of the town, as well as other codes, ordinances, and controls related to the municipality's development. 
(7)  Keeping the town council and the general public informed and advised as to these matters. 
(Code 1996, § 5-1-4) 
State Law reference- Functions and powers of planning commission, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-340. 
CHAPTER 2. - BUILDING REGULATION AND CODE ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted on Oct. 10, 2016, repealed the former ch. 2., §§ 5-2-1-5-2-122, and enacted a new ch. 2 as set out herein. The former ch. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1996, §§ 5-1-1, 5-2-92-5-2-122; and an ordinance adopted Dec. 13, 2010. 
State Law reference- Adoption of standard technical codes by reference, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-9-10; enforcement of building codes by local governments, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-9-10; mandamus and injunctive relief for violation of code or regulation, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-9-80; codes applicable to building inspections, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-9-130; building codes modification procedure, S.C. Code Reg. 8-240; qualifications for building codes amendments, S.C. Code Reg. 8-245; local adoption of building codes, S.C. Code Reg. 8-265; dwellings unfit for human habitation, S.C. Code 1976, § 31-15-10 et seq.; municipality may not enforce national building code provisions regulating farm structures, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-9-65(B); municipal responsibility to enforce barrier-free building design standards, S.C. Code Reg. 19-400.3(B). 

ARTICLE A. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-2-1. - Technical codes adopted. 
(1)  In compliance with S.C. Code 1976, § 6-9-10, as amended, the town acknowledges its responsibility to enforce the editions of the building, residential, fire, plumbing, mechanical, fuel gas and energy conservation codes, as published by the International Code Council and duly adopted by the South Carolina Building Codes Council. 
a.  The following codes as published by the International Code Council are adopted: 
1.  2015 International Property Maintenance Code. 
(a)  Section 101.1 - insert "the Town of Batesburg-Leesville". 
(b)  Section 103.5 - insert "that fees can be obtained from Town Clerk". 
(c)  Section 112.4 - insert a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and maximum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Any offense of this section or code is a misdemeanor offense punishable by 1-3-49. 
(d)  Section 302.4 - insert the words "fourteen (14) inches". 
(e)  Section 302.8 - amended sections are replaced with the following: 
Except as provided for in other regulations or zoning ordinance, no more than two (2) inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicles shall be parked, kept or stored on any residentially zoned premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth. 
Inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicles may not be stored in the front yard of any residentially zoned premise. The vehicles must be stored in the backyard of the residentially zoned premise, and screened behind a solid fence or within an enclosed structure with no means to collect water. The number of vehicles stored inside on an enclosed structure is not limited, provided the enclosed structure is not in violation of any other regulation, town ordinance or zoning ordinance. In the case of only one (1) vehicle, the vehicle will not be in violation of this article if covered with a cloth type car cover, not a tarpaulin. 
An unlicensed vehicle is described as a vehicle that does not have a current license tag displayed on the vehicle; and has nothing to do with a vehicle being titled. Licensed vehicle(s) that are under repair for more than thirty (30) days are subject to the regulations of this article. For areas that are not zoned residential, the town's zoning ordinance provides specific regulations related to the storage of motor vehicles. 
(f)  Section 304.14 - insert "April 1", insert "November 1". 
(g)  Section 602.3 - insert "November 1", insert "April 1". 
(h)  Section 602.4 - insert "November 1", insert "April 1". 
(i)  Appendix A (Boarding Standards) adopted in its entirety. 
b.  The following codes as published by the International Code Council are adopted. Chapter 1, Administration, of the following codes are specifically adopted: 
1.  2015 International Building Code with South Carolina Modifications. 
2.  2015 International Residential Code with South Carolina Modifications. 
3.  2015 International Fire Code with South Carolina Modifications. 
4.  2015 International Plumbing Code with South Carolina Modifications. 
5.  2015 International Mechanical Code with South Carolina Modifications. 
6.  2015 International Fuel Gas Code with South Carolina Modifications. 
7.  2009 International Energy Conservation Code. 
8.  2015 International Existing Building Code with South Carolina Modifications 
c.  The following code as published by the National Fire Protection Association is adopted: 
1.  2014 National Electric Code (NFPA 70). 
(2)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor offense and shall be subject to the penalties outlined in section 01-03-49. Punishment for the violation shall not relieve the offender of the proper requirements for permits, inspections, and occupancy permits. 
(Ord. of 10-10-2016(1)) 
CHAPTER 3. - ZONING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning powers of municipality, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-710 et seq.; zoning districts, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-720; board of zoning appeals, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-780. 

Sec. 5-3-1. - Ordinance incorporated by reference. 
    The zoning ordinance of the town, adopted by an ordinance of 1993, as now or subsequently amended, is hereby incorporated into this Code by reference as fully as if set out at length herein. Copies of the zoning ordinance shall be maintained on file in the office of the town clerk-treasurer and shall be available for public inspection. 
(Code 1996, § 5-3-1) 
Title 6 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Building Code Ordinance and the books for International Codes are at the Town Hall of Batesburg-Leesville. 

Sec. 6-1-1. - Property maintenance code. 
    The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, is adopted by reference. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2010(02), 12-13-2010) 
Editor's note- The International Property Maintenance Code contains the relevant provisions concerning abatement of property and building nuisances. 
CHAPTER 2. - GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 6-2-1. - Garbage and refuse defined. 
(a)  The term "garbage" shall consist of organic waste matter, both animal and vegetable, being comprised chiefly of waste food. 
(b)  The term "refuse" shall include all waste material other than garbage. 
(Code 1996, § 6-2-1) 
Sec. 6-2-2. - Liquids prohibited. 
    All garbage and refuse shall be drained of liquid before being deposited for collection. 
(Code 1996, § 6-2-2) 
Sec. 6-2-3. - Refuse prohibited. 
    No leaves, trees, limbs, brush, ashes, discarded building materials, or dead animals shall be deposited for garbage collection. 
(Code 1996, § 6-2-3) 
Sec. 6-2-4. - Throwing wastes from elevated places prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, or let fall or drop out of any window, or from any roof, porch or other elevated place, any dirty water, garbage, refuse, ashes, filth or other waste material. 
(Code 1996, § 6-2-4) 
Sec. 6-2-5. - Containers-Residential. 
    Residential garbage containers shall be provided by the contractor and shall be designed in such a manner to be serviceable. 
(Code 1996, § 6-2-5) 
Sec. 6-2-6. - Same-Commercial. 
(a)  Businesses shall be required to obtain garbage containers of sufficient size to enable all garbage to be picked up by mechanical equipment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for anyone other than a person who is a merchant of the town, with a contract thru the current town vendor to use a trash dumpster or green box to dispose of any waste, trash, litter or garbage. 
(Code 1996, § 6-2-6) 
Sec. 6-2-7. - Same-Maintenance and placement. 
    Garbage containers shall be maintained in good condition, reasonably clean and free of water. Lids must remain on the containers at all times. Containers shall be placed at ground level and shall be accessible from the street, and the area around the containers shall be kept reasonably clean and free of litter. 
(Code 1996, § 6-2-7) 
Sec. 6-2-8. - Replacement of containers. 
    Any container that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter or which has ragged or sharp edges or any other defect which may hamper or injure the garbage collector shall be promptly replaced by the contractor after notice from the street superintendent. 
(Code 1996, § 6-2-8) 
Sec. 6-2-9. - Frequency of garbage collection. 
    The town shall collect garbage and waste at such times and intervals as deemed necessary for the health and sanitation of the community. 
(Code 1996, § 6-2-9) 
Sec. 6-2-10. - Residential yard trash. 
    Residential yard trash is defined as the collection of vegetative materials from residential property. This type of trash may include, but is not limited to, trimmings, tree branches, pine straw, leaves, and grass clippings. These items may be placed by residents beside the road right-of-way in front of the property they own for curb collection, provided that: 
(1)  Yard trash must be placed on or beside the paved portion of the right-of-way. In no event can this trash block the paved portion of the right-of-way. 
(2)  On an unpaved street, yard trash must be placed beside the traveled portion of the right-of-way, but not in it. 
(3)  All yard trash must be placed either on owners' or tenants' property, or directly in front of and on the same side of the street as owners' or tenants' property. No person shall place yard trash in front of, or on, property they do not own or lease from an owner. It shall be unlawful to place yard trash on, or within three feet of the city water meter or a storm drain. 
(4)  All yard trash will be kept separate from other types of waste. 
(5)  Yard trash placed into plastic garbage bags must be secured and bags shall not exceed 55 gallons in capacity. 
(6)  Limbs shall be no longer than four feet in length and six inches in diameter. Improperly prepared yard trash will not be collected. 
(7)  Residential yard trash in normal seasonal quantities will be removed by the town. Abnormal quantities of yard trash may be collected, if feasible, after normal collection is completed. A fee for collection of abnormal quantities of yard trash shall be collected in advance as set by the town manager based on costs of personnel, equipment and landfill fees. Whole trees, stumps and land clearing debris will not be collected by the town, but shall be disposed of by the property owner or contractor performing removal. 
(8)  Collection of residential yard trash begins at 7:00 a.m. and all yard trash must be placed at the curb before that time. 
(9)  Under no circumstances shall other materials, refuse, garbage, or construction debris be mixed with residential yard trash for pickup. In such instance, yard trash will not be collected and must be removed by the tenant or property owner. 
(Code 1976, § 11-60; Code 1996, § 6-2-10; Ord. of 4-20-1987, § 1; Ord. of 9-8-2014, §§ 1-3) 
Sec. 6-2-11. - Removal of construction debris. 
    Any landscaping or construction debris including, but not limited to, railroad ties, landscaping timbers, treated lumber, building materials, lumber, brick, dirt, shingles, or any other similar materials shall be removed by the property owner and will not be collected during pick up. Tenants and property owners must ensure that debris left by any contractor is removed and properly disposed, whether by contractors, property owners, or tenants. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 4) 
Sec. 6-2-12. - Bulk goods. 
    Disposal of household bulk goods shall be the responsibility of the owner or tenant of a dwelling, and will not be removed by the town. Household bulk goods are defined as any item which can not be placed into the provided residential garbage container, or any amount of items which can not fit into the provided residential garbage container. Examples would be: 
a.  Furniture; 
b.  Mattresses; 
c.  Toys; 
d.  Construction debris; 
e.  Tires; or 
f.  Appliances. 
    It shall be a violation of this section to improperly dispose of bulk goods. Penalties shall be assessed in accordance to section 6-2-18. 
(Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 5; Ord. of 6-8-2015) 
Sec. 6-2-13. - Service to out-of-town residents. 
    There shall be no collection of garbage from any business or residence outside the town limits unless specifically authorized by the town council. 
(Code 1996, § 6-2-11; Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 4) 
Sec. 6-2-14. - Preparation of garbage and refuse. 
    All garbage and/or refuse shall be placed securely in the containers required by sections 6-2-5 and 6-2-6. Any garbage and/or refuse placed outside a residence or other building in such a manner as to not be securely contained in such a container shall constitute a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1996, § 6-2-12; Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 5) 
Sec. 6-2-15. - Placing or sweeping refuse onto streets or sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or his agent to put, place, sweep or throw any trash, house sweepings, paper cups, dirt, paper, broken glass, tin cans, bottles, ashes, shavings or other garbage, waste or refuse upon any sidewalk or in any alley, street, gutter, catchbasin or other public place in the town, except in approved receptacles. 
(Code 1996, § 6-2-13; Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 6) 
Sec. 6-2-16. - Dumping refuse on vacant lots. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or cause to be dumped any trash, litter or refuse upon any vacant lot within the town; provided, however, that upon application of any person, the town council may issue a permit allowing dumping on any lot which is situated more than 150 yards from any dwelling house or place of business, if in the judgment of the council the health, safety and general welfare of the town would not be jeopardized thereby. 
(Code 1996, § 6-2-14; Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 7) 
Sec. 6-2-17. - Landfill fees. 
    A commercial landfill fee shall be charged to any commercial and/or industrial business generating commercial solid waste which is collected by the town and delivered to the county landfill, and for the disposal of which the town pays to the county a sanitary landfill fee. The amount of such fee shall be as fixed from time to time by the town council. 
(Code 1996, § 6-2-15; Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 8) 
Sec. 6-2-18. - Penalty. 
    Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1996, § 6-2-16; Ord. of 9-8-2014, § 9) 
CHAPTER 3. - ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- The county animal control provisions can be found in an appendix to this Code of Ordinances. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority regarding care and control of animals, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-3-20; municipal powers not limited by state law, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-3-70; regulation of dangerous animals, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-3-710 et seq. 

Sec. 6-3-1. - Adoption of county animal control ordinance. 
(a)  The town adopts by reference the animal control ordinance which was adopted by the County of Lexington and is reflected in the Lexington County Code of Ordinances, Art. II, Divisions 1 and 2, as it existed on the date of adoption of this town Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  If any provision in this Code or another town ordinance is inconsistent with the county animal control ordinance, the county ordinance shall control. 
Title 7 - LICENSING AND REGULATION 
CHAPTER 1. - BUSINESS LICENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to establish business license tax based on gross receipts, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-30; governing body may impose or increase business license tax, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-1-315. 

Sec. 7-1-1. - License required. 
    Every person engaged or intending to engage in any calling, business, occupation or profession, in whole or in part, within the limits of the town is required to pay an annual license tax and obtain a business license as herein provided. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2014, exh. A, § 7-1-1) 
Sec. 7-1-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Business means a calling, occupation, profession or activity engaged in with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, either directly or indirectly. 
    Charitable organization means an organization that is determined by the Internal Revenue Service to be exempt from federal income taxes under 26 USC 501(c)(3), (4), (6), (7), (8), (10) or (19). 
    Charitable purpose means benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary purpose which does not result in personal gain to a sponsor, organizer, officer, director, trustee or person with ultimate control of the organization. 
    Classification means that division of businesses by major groups subject to the same license rate as determined by a calculated index of ability to pay based on national averages, benefits, equalization of tax burden, relationships of services, or other basis deemed appropriate by the council. 
    Gross income means the total income of a business, received or accrued, for one calendar year collected or to be collected from business done within the municipality, excepting therefrom income earned outside of the municipality on which a license tax is paid to some other municipality or a county and fully reported to the municipality. Gross income for agents means gross commissions received or retained, unless otherwise specified. Gross income for insurance companies means gross premiums written. Gross income for business license tax purposes shall not include taxes collected for a governmental entity, escrow funds, or funds which are the property of a third party. The value of bartered goods or trade-in merchandise shall be included in gross income. The gross income for business license purposes may be verified by inspection of returns and reports filed with the Internal Revenue Service, the department of revenue, the department of insurance, or other government agency. 
    License official means a person designated to administer this chapter. 
    Licensee means the business, the person applying for the license on behalf of the business, an agent or legal representative of the business, a person who receives any part of the net profit of the business, or a person who owns or exercises control of the business. 
    Municipality means the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, South Carolina. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, LLP, LLC, cooperative nonprofit membership, corporation, joint venture, association, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, holding company, or other group or combination acting as a unit, in the singular or plural, and the agent or employee having charge or control of a business in the absence of the principal. 
    Student permit means any resident of School District 3 under the age of 19 years that engages in an occupation or activity with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, either direct or indirectly. Tax shall be $20.00 on gross income not exceeding $5,000.00 per year, then $1.00 on each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof. 
    Town stamp. All coin-operated amusement machines require an annual stamp. A stamp is not transferable. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2014, exh. A, § 7-1-2) 
Sec. 7-1-3. - Purpose and duration. 
    The business license levied by this chapter is for the purpose of providing such regulation as may be required by the businesses subject thereto and for the purpose of raising revenue for the general fund through a privilege tax. Each license shall be issued for one calendar year ending on December 31. The provisions of this chapter and the rates herein shall remain in effect from year to year as amended by the council. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2014, exh. A, § 7-1-3) 
Sec. 7-1-4. - License tax. 
(a)  The required license tax shall be paid for each business subject hereto according to the applicable rate classification on or before April 15 each year, except for those businesses in Rate Class 8 for which a different due date is specified. 
(b)  A separate license shall be required for each place of business and for each classification or business conducted at one place. If gross income cannot be separated for classifications at one location, the license tax shall be computed on the combined gross income for the classification requiring the highest rate. A license tax based on gross income shall be computed on the gross income for the preceding calendar or fiscal year, and on a 12-month projected income based on the monthly average for a business in operation for less than one year. The tax for a new business shall be computed on the estimated probable gross income stated in the license application for the balance of the calendar year. The initial tax for an annexed business shall be prorated for the number of months remaining in the license year. No refund shall be made for a business that is discontinued. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2014, exh. A, § 7-1-4) 
Sec. 7-1-5. - Registration required. 
(a)  The owner, agent or legal representative of every business subject to this chapter, whether listed in the classification index or not, shall register the business and make application for a business license on or before the due date of each year; provided, a new business shall be required to have a business license prior to operation within the municipality. A license for a bar (NAICS 722410) must be issued in the name of the individual who has been issued a state alcohol, beer or wine permit or license and will have actual control and management of the business. 
(b)  Application shall be on a form provided by the license official which shall contain the social security number and/or the federal employer's identification number, the business name as reported on the South Carolina income tax return, and all information about the applicant and the licensee and the business deemed appropriate to carry out the purpose of this chapter by the license official. Applicants may be required to submit copies of portions of state and federal income tax returns reflecting gross income figures. 
(c)  The applicant shall certify under oath that the information given in the application is true, that the gross income is accurately reported, or estimated for a new business, without any unauthorized deductions, and that all assessments and personal property taxes on business property and other monies due and payable to the municipality have been paid. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2014, exh. A, § 7-1-5) 
Sec. 7-1-6. - Deductions, exemptions, and charitable organizations. 
(a)  No deductions from gross income shall be made except income earned outside of the municipality on which a license tax is paid to some other municipality or a county and fully reported to the municipality, taxes collected for a governmental entity, or income which cannot be included for computation of the tax pursuant to state or federal law. The applicant shall have the burden to establish the right to exempt income by satisfactory records and proof. 
(b)  No person shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter by reason of the lack of an established place of business within the municipality, unless exempted by state or federal law. The license official shall determine the appropriate classification for each business in accordance with the latest issue of the North American Industry Classification Manual (NAICS) for the United States published by the Office of Management and Budget. No person shall be exempt from this chapter by reason of the payment of any other tax, unless exempted by state law, and no person shall be relieved of liability for the payment of any other tax or fee by reason of the application of this chapter. 
(c)  A charitable organization shall be exempt from the business license tax on its gross income unless it is deemed a business subject to a business license tax on all or part of its gross income as provided in this section. A charitable organization or any for-profit affiliate of a charitable organization, that reports income from for-profit activities, or unrelated business income, for federal income tax purposes to the Internal Revenue Service shall be deemed a business subject to a business license tax on the part of its gross income from such for-profit activities or unrelated business income. 
(d)  A charitable organization shall be deemed a business subject to a business license tax on its total gross income if: 
(1)  Any net proceeds of operation, after necessary expenses of operation, inure to the benefit of any individual or any entity that is not itself a charitable organization as defined in this chapter; or 
(2)  Any net proceeds of operation, after necessary expenses of operation, are used for a purpose other than a charitable purpose as defined in this chapter. 
Excess benefits or compensation in any form beyond fair market value to a sponsor, organizer, officer, director, trustee or person with ultimate control of the organization shall not be deemed a necessary expense of operation. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2014, exh. A, § 7-1-6) 
Sec. 7-1-7. - False application unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the provisions of this chapter to make a false application for a business license, or to give or file, or direct the giving or filing of, any false information with respect to the license or tax required by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2014, exh. A, § 7-1-7) 
Sec. 7-1-8. - Display and transfer. 
(a)  All persons shall display the license issued to them on the original form provided by the license official in a conspicuous place in the business establishment at the address shown on the license. A transient or non-resident business shall carry the license upon his person or in the vehicle used in the business readily available for inspection by any authorized town agent of the municipality. 
(b)  In addition to the foregoing, each maintenance, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, general or service contractor who shall individually or through an entity or other person construct, service or repair buildings of any type within the town shall purchase one decal for each vehicle or trailer used at any job site within the municipality, which shall be displayed on the rear bumper of the vehicle or trailer. The decal shall be issued annually at such charge to the licensee as shall be set by the town manager based upon the costs of administering the decal program. 
(c)  Any change of address must be reported to the license official within ten days after removal of the business to a new location and the license will be valid at the new address upon written notification by the license official and compliance with zoning and building codes. Failure to obtain the approval of the license official for a change of address shall invalidate the license and subject the licensee to prosecution for doing business without a license. A business license shall not be transferrable and a transfer of controlling interest shall be considered a termination of the old business and the establishment of a new business requiring a new business license, based on the old business income. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2014, exh. A, § 7-1-8) 
Sec. 7-1-9. - Administration of article. 
    The license official shall administer the provisions of this article, collect license taxes, issue licenses, make or initiate investigations and audits to insure compliance, initiate denial or suspension and revocation procedures, report violations to the municipal attorney, assist in prosecution of violators, produce forms, make reasonable regulations relating to the administration of this chapter, and perform such other duties as may be duly assigned. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2014, exh. A, § 7-1-9) 
Sec. 7-1-10. - Inspection and audits. 
(a)  For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the license official or other authorized agent of the municipality is empowered to enter upon the premises of any person subject to this chapter to make inspections, examine and audit books and records. It shall be unlawful for any such person to fail or refuse to make available the necessary books and records. In the event an audit or inspection reveals that the licensee has filed false information, the costs of the audit shall be added to the correct license tax and late penalties in addition to other penalties provided herein. Each day of failure to pay the proper amount of license tax shall constitute a separate offense. Each licensee of a business located within the municipal limits shall provide proper tax documentation showing total gross receipts. 
(b)  The license official shall make systematic inspections and random audits of all businesses within the municipality to ensure compliance with this chapter. Financial information obtained by inspections and audits shall not be deemed public records, and the license official shall not release the amount of license taxes paid or the reported gross income of any person by name without written permission of the licensee, except as authorized by this chapter, state or federal law, or proper judicial order. Statistics compiled by classifications are public records. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2014, exh. A, § 7-1-10) 
Sec. 7-1-11. - Assessments, payments under protest, appeal. 
(a)  If a person fails to obtain a business license or to furnish the information required by this chapter or the license official, the license official shall examine such records of the business or any other available records as may be appropriate, and conduct such investigations and statistical surveys as the license official may deem appropriate to assess a license tax and penalties as provided herein. 
(b)  A notice of assessment shall be served by certified mail or personal service. An application for adjustment of the assessment may be made to the license official within five days after the notice is mailed or personally served or the assessment will become final. The license official shall establish a uniform procedure for hearing an application for adjustment of assessment and issuing a notice of final assessment. 
(c)  A final assessment may be appealed to the council only by payment in full of the assessment under protest within five days and the filing of written notice of appeal within ten days after payment pursuant to the provisions of this chapter relating to appeals to council. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2014, exh. A, § 7-1-11) 
Sec. 7-1-12. - Delinquent license taxes, partial payment. 
(a)  For non-payment of all or any part of the correct license tax, the license official shall levy and collect a late penalty of five percent of the unpaid tax for each month or portion thereof after the due date until paid. Penalties shall not be waived. If any license tax remains unpaid for 60 days after its due date, the license official shall report it to the municipal attorney for appropriate legal action. 
(b)  Partial payment may be accepted by the license official to toll imposition of penalties on the portion paid; provided, however, no business license shall be issued or renewed until the full amount of the tax due, with penalties, has been paid. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2014, exh. A, § 7-1-12) 
Sec. 7-1-13. - Notices. 
    The license official may, but shall not be required to, mail written notices that license taxes are due. If notices are not mailed, there shall be published a notice of the due date in a newspaper of general circulation within the municipality three times prior to the due date in each year. Failure to receive notice shall not constitute a defense to prosecution for failure to pay the tax due or grounds for waiver of penalties. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2014, exh. A, § 7-1-13) 
Sec. 7-1-14. - Denial of license. 
(a)  The license official shall deny a license to an applicant when the license official determines: 
(1)  The application is incomplete, contains a misrepresentation, false or misleading statement, evasion or suppression of a material fact; 
(2)  The activity for which a license is sought is unlawful or constitutes a public nuisance per se or per accidens; 
(3)  The applicant, licensee or prior licensee or the person in control of the business has been convicted of an offense under a law or ordinance regulating business, a crime involving dishonest conduct or moral turpitude, or an unlawful sale of merchandise or prohibited goods; 
(4)  The applicant, licensee or prior licensee or the person in control of the business has engaged in an unlawful activity or nuisance related to the business or to a similar business in the municipality or in another jurisdiction; 
(5)  The applicant, licensee or prior licensee or the person in control of the business is delinquent in the payment to the municipality of any tax or fee; or 
(6)  The license for the business or for a similar business of the licensee in the municipality or another jurisdiction has been denied, suspended or revoked in the previous license year. 
(b)  A decision of the license official shall be subject to appeal to council as herein provided. Denial shall be written with reasons stated. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2014, exh. A, § 7-1-14) 
Sec. 7-1-15. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  When the license official determines: 
(1)  A license has been mistakenly or improperly issued or issued contrary to law; 
(2)  A licensee has breached any condition upon which his license was issued or has failed to comply with the provision of this chapter; 
(3)  A licensee has obtained a license through a fraud, misrepresentation, a false or misleading statement, evasion or suppression of a material fact in the license application; 
(4)  A licensee has been convicted of an offense under a law or ordinance regulating business, a crime involving dishonest conduct or moral turpitude, or an unlawful sale of merchandise or prohibited goods; 
(5)  A licensee has engaged in a unlawful activity or nuisance related to the business; or 
(6)  A licensee is delinquent in the payment to the municipality of any tax or fee; 
the license official shall give written notice to the licensee or the person in control of the business within the municipality by personal service or certified mail that the license is suspended pending a hearing before council for the purpose of determining whether the license should be revoked. 
(b)  The notice shall state the time and place at which the hearing is to be held, which shall be at a regular or special council meeting within 30 days from the date of service of the notice, unless continued by agreement. The notice shall contain a brief statement of the reasons for suspension and proposed revocation and a copy of the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2014, exh. A, § 7-1-15) 
Sec. 7-1-16. - Appeal to council. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a decision, final assessment, proposed revocation, suspension, or a denial of a business license by the license official may appeal the decision to the council by written request stating the reasons therefore, filed with the license official within ten days after service by certified mail or personal service of the notice of a decision, final assessment, proposed revocation, suspension or denial. 
(b)  An appeal or a hearing on proposed revocation shall be held by the council within 30 days after receipt of a request for appeal or service of notice of suspension at a regular or special meeting of which the applicant or licensee has been given written notice, unless continued by agreement. At the hearing, all parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to present testimony and evidence and to cross-examine witnesses. The proceedings shall be recorded and transcribed at the expense of the party so requesting. The rules of evidence and procedure prescribed by council shall govern the hearing. Council shall by majority vote of members present render a written decision based on findings of fact and application of the standards herein which shall be served upon all parties or their representatives and shall be the final decision of the municipality. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2014, exh. A, § 7-1-16) 
Sec. 7-1-17. - Consent, franchise or license required for use of streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, maintain or operate in, on, above or under any street or public place under control of the municipality any line, pipe, cable, pole, structure or facility for utilities, communications, cablevision or other purposes without a consent agreement or franchise agreement issued by the council by ordinance that prescribes the term, fees and conditions for use. 
(b)  The annual fee for use of streets or public places authorized by a consent agreement or franchise agreement shall be set by the ordinance approving the agreement and shall be consistent with limits set by state law. Existing franchise agreements shall continue in effect until expiration dates in the agreements. Franchise and consent fees shall no be in lieu of or be credited against business license fees unless specifically provided by the franchise or consent agreement. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2014, exh. A, § 7-1-17) 
Sec. 7-1-18. - Confidentiality. 
    Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for any official or employee to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of income or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any report or return required under this chapter. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns. Any license data may be shared with other public officials or employees in the performance of their duties, whether or not those duties relate to enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2014, exh. A, § 7-1-18) 
Sec. 7-1-19. - Violations. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be subject to a fine up to $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both, upon conviction. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. Punishment for violation shall not relieve the offender of liability for delinquent taxes, penalties and costs provided for herein. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2014, exh. A, § 7-1-19) 
Sec. 7-1-20. - Severability. 
    A determination that any portion of this chapter is invalid or unenforceable shall not affect the remaining portions. 
(Ord. of 12-8-2014, exh. A, § 7-1-20) 
Sec. 7-1-21. - Classification and rates. 
Appendix A 
Rate Schedule 
Income: $0-$2,000 Income: Over $2,000 Rate Class Minimum Tax Rate per thousand or fraction thereof 1 $20.00 $1.15 2 $25.00 $1.20 3 $30.00 $1.25 4 $35.00 $1.30 5 $40.00 $1.35 6 $45.00 $1.40 7 $50.00 $1.45 8.1 $30.00 $1.25 8.1A $150.00 $1.00 8.2 $410.00 8.3 MASC Telecommunications 8.4 $50.00 $1.45 8.5 $20.00 $0.95 8.6 $135.00 $3.05 8.6A $20.00 $3.05 8.7 MASC Insurance 8.8A $12.50 + $12.50 per machine 8.8B $35.00 $1.30 8.8C $12.50 + $180.00 per machine 8.9 $300.00 $3.05 8.10 $25.00 + $5.00 per table $1.80  
Nonresident rates 
    Unless otherwise specifically provided, all minimum taxes and rates shall be doubled for nonresidents and itinerants having no fixed principal place of business within the municipality. 
Declining rate 
    Declining rates apply in all classes for gross income in excess of $1,000,000.00, unless otherwise specifically provided for in this article. 
Gross Income in $ Millions Percent of Class Rate for each
additional $1,000 0-1 100% 1-2 90% 2-3 80% 3-4 70% 4-5 60% Over 5 50%  
(Ord. of 12-8-2014, exh. A, § 7-1-21; Ord. of 3-26-2015) 
CHAPTER 3. - ADVERTISING 

Sec. 7-3-1. - Posting on public property-Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to place any advertisement, business, political or otherwise, or any notice or sign of any nature on public property within the town, by the use of a placard, picture, paper, circular, painting, or by any means or device whatsoever. 
(Code 1996, § 7-3-1) 
Sec. 7-3-2. - Same-Property in which town has interest. 
    It shall be unlawful to place any advertisement, notice or sign of any nature on property in which the town has an interest or the right to regulate, including, but not limited to, telephone and telegraph poles, and electric poles and towers. 
(Code 1996, § 7-3-2) 
Sec. 7-3-3. - Posting on private property. 
    It shall be unlawful to place any advertisement, notice or sign of any nature on private property within the town, without written consent of the owner or lessee of the property. 
(Code 1996, § 7-3-3) 
Sec. 7-3-4. - Penalties. 
    Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1996, § 7-3-4) 
CHAPTER 4. - YARD SALES 

Sec. 7-4-1. - Permit required; definition. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a yard sale within the town limits, unless such person shall first obtain a permit from the town clerk-treasurer. The cost of such permit shall be as fixed by the council from time to time; provided that persons age 62 and over are exempt from payment of the permit fee. 
(b)  For the purposes of this chapter, the term "yard sale" is defined as the sale or trading of clothing, furniture, household items, food, dishes, antiques or similar goods or merchandise, other than in the normal course of business, or the sale or trading of such goods, as outlined above, by a person not regularly engaged in such business. Such goods or merchandise do not need to be attended for a sale to be deemed to be in existence. The term "yard sale" shall include garage sales, attic or carport sales and similar types of sales or events. 
(Code 1996, § 7-4-1) 
Sec. 7-4-2. - Where held. 
    Yard sales shall be held only on property owned, leased or rented for residential purposes by the person applying for the permit. 
(Code 1996, § 7-4-2) 
Sec. 7-4-3. - Owner of property liable. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property within the town to knowingly permit any person to hold or conduct a yard sale on such property: 
(1)  Without having first secured a permit therefor in accordance with this chapter; or 
(2)  If the property is not used for residential purposes. 
(Code 1996, § 7-4-3) 
Sec. 7-4-4. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  At least 24 hours prior to conducting a yard sale, a permit for the yard sale shall be secured from the town clerk-treasurer. Upon application for a permit, an applicant shall be given the opportunity to review the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Information presented by the applicant for a yard sale permit shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the person conducting, operating, sponsoring, and/or promoting a sale regulated herein; 
(2)  Location at which the sale is to be conducted; 
(3)  The date on which the sale is to be conducted; and 
(4)  The time period of the day during which it is proposed to carry on the sale. 
(c)  If information submitted by the applicant indicates that the proposed yard sale activity will be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, a permit for the yard sale shall be issued by the town. If it is determined by the clerk-treasurer that a permit should not be issued, that termination shall be appealable to the town council. All permits shall be displayed at the location of the sale in a conspicuous manner. Each permit shall be valid only for time and place specified in the application. The term "person" herein shall be taken to mean individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, clubs, associations or any other such groups. 
(Code 1996, § 7-4-4) 
Sec. 7-4-5. - Maximum period and number of permits. 
    The maximum period for each yard or garage sale permit shall be two days consecutively. The maximum number of permits allowed is three per family, per location, per calendar year. All signs shall be removed 24 hours after the sale. 
(Code 1996, § 7-4-5) 
Sec. 7-4-6. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1996, § 7-4-6) 
CHAPTER 5. - ASSEMBLIES, PARADES AND PROCESSIONS 

Sec. 7-5-1. - Enforcement. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the authority of any officer to arrest a person engaged in any act or activity granted a permit under this chapter, if the conduct of such person violates the laws of the state, provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the town, or unreasonably obstructs the public streets and sidewalks of the town, or engages in acts that cause, or would tend to cause, a breach of the peace. 
(Code 1996, § 7-5-1) 
Sec. 7-5-2. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any group of ten or more persons to organize or hold or participate in any parade, meeting, assembly or procession of persons and/or vehicles on the streets or sidewalks of the town, unless such activity shall have first been authorized by a written permit therefor. 
(Code 1996, § 7-5-2) 
Sec. 7-5-3. - Application for permit. 
    Any person desiring a permit required by the provisions of this chapter shall make application therefor to the town manager, which application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The name and address of the person the applicant represents; 
(3)  The exact time and date of commencement and termination of each act or activity desired; 
(4)  The purpose, location and route of such act or activity, if applicable; 
(5)  The person, group, association or body to be authorized under the permit to do such act or activity and the number of persons to participate; and 
(6)  Such other relevant information as the town manager may require for the investigation of the applicant. 
(Code 1996, § 7-5-3) 
Sec. 7-5-4. - Contents of permit. 
    Upon issuance of a permit required by this chapter, the same shall contain therein all information contained in the application therefor and be signed by the town manager and a signed copy of the same shall be kept with application, both on file in the office of the town manager. 
(Code 1996, § 7-5-4) 
Sec. 7-5-5. - Matters considered in determining issuance of permit. 
    In deciding whether to issue a permit under the provisions of this chapter, the town manager shall consider: 
(1)  The number of persons to participate; 
(2)  The anticipated traffic conditions at the time and date proposed for the activity; 
(3)  The schedule of other similar activities for which permits may have been issued; 
(4)  The adequacy of adult supervision for any minor scheduled to participate; 
(5)  The availability of town personnel whose presence on duty may be required by the activity and by the necessity to protect the general public; and 
(6)  The adequacy of public facilities in the location proposed for the activity to accommodate the proposed activity and the normal public use of public facilities in the proposed location. 
(Code 1996, § 7-5-5) 
Sec. 7-5-6. - Issuance. 
    The permit required by the provisions for this chapter shall be issued by the town manager upon application therefor; provided, however, such permit may be denied or refused if it shall appear that the applicant therefor or the act or activity requested by such application shall be violative of any applicable provision of this Code, state law or other town ordinance. 
(Code 1996, § 7-5-6) 
Sec. 7-5-7. - Deviation from permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person participating in any act or activity for which a permit has been granted under the provisions of this chapter to deviate from or alter any of the terms or contents of such permit. 
(Code 1996, § 7-5-7) 
Sec. 7-5-8. - Display of permit. 
    Every person having a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall have the permit in his possession during the activity permitted thereby and shall display such permit upon the request of any law enforcement officer. Failure to display such permit shall be deemed a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1996, § 7-5-8) 
Sec. 7-5-9. - Parade fee. 
(a)  Within the town, a parade fee as established by council is to be paid at the time of application to help defray the additional costs of the town to provide security services for any parade conducted within the town which does not fall within one of the two categories below: 
(1)  The parade is put on by any organization whose principle office and base of operations is the town; or 
(2)  Not less than 20 percent of the participants in the parade are citizens and residents of the town. 
(b)  This chapter is cumulative to all other parade ordinances and is not intended to change in any other way the requirements of the town's ordinances as they relate to obtaining parade permits or the conduct of parades within the town. 
(Code 1996, § 7-5-9) 
Sec. 7-5-10. - Carnivals and street shows. 
    All carnivals or street shows by whatever name known are hereby forbidden to show, parade, or otherwise engage in business in the corporate limits of the town unless a business license has been obtained. 
(Code 1996, § 9-1-3) 
State Law reference- Circuses, carnivals, etc., S.C. Code 1976, § 52-1-10 et seq. 
CHAPTER 6. - PAWNBROKER, JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS 

Sec. 7-6-1. - Regulations and requirements. 
(a)  Adoption of state law . All the provisions and requirements of the general laws of the state in regard to pawnbrokers, junk or secondhand dealers and peddlers etc., as covered in S.C. Code 1976, §§ 40-39-10 through 40-39-130 and 40-27-10 through 40-27-40, as amended, insofar as such provisions and amendments have application within the town, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set out herein. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to fail or refuse to comply with the sections of the state law referred to in this subsection or the town ordinance contained in this chapter. 
(b)  Records to be kept . Every person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall keep a book in which shall be written, at the time of every purchase, barter, pledge, loan or any transactions at his place of business, the name, residence, date of birth, social security number and/or drivers license number of the person from whom an article transacted by him and the hour and date of transaction. All records kept by any person licensed under the provisions of this article shall at all times be subject to the inspection of his records of transactions by the chief of police or any person duly authorized by him, to inspect the same. 
(c)  Report of transactions . Every person licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall make a report to the chief of police by 11:00 a.m. every day, Sunday excepted, concerning all transactions made by him/her since his/her last report. 
(d)  Dealing with minors . No keeper of any pawnshop, pawnbroker, junk shop or secondhand dealer, shall himself, or through any person, either directly or indirectly, purchase or receive, or transact any of the articles mentioned in this article, from any minor or apprentice, without the written permission of the parent, guardian or master of any such minor or apprentice, which written permission shall be filed, and produced whenever required by any person authorized to inspect such shops. 
(e)  Sign required . Every person who shall obtain a pawnbrokers, junk and secondhand dealer license shall put on or over the principal entrance to his shop a sign designating that he is licensed and containing his name. 
(f)  Retention of material . Every article purchased by a licensed pawnshop, pawnbroker, junk shop or secondhand dealer shall be retained in stock by such dealer subject to inspection for at least 48 hours after the purchase thereof. 
(g)  Suspension. revocation of license or pawnshop, pawnbroker, junk and secondhand dealers . Any license issued to pawnshop, pawnbrokers, junk and secondhand dealers may be suspended or revoked by the town council for the violation by the licensee of any applicable provision of this Code, state law or town ordinance, rule or regulation. 
(h)  Junk and secondhand dealer defined . This title as stated in this chapter is taken in the same context as a pawnbroker as defined in S.C. Code 1976, § 40-39-10. 
(Code 1996, § 9-1-21) 
Title 8 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, local authority, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-30; powers of local authorities concerning traffic laws, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-710; local traffic control devices, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-930. 

CHAPTER 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1-1. - Adoption of state law. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof as if set out in full those provisions of state law known as the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways as contained in S.C. Code, Title 56, Chapter 5. 
(Code 1996, § 8-1-1) 
State Law reference- Municipal court's authority to try violations of state traffic laws, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 56-5-6150, 5-7-90. 
Sec. 8-1-2. - Driver's license required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle upon the streets of the town who does not have a currently valid driver's license. 
(Code 1996, § 8-1-2) 
State Law reference- State license required, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-1-20. 
Sec. 8-1-3. - Powers and duties of council. 
    Except as otherwise directed by this chapter, the town council shall have the power, and is hereby authorized: 
(1)  To regulate the operation and parking of vehicles within the corporate limits of the town by the erection or placing of proper signs or markers indicating prohibition or limited parking, restricted speed areas, one-way streets, play streets, through or arterial streets, parking meter spaces in parking meter zones, U-turns, school zones, hospital zones, loading and unloading zones, quiet zones and other signs, markers and official traffic-control devices indicating the place or manner of operating or parking vehicles within the town; 
(2)  To regulate the movement of pedestrians upon the streets and sidewalks of the town by the erection or placing of proper signs or markers indicating the flow of pedestrian traffic; 
(3)  To designate bus stops and taxicab stands and to erect signs prohibiting the parking of vehicles other than buses and taxicabs at their respective stops and stands; 
(4)  To mark off traffic lanes on streets and parts of streets indicating and directing the flow of traffic, as the council deems necessary; and 
(5)  To secure all necessary signs, markers or official traffic-control devices to be erected or placed on any street or part of a street when such action is deemed necessary. The existence of such signs, markers or official traffic-control devices at any place within the town shall be prima facie evidence that such signs, markers or official traffic-control devices were erected or placed by and at the direction of the council and in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1996, § 8-1-3) 
Sec. 8-1-4. - Cleaning glass, etc., from streets. 
(a)  Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any street any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove such material or cause it to be removed. 
(b)  Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street from such vehicle. 
(Code 1996, § 8-1-4) 
Sec. 8-1-5. - Reserved. 
Sec. 8-1-6. - Disposition of fines and forfeitures. 
(a)  All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail of any person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be paid into the town treasury and deposited in the general fund of the town. 
(b)  Failure, refusal or neglect on the part of any judicial or other officer or employee receiving or having custody of any such fine or forfeiture to comply with the foregoing provisions of this section shall constitute misconduct in office and shall be grounds for removal therefrom. 
(Code 1996, § 8-1-6) 
Sec. 8-1-7. - Operation prohibited when personal property taxes delinquent. 
    No motor vehicle may be operated upon the public streets or ways or within the corporate limits of the town when the property taxes on such vehicle due the town are delinquent. Personal property taxes assessed against any motor vehicle owned by any citizen of the town shall be delinquent when the same are past due and unpaid and have gone into execution as provided in this Code. 
(Code 1996, § 8-1-7) 
Sec. 8-1-8. - Reports of accidents-Driver. 
    The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury or death of any person or total property damage to an apparent extent of $50.00 or more shall, within 24 hours after such accident, forward a written report of such accident to the police department of the town. 
(Code 1996, § 8-1-8) 
State Law reference- Reports required, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-1260 et seq.; municipalities may require reports, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-1360. 
Sec. 8-1-9. - Same-Duty of occupant. 
    Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making a required accident report and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of making a report, such occupant shall make, or cause to be made, such report. 
(Code 1996, § 8-1-9) 
Sec. 8-1-10. - Same-Confidential. 
    All required accident reports and supplemental reports shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the police department, except that the department may disclose the identity of a person involved in an accident when such identity is not otherwise known or when such person denies his presence at such accident. No such report shall be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident, except that the police department shall furnish upon demand of any person who has or claims to have made such a report, or upon demand of any court, a certificate showing that a specified accident report has or has not been made to the department. 
(Code 1996, § 8-1-10) 
Sec. 8-1-11. - Reserved. 
Sec. 8-1-12. - Reckless operation of bicycles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any bicycle in the town in a reckless or dangerous manner. 
(Code 1996, § 8-1-12) 
CHAPTER 2. - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 

Sec. 8-2-1. - Obedience to official traffic-control devices. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic ordinances of the town, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted to the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this chapter. 
(b)  No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. 
(Code 1996, § 8-2-1) 
Sec. 8-2-2. - Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markers. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be, or is an imitation of, or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device, sign or signal. 
(b)  No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority permit, any commercial advertising on any traffic sign or signal. 
(c)  Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the street is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. 
(Code 1996, § 8-2-2) 
Sec. 8-2-3. - Interference with traffic-control devices, signs, etc. 
    No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(Code 1996, § 8-2-3) 
Sec. 8-2-4. - Zones of quiet. 
    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning device of such vehicle, except in an emergency. 
(Code 1996, § 8-2-4) 
Sec. 8-2-5. - Driving through private driveways, filling stations, etc. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be driven through or across any private driveway or filling station premises for the purpose of avoiding any traffic-control device. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person driving a vehicle to make any U-turn or other turn prohibited at any point where such turn is prohibited, and it shall be unlawful to accomplish a U-turn by deviously going into or through private property adjoining the street where such turn is prohibited. 
(Code 1996, § 8-2-5) 
Sec. 8-2-6. - Stop when traffic obstructed. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1996, § 8-2-6) 
Sec. 8-2-7. - Funeral processions. 
(a)  A funeral procession of vehicles shall be identified by the display of lights on each vehicle and as may be further designated by the traffic division of the police department. 
(b)  Each driver in a funeral procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. 
(Code 1996, § 8-2-7) 
Sec. 8-2-8. - Driving through funeral processions. 
    No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in section 8-2-7. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers. 
(Code 1996, § 8-2-8) 
Sec. 8-2-9. - Duties regarding pedestrians. 
    Every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway, and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary, and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
(Code 1996, § 8-2-9) 
CHAPTER 3. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 

Sec. 8-3-1. - Compliance with signs. 
    Where signs prohibiting or restricting parking are erected on any street, no person shall park a vehicle in violation thereof. 
(Code 1996, § 8-3-1) 
Sec. 8-3-2. - Parking prohibited in certain places. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicle traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals of a police officer. 
(b)  No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1996, § 8-3-2) 
Sec. 8-3-3. - Standing or parking close to curb. 
(a)  No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the right edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of traffic, and with the curb-side wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the roadway, except that upon those streets which have been marked or signed for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such mark or signs. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to congregate upon the streets or sidewalks of the town in such a manner as to impede the free flow of traffic. 
(Code 1996, § 8-3-3) 
Sec. 8-3-4. - Parking for display, repairs, etc. 
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying it for sale; or 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Code 1996, § 8-3-4) 
Sec. 8-3-5. - Loading and unloading at rear or side of business. 
    All persons loading or unloading goods at any business or any establishment in a business district shall use back or side entrances where they are accessible, and where there exists an accessible back or side entrance, it shall be unlawful to load or unload goods across any sidewalk of the principal business streets of the town. 
(Code 1996, § 8-3-5) 
Sec. 8-3-6. - Owner responsible for illegal parking. 
    No person shall allow or permit any vehicle registered in his name to stand or park in any street in the town in violation of any of the ordinances of the town regulating the standing or parking of vehicles. 
(Code 1996, § 8-3-6) 
Sec. 8-3-7. - Time parking. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than stated time between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except Sundays and public holidays. 
(Code 1996, § 8-3-7) 
Sec. 8-3-8. - Double parking. 
    It shall be unlawful for any operator of any of the above means of conveyance to double park within the town limits. 
(Code 1996, § 8-3-8) 
Sec. 8-3-9. - Trailers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any trailer coach of any kind overnight on any street, alley, highway or other public place. 
(b)  No trailer coach shall be parked or located and used or occupied on any tract of land other than within an authorized trailer coach park, except: 
(1)  Trailer coaches which were located on their present sites prior to January 1, 1993; 
(2)  Trailer coaches used as offices, on a temporary basis, by contractors making application for a temporary parking permit to the town clerk-treasurer for a period not to exceed three months, renewable upon approval by town council; 
(3)  Trailers used as temporary (maximum of six months) office space pending completion of a permanent office space. No such temporary permit will be issued unless there is positive evidence that a permanent office is to be constructed; and 
(4)  Camper trailers, campers mountable on other vehicles and mobile camper units so long as they shall remain unoccupied. 
(Code 1996, § 8-3-9) 
Sec. 8-3-10. - Marking of curbs or streets; parking within lines required. 
    Lines or markings shall be painted or placed upon the curb or upon the street for the purpose of designating the confines of the parking space, and each vehicle parking in any such parking space shall park within the lines or markings as established. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any such line or marking or in such position that the same shall not be entirely within the area so designated by such lines or markings. 
(Code 1996, § 8-3-10) 
Sec. 8-3-11. - Handicapped parking. 
(a)  The town council shall designate the number and location of handicapped parking zones within the town and the time limit for parking in such zones and shall provide for appropriate signs and markings indicating same. 
(b)  Those persons who have obtained a placard or license plate from the state department of highways and public transportation pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, § 56-3-1960, shall be entitled to park their vehicles in spaces designated for handicapped parking, and when so parked, shall not be subject to the fines and penalties imposed by this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 8-3-11) 
State Law reference- Handicapped parking, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-3-1950 et seq. 
Sec. 8-3-12. - Violations. 
    Whenever any motor vehicle is found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the officer finding it shall take its registration number, license number, and parking meter number, if any, and affix to such vehicle or issue to the driver thereof, if he is present, a notice in writing, on a form to be provided by the town, for the driver to post a specified bond or to answer the charge against him during the hours and at the time and place specified in the notice. The schedule of bonds and fines shall be as fixed from time to time by the town council. 
(Code 1996, § 8-3-12) 
Sec. 8-3-13. - Removal of abandoned, wrecked or illegally parked vehicles. 
(a)  Removal of vehicle conditions. Whenever a police officer finds a vehicle that has been abandoned or wrecked upon the public streets or ways of the town, or that has been parked in violation of a town ordinance or state law, or the vehicle has been or is being used in commission of a crime, such officer may, with the approval of the chief of police, have such vehicle removed by a wrecker to the storage lot or garage operated by such owner. Vehicles removed under the above conditions shall be held until claimed by the legal owner or otherwise disposed of as provided by law. 
(b)  Wrecker and towing services generally . Wreckers are to go to an accident only when properly called. It shall be unlawful for the owner or agent of any wrecker or towing service to go to any place within the town where an accident has occurred unless called by the owner of the vehicle involved, or his authorized representative, or an authorized representative of the town. 
(c)  Solicitation of wrecker or towing service . It shall be unlawful for the owner or agent of any wrecker or towing service to drive along or park on any streets, bridges, or highways within the town for the sole purpose of soliciting wrecker or towing service. 
(d)  Solicitation of business by town employees prohibited . It shall be unlawful for any town employee to solicit business for any wrecker or towing service. 
(e)  Rules and regulations . In order to be eligible to be placed on the towing list: 
(1)  All wrecker or towing services must have a wrecker available at all times (24 hours a day, seven days a week). 
(2)  The wrecker or towing service must have been in business for 12 calendar months before being placed on the list. 
(3)  Said business must also be in the corporate limits of the town or have a valid town business license. 
(4)  Unless specified by the owner of the vehicle at the time it is being towed, all vehicles towed must be stored within the town limits of the town. 
(5)  Said service must comply with all sections of this chapter, all rules listed and any other additional rules the police department deems necessary to safeguard vehicles in their custody. 
(6)  Towing agreement with each wrecker or towing services will be operated on a rotating basis. 
(7)  The wrecker or towing service will be responsible for all damage or loss on all vehicles, unless such loss or damage is noted by police officer before the vehicle is removed from the scene. The wrecker or towing service towing for the town will be responsible for pointing out damage to the vehicle before leaving the scene. 
(8)  All wrecker and towing services must conform to and comply with all town building codes and business license ordinances pertaining to such services. 
(9)  The town shall have the authority to adopt from time to time reasonable rules and regulations, including establishing zones or contracts for the operation of wreckers for town towing. 
(f)  Penalty . Any person, firm or corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, such persons shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 and imprisoned for not more than 30 days for each offense. 
(Code 1996, § 8-3-13) 
State Law reference- Removal of abandoned vehicles from highways, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-5610 et seq.; authority of police to remove illegally parked vehicles, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-2520. 
Sec. 8-3-14. - Storage and wrecker charges. 
    Storage and wrecker charges shall be imposed on vehicles seized pursuant to section 8-3-13, in accordance with the rotation of the wrecker. 
(Code 1996, § 8-3-14) 
Sec. 8-3-15. - Release of vehicle to owner. 
    No impounded vehicle shall be released until all towing, storage and other charges have been paid, proper evidence of ownership has been exhibited and the police issue discharge papers. 
(Code 1996, § 8-3-15) 
Sec. 8-3-16. - Fire lane parking. 
(a)  There will be no parking in an area marked as a fire lane, except for emergency vehicles. Anyone who violates this section will be subject to a fine of not less than $10.00 or more than $100.00. 
(b)  A fire lane must be properly marked with signs and a painted area no less than 18 feet from a building. When on private property, this property must be properly posted as to state and local ordinances. 
(Code 1996, § 8-3-16) 
State Law reference- Parking lots in police jurisdiction, S.C. Code 1976, § 23-1-15; powers of local authorities, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-710 
CHAPTER 4. - JUNK AND WRECKED MOTOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 8-4-1. - Prohibition of junk vehicles. 
    The relevant provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code, adopted by reference, apply to the prohibition of junk vehicles. 
(Ord. of 12-13-2010(04)) 
Sec. 8-4-2. - Defined. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, a vehicle shall be determined to have been abandoned under one or more of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Left upon a street or highway in violation of a law or ordinance controlling traffic or prohibiting parking; 
(2)  Failing to display a current license plate; 
(3)  Partially dismantled or damaged and left out of doors, in an uncovered, unscreened or unenclosed state; 
(4)  Incapable of self propulsion or being moved in the manner for which it was originally intended and left out of doors, in an uncovered, unscreened or unenclosed state; 
(5)  Left on property owned or operated by the town without its consent, other than a street or right-of-way, for a period in excess of 24 hours; 
(6)  Left on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant or lessee thereof for a period in excess of 24 hours; or 
(7)  Left on any public street or right-of-way of the town for a period in excess of seven days. 
(Code 1996, § 8-4-2) 
Sec. 8-4-3. - Removal. 
    The person responsible, or the registered owner of any vehicle if it can be determined after a reasonable search, or the owner of the premises on which the vehicle is located, or all, shall be given notice as prescribed in this chapter to remove and dispose of an abandoned vehicle at his own expense, or he shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(1)  If the person or owner cannot be determined or has not complied within the time prescribed by the notice, the vehicle, if located on public property, at the discretion of the town, may be removed to a storage area for safekeeping at the direction of the town. Written notice of the removal shall be promptly given to the registered owner of the vehicle and to any holders of any lien on record in the office of the state department of motor vehicles, if it can be determined after a reasonable search. The town may remove the vehicles without prior notice when the vehicles constitute a safety hazard or other public nuisance. 
(2)  If located on private property, no vehicle shall be so removed from the premises by the town without the written authorization of the owner of the vehicle, if known, or the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises, unless the vehicle has been declared to be a safety hazard or other public nuisance. 
(Code 1996, § 8-4-3) 
Sec. 8-4-4. - Disposition of vehicles. 
(a)  The owner of any removed vehicle, before obtaining possession thereof, shall pay to the town all reasonable costs incidental to its removal, storage or the locating of the owner. 
(b)  Should the owner fail or refuse to pay the costs within 20 days after receipt of the notice, or should his identity or whereabouts be unknown and unascertainable after a reasonable search and after notice as prescribed herein, the stored vehicle may be sold after 20 days' notice has been given to the department of motor vehicles before the date of the sale and after the vehicle has been held for not less than 30 days; provided, further, that section 8-4-5 shall govern the disposition of any junk motor vehicles. 
(c)  The vehicle may be sold by public sale, after one public notice, but no vehicle may be sold or disposed of until its value has been determined in writing by at least two disinterested dealers or garagemen. 
(d)  A vehicle of an appraised value of less than $50.00 may be disposed of by any means in the discretion of the storing agent of the town. 
(e)  The proceeds of any sale shall be forwarded to the clerk-treasurer, who shall pay from the proceeds, the costs of removal, storage, investigation as to ownership and sale and other liens, in that order. If after the sale the ownership at the time of removal is established satisfactorily to the clerk-treasurer, the owner shall be paid so much of the proceeds as remains after payment of the foregoing costs and liens; otherwise, any remaining proceeds shall be deposited after 90 days in the general fund of the town. 
(Code 1996, § 8-4-4) 
Sec. 8-4-5. - Junk motor vehicles. 
(a)  Any motor vehicle which does not have lawfully affixed thereto both unexpired license plates and a current motor vehicle safety inspection certificate, and the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative or discarded, and being more than eight years old, shall be deemed a junk motor vehicle. 
(b)  The person responsible, or the owner of the premises on which the vehicle is located, or the registered owner of the vehicle if it can be determined after reasonable search, or all, shall be given notice as prescribed in this chapter to remove and dispose of the vehicle at his own expense, or he shall be in violation of this chapter. If the person or owner cannot be determined or has not complied within the time prescribed by the notice, any vehicle at the discretion of the town may be removed from public property to a storage area for safekeeping at the direction of the town. No vehicle shall be so removed from privately owned premises without the written authorization of the registered owner of the vehicle, if known, or the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises, unless the vehicle has been declared to be a safety hazard or other public nuisance. The costs of its removal and disposal may be assessed against the person responsible for the nuisance, and the costs may be placed as a lien against his property. 
(c)  A junk motor vehicle may be posted in place, and its owner may reclaim it by exhibiting reasonable proof of ownership and paying all reasonable costs incident to its removal, storage and administrative expenses. An unclaimed junk motor vehicle may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of in summary manner after 15 days following possession of the vehicle under the provisions of this chapter. Notice shall be promptly given after final disposition to the state department of motor vehicles on the forms as it provides, that it was deemed a junk motor vehicle and disposed as a junk motor vehicle. This notice shall fully and accurately describe the vehicle. Any proceeds derived from the disposition of junk motor vehicles shall be deposited in the general fund of the town. 
(Code 1996, § 8-4-5) 
Sec. 8-4-6. - Disposition with owner's consent. 
    With a vehicle owner's written consent, the town, at its own discretion, may remove and immediately dispose of any vehicle as a junk motor vehicle regardless of value or condition of the vehicle and without waiting the aforesaid periods. Costs may be assessed to the vehicle owner. 
(Code 1996, § 8-4-6) 
Title 9 - OFFENSES 
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Fortune-telling to promote business, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-17-690; coin-operated devices, S.C. Code 1976, § 12-21-2710 et seq.; unlawful games and betting, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-19-40; removal of doors from abandoned airtight containers, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-3-1010; open and unprotected abandoned wells, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-3-1020. 

Sec. 9-1-1. - Aiding or abetting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to counsel, advise, incite, abet, procure or aid any other person in the violation of any of the ordinances of the town. 
(Code 1996, § 9-1-1) 
Sec. 9-1-2. - Establishment of cemetery. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or use, within the town, any place for the burial of the dead without permission of the town council. This prohibition shall not extend to burial grounds established in the town as of the effective date of this Code, within the boundaries established for that purpose. 
(Code 1996, § 9-1-2) 
Secs. 9-1-3-9-1-6. - Reserved. 
Sec. 9-1-7. - Public nuisances. 
(a)  The keeping, maintaining, operation, or control of any building, premises, or condition in a manner that is detrimental to the peace, good order, happiness, safety, or good morals of people living nearby, or of the public generally, constitutes a public nuisance and is hereby forbidden. Each day the conditions continue constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition, any nuisance may be abated by the town court pursuant to a resolution adopted after a hearing of which all interested parties shall have five days' written notice. 
(Code 1996, § 9-1-7) 
Sec. 9-1-8. - Peddling on public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or otherwise carry on a business in the town from the public streets or sidewalks or other public property; provided that this section shall not in any way infringe upon the rights of individuals to have free movement within said town while engaged in any legal business activity or for any other reason. This section shall not in any way prohibit a merchant with a place of business abutting any sidewalk from exhibiting merchandise on the sidewalk immediately in front of such business establishment, provided that such merchant shall not inhibit, prevent or substantially interfere with the free flow of pedestrian traffic on said sidewalk. 
(Code 1996, § 9-1-8) 
Sec. 9-1-9. - Reserved. 
Sec. 9-1-10. - Prohibited obstruction in public places. 
(a)  No person shall loiter or sleep in or upon any street, park or public place or in any public building, or obstruct the access to any public building or any part thereof, or obstruct passage through or upon any public street, park or public place or private property that has been properly posted to show property under the jurisdiction of the town police department. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "loiter" shall encompass, but not necessarily be limited to, one or more of the following acts: 
(1)  Obstruction of the free unhampered passage of pedestrians or vehicles. 
(2)  Obstructing, molesting or interfering with any person lawfully upon any street, park or other public place. 
(3)  Refusing to move on when so requested by a peace officer, provided that the peace officer has exercised his discretion reasonably under the circumstances in order to preserve or promote public peace and order. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, the term "other public place" shall be deemed to include the quasi-public area in front or adjacent to any store, shop, restaurant, luncheonette or other place of business and shall include also any parking lots or other vacant private property not owned or under the dominion of the person charged with a violation of this section. 
(Code 1996, § 9-1-10) 
Sec. 9-1-11. - Reserved. 
Sec. 9-1-12. - Placing, extending signs, banners across public way or place. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to extend any banner or canvas sign across any public street, park or other public way or place without first having obtained a permit from the state highway department. 
(Code 1996, § 9-1-12) 
Sec. 9-1-13. - Posting on public property. 
    It shall be unlawful to place any advertisement, business, political or otherwise, or any notice or sign of any nature on public property within the town, by the use of a placard, picture, paper, circular, printing, or by any means or device whatsoever. 
(Code 1996, § 9-1-13) 
Sec. 9-1-14. - Posting property in which town has interest or regulatory power. 
    It shall be unlawful to place any advertisement, notice or sign of any nature or property in which the town has an interest or the right to regulate, such as telephone poles, telegraph poles, electric poles or towers, and the like thereof. 
(Code 1996, § 9-1-14) 
Sec. 9-1-15. - Posting on private property. 
    It shall be unlawful to place any advertisement, notice or sign of any nature on private property, without written consent of the owner or lessee of the property. 
(Code 1996, § 9-1-15) 
Sec. 9-1-16. - Placing handbills in or upon automobiles. 
    No person shall place or cause any commercial handbill to be placed within or upon, or under the windshield wiper of any private automobile parked upon any of the public streets or in any public parking area. This shall not preclude the delivery of any handbill to an owner, occupant or person present and in charge of a vehicle willing to accept and receive the handbill. 
(Code 1996, § 9-1-16) 
Sec. 9-1-17. - Using vehicle for primary purpose of advertising prohibited. 
    No person shall operate or park on any street any vehicle for the primary purpose of advertising. 
(Code 1996, § 9-1-17) 
CHAPTER 2. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC PEACE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Pointing firearms, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-23-410; concealed weapons, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-23-460; unlawful carrying of pistol, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-23-20; wearing masks, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-7-110; burning crosses, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-7-120; engaging in riot, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-5-120; disturbance of religious worship, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-17-520; disorderly conduct, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-17-530. 

Sec. 9-2-1. - Assault and battery. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault or assault and battery upon any other person in the town. 
(Code 1996, § 9-2-1) 
Sec. 9-2-2. - Weapons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Negligently or carelessly fire or discharge any firearm, including, but not limited to, any air rifle, pellet gun, pistol, or other device which may be potentially be harmful to any person or property; 
(2)  Draw a knife, gun, pistol or any dangerous or deadly weapon in any fight or disturbance; 
(3)  Publicly brandish a firearm; 
(4)  Carry about the person in the town, whether concealed or not, any dirk, slingshot, metal knuckles, razor or other weapon usually used for the infliction of personal injury; 
(5)  Carry about the person any gun, pistol, or other type firearm whether concealed or not; 
(6)  To shoot or discharge any firearm within the town or have in their possession a firearm not in compliance with state regulations of firearms as to size and weight existing at the time in question. 
(b)  Any person carrying a concealed weapon in violation of subsections (a)(5) or (6) of this section shall forfeit the weapon to the town pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, § 16-23-460 and such weapon may subsequently be sold or otherwise disposed of as provided in S.C. Code 1976, § 16-23-500. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to police or other law enforcement officers while in the exercise and discharge of their duties or to any theatrical or like performance; nor shall it be construed to abridge or abrogate the right of defense of person or property. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to any person who possesses a permit to carry a firearm pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, § 16-23-20(12). Nor shall this section apply to any person who is a licensed hunter or fisherman while engaged in hunting or fishing and going to and from their places of hunting or fishing. 
(Code 1996, § 9-2-2) 
Sec. 9-2-3. - Disruption of court or council. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interrupt the proceedings of the municipal court or town council, or be guilty of disorderly conduct therein, or to commit any contempt of either. 
(Code 1996, § 9-2-3) 
Sec. 9-2-4. - Fireworks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to light, fire, ignite or discharge fireworks within the corporate limits of the Town, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. For the purposes of this section and the remaining sections of this section, "fireworks" means fireworks as defined by State statutory law including S.C. Code Section 23-35-175 and ICC Class C Common Fireworks as described therein. 
(b)  Exceptions: 
(1)  All town sponsored events are exempt from the provisions of subsection (a) including pyrotechnic companies hired by the town for enjoyment purposes. All pyrotechnic companies shall comply with any and all federal, state and municipal regulations as far as licensing, insurance and pennits. 
(2)  The discharging or shooting of fireworks on the 4th of July between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., unless drought conditions exist and a red flag warning has been issued for the town. 
(3)  The discharging or shooting of fireworks between the hours of 10:00 a.m. on December 31 and 1:00 a.m. on January 1. 
(4)  The discharging or shooting of fireworks in conjunction with a special event to the extent allowed under the terms of the permit issued by town hall, with approval given by the town manager and police chief. 
(5)  The provisions of this section shall not include nor prevent the possession or use of toy cap pistols and toy pistol paper caps which contain no more than twenty hundredths (0.20) of a grain of explosive mixture and fireworks known as sparklers. The use and possession of such toy cap pistols, toy pistol caps and sparklers shall be permitted at all times. 
(c)  Nothing contained in subsection (a) shall be construed as prohibiting the use of signals necessary for the safe operation of buses, trucks, or trains within the town. 
(d)  All fireworks discharged under this provision shall be under the direct supervision of a responsible adult. 
(e)  Enforcement and penalties: 
(1)  A person who uses, fires, shoots, or discharges any fireworks within the corporate limits of the town or fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of an infraction for each occurrence of noncompliance. 
(2)  An infraction is punishable by a fine up to the maximum amount allowed by state law. Each occurrence of a violation of this section shall be considered a separate and distinct infraction. A violation of this section is further declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1996, § 9-2-4; Ord. of 2-9-2015) 
State Law reference- Fireworks, S.C. Code 1976, § 23-35-10 et seq. 
Sec. 9-2-5. - Unreasonable noise prohibited. 
    The making or contributing to the creation of any loud or disturbing noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life, health or discomfort of any ordinary, reasonable person is hereby prohibited. The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing noises in violation of this section, but enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive. 
(1)  The sounding or blowing of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, motor bus or other vehicle, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or, if in motion, only as a danger signal; the creation by any signal device of any loud or harsh noise; and the sounding of such device for any unnecessary period of time. 
(2)  The playing of any radio, phonograph, piccolo, television or any musical instrument, including radios, cassette players, and CD players in motor vehicles, in such a manner or with such volume as to disturb any person, or the playing of such instrument in such manner as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any ordinary, reasonable person in any dwelling, hotel, or other residences. 
(3)  The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequency of long continued noise shall disturb comfort or repose of any ordinary, reasonable person in the vicinity. 
(4)  The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or used or repaired in such manner, as to create loud noises, particularly grating, grinding, rattling, riveting or other disturbing noises. 
(5)  The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice to the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of danger. 
(6)  The discharge into the open air of the exhaust from any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat engine or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)  The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air, unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced. 
(8)  The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building in a residential or business district other than between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in cases of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety. 
(9)  The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, library, or court while the same is in session or adjacent to any church during church services which interferes with the work or worship in any such place or institution, provided that signs must be displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, church, library, or court. 
(10)  The creation of loud and excessive noises in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle, or opening and destroying bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(11)  The sounding of any bell or gong attached to any building or premises, which disturbs the quiet or repose of any ordinary, reasonable person in the vicinity thereof. 
(12)  The shouting, loud talking, crying or soliciting by peddlers, hawkers, solicitors and vendors which disturbs the quiet and peace of the neighborhood. 
(13)  The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance or event, show, sale or the display or advertisement of merchandise, by the creation of noise. 
(14)  The use of any mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks, airplanes or other vehicles for advertising or other purposes. 
(15)  The operation of any garage, filling station, auto repair business, taxicab business, plant, store, factory or other place of business, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., in such manner as to create loud and disturbing noises, of such frequency or such frequency or such volume as to disturb the quiet and comfort of any ordinary, reasonable citizen. 
(Code 1996, § 9-2-5) 
Sec. 9-2-6. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in disorderly conduct, which shall consist of any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Acting in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any person is placed in danger of his life, limb or health; 
(2)  Acting in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Causing, provoking or engaging in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; 
(4)  Using fighting words directed toward any person who thereby becomes outraged and thus creates a turmoil; 
(5)  Congregating with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and refuse to clear such public way when ordered by the town public safety officers or other lawful authority; 
(6)  Being drunk or under the influence of alcohol, or any narcotic or hypnotic drug or any stimulant or depressant on any street or public place to such an extent as to jeopardize persons or property or as to menace the public peace and safety. 
(7)  Endangering lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats and abusive conduct. 
(8)  Assembling or congregating with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl. 
(9)  Being found jostling or roughly crowding or pushing in any public place. 
(10)  Collecting in bodies or in crowds for unlawful purposes. 
(11)  Assembling or congregating with another or others, for the purpose of, or with the intent to engage in, gaming. 
(12)  Frequenting any public place with intent to obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice or device. 
(13)  Assembling with another or others for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the town, or who shall aid or abet therein. 
(14)  Uttering, while in a state of anger, in the presence of another any lewd or obscene words. 
(15)  Frequenting any place where gaming or illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drug is practiced, allowed or tolerated. 
(16)  Any person who shall act in a dangerous manner toward others. 
(17)  Assembling or congregating with another or other person for the purpose of doing bodily harm to another. 
(18)  Acting in a violent manner that interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation. 
(19)  Being found on any highway or at any public place or public gathering in a grossly intoxicated condition. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to peaceful picketing, public speaking or other lawful expressions of opinion not in contravention of other laws. 
(c)  Any person convicted of violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1996, § 9-2-6) 
Sec. 9-2-7. - Interfering with law enforcement officers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any law enforcement officer, or to otherwise interfere with, impede, hinder or resist any such officer in the discharge of his duties. Speech alone that questions or expresses opposition to action by law enforcement personnel does not constitute a violation of this section. 
(Code 1996, § 9-2-7) 
State Law reference- Hindering officers, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-5-50; resisting arrest, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-9-320. 
Sec. 9-2-8. - Possession of open containers while on public streets and sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any opened container containing beer, ale, porter, wine or other similar malt or fermented beverage, or other alcoholic liquor or any mixture thereof by whatever name called or known which contains alcohol and is used as a beverage, while on any public street or sidewalk. 
(Code 1996, § 9-2-8) 
Sec. 9-2-9. - Drunkenness in public place. 
    No person shall be drunk or intoxicated in any street, public house, place of amusement or worship, or any public place in the town. 
(Code 1996, § 9-2-9) 
Sec. 9-2-10. - Drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  Definitions . The following sections of this chapter will coincide with existing federal, state and city laws. The term "drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and material of any kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this Act (meaning the Controlled Substances Act of the state). It includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived; 
(2)  Kits used, intended for use or designed for use, in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances; 
(3)  Isomerizating devices used, intended for use or designed for use, in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance; 
(4)  Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use, in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness of purity of controlled substances; 
(5)  Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use, in weighing or measuring controlled substances; 
(6)  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use, in cutting controlled substances; 
(7)  Separating gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use, in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana; 
(8)  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use, in compounding controlled substances; 
(9)  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use, in packaging small quantities of controlled substances; 
(10)  Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances; 
(11)  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use, in parenterally injected controlled substances into the human body; 
(12)  Objects used, intended for use or designed for use, in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
a.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
b.  Water pipes; 
c.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
d.  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
e.  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
f.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials; 
g.  Chamber pipes; 
h.  Carburetor pipes; 
i.  Electric pipes; 
j.  Air-driven pipes; 
k.  Chillums; 
l.  Bongs; 
m.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(b)  Determination of object as drug paraphernalia. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
(2)  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance; 
(3)  The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this section; 
(4)  The proximity of the object to controlled substances; 
(5)  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object. 
(6)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows, or should reasonable know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this section; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of this section should not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use, as drug paraphernalia; 
(7)  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use; 
(8)  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use; 
(9)  National and local advertising concerning its use; 
(10)  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; 
(11)  Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products; 
(12)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object to the total sales of the business enterprise; 
(13)  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; 
(14)  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(c)  Offenses and penalties . 
(1)  Possession of drug paraphernalia . It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this section. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a crime and, upon conviction, may be imprisoned for not more than 30 days, fined not more than $500.00, or both. 
(2)  Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia . It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this Act. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a crime and upon conviction may be imprisoned for not more than 30 days, fined not more than $500.00, or both. 
(3)  Delivery of drug paraphernalia . Any person 18 years of age or over who violates the above section by delivering drug paraphernalia to a person under 18 years of age who is at least three years his junior is guilty of a special offense and upon conviction may be imprisoned for not more than 30 days, fined not more than $500.00, or both. 
(4)  Advertisement of drug paraphernalia . It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a crime and, upon conviction, may be imprisoned for not more than 30 days, fined not more than $500.00, or both. 
(d)  Civil forfeiture . All drug paraphernalia, as defined by subsection (a) of this section, are subject to forfeiture. 
(e)  Severability . If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of the section which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application and to this end the provisions of this section are severable. 
(Code 1996, § 9-2-10) 
CHAPTER 3. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Entering premises after warning or refusing to leave on request, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-11-620; altering and removing landmarks, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-11-680; petit larceny, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-13-30; receiving stolen goods, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-13-180; obtaining signature or property by false pretenses, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-13-240; obtaining property under false tokens or letters, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-13-260; failure to return books, etc., borrowed from libraries, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-13-340; securing property by fraudulent impersonation of officer, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-13-290; removing or destroying fences, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-11-650; mutilation of monuments or tombstones, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-17-590; destruction of graves and graveyards, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-17-600; entry on another's lands without permission, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-11-610; entry on another's lands after notice, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-11-600. 

Sec. 9-3-1. - Property; injuring damaging, destroying, etc. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, damage, mutilate or remove the property of another. The following acts, among others, are declared to be in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive. 
(1)  Personal property . No person within the town shall willfully, unlawfully and maliciously cut, shoot, maim, wound or otherwise injure any personal property of another person. 
(2)  Fixtures and real property . No person within the town shall willfully, unlawfully or maliciously cut, mutilate, deface or otherwise injure any tree, house, outside fence or fixture of another, or commit any other trespass upon real property in the possession of another. 
(3)  Municipal property . No person within the town, unless authorized by town officials, shall remove, interfere with or destroy any town property. 
(4)  Grassplots, flowers, etc . No person shall drive any animal or vehicle along, on or across any grass plot in any street, public place or sidewalk, or to trample, pluck, mutilate or injure the grass, shrubs or flowers planted or growing in such place. 
(5)  Trees and shrubs . No person shall cut, scar, mutilate, dig up or otherwise injure or destroy any trees or shrubs on the public streets or in the parks of the town. 
(b)  Violations. Any person violating the terms of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1996, § 9-3-1) 
Sec. 9-3-2. - Reserved. 
Sec. 9-3-3. - Trespassing upon private property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon the property of another without the invitation or permission of the owner. Any person found upon the property of another without the owner's consent or permission, shall be guilty of trespassing and subject to a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment of not more than 30 days, or both. 
(Code 1996, § 9-3-3) 
Sec. 9-3-4. - Throwing trash upon private property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw trash, litter or waste of any kind upon the private property of another without the permission of the owner, lessee or occupant of the said property. 
(Code 1996, § 9-3-4) 
CHAPTER 4. - OFFENSES AGAINST MORALITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Indecent exposure, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-15-130; prostitution, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-15-90 et seq.; obscene materials, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-15-260 et seq. 

Sec. 9-4-1. - Solicitation for illegal purposes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to invite or entice any person upon any street, public square or enclosure in the town to accompany, go with or follow such person to any place for illegal purposes, or to invite, entice or address any person from any door, window, porch or portico of any house or building, or to enter any house, or go with or accompany such person to any place for illegal purposes. 
(Code 1996, § 9-4-1) 
Title 10 - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
CHAPTER 1. - PROCUREMENT PROCEDURES 

Sec. 10-1-1. - Procurement code adopted. 
    Procurement procedures in this chapter and regulations hereby authorized are adopted pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, § 11-35-50, and may be cited as "The Town Procurement Code." Terms used in this procurement code shall be defined in accordance with S.C. Code 1976, § 11-35-310. 
(Code 1996, § 10-1-1) 
Sec. 10-1-2. - Purchasing agent. 
    The town manager shall appoint a purchasing agent, who shall serve at his pleasure and be subject to the finance director. The purchasing agent of a designated department head shall be responsible for procurement under the regulations promulgated by the town manager. 
(Code 1996, § 10-1-2) 
Sec. 10-1-3. - Public access to procurement information. 
    Procurement information shall be a public record to the extent required by chapter 3 of title 30 (The Freedom of Information Act), Code of Laws of South Carolina, 1976, as amended, with the exception that commercial or financial information obtained in response to a request for proposals which is privileged and confidential need not be disclosed. 
(Code 1996, § 10-1-3) 
Sec. 10-1-4. - Compliance with federal requirements. 
    Where a procurement involves the expenditure of federal assistance or contract funds, the town shall also comply with such federal law and authorized regulations as are mandatorily applicable. Notwithstanding, where federal assistance or contract funds are used in a procurement, requirements of this Code and town regulations that are more restrictive than federal requirements shall be followed. 
(Code 1996, § 10-1-4) 
Sec. 10-1-5. - Methods of source selection. 
    All town contracts shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding, except the following as determined pursuant to definitions and standards set by regulations: 
(1)  Professional services where the person employed is customarily employed on a fee basis rather than by competitive bidding (example: appraiser, architect-engineer, auditor, legal service, physician); 
(2)  Competitive sealed proposals; 
(3)  Negotiations after unsuccessful competitive sealed bidding; 
(4)  Small purchases; 
(5)  Sole source procurements; 
(6)  Emergency procurements; 
(7)  Procurement of information technology; 
(8)  Leasing of real property for governmental use; 
(9)  When purchasing through state contracts. 
(Code 1996, § 10-1-5) 
Sec. 10-1-6. - Bidding procedures. 
    Regulations promulgated by the town manager shall provide for fair and equitable procurement system for the town through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Competitive sealed bidding; 
(2)  Competitive sealed proposals; 
(3)  Negotiations after unsuccessful competitive sealed bidding; 
(4)  Small purchases; 
(5)  Sole source procurement; 
(6)  Emergency procurements; 
(7)  Negotiations for contracts exempted from competitive procurement. 
(Code 1996, § 10-1-6) 
Sec. 10-1-7. - Correction or withdrawal of bids. 
(a)  Cancellation of awards . Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before bid opening, withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids after award, or cancellation of awards of contracts based on such bid mistakes, may be permitted in accordance with regulations promulgated by the town manager. After bid opening, no change in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest of the town or fair competition shall be permitted. All decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes, shall be supported by a written determination of appropriateness and shall be subject to approval by the town council when the amount involved exceeds $5,000.00. 
(b)  Tie bids . In the event two or more bidders are tied in price while otherwise meeting all of the required conditions, awards are determined as follows: 
(1)  Should there be a town firm tied with an out-of-town firm, the award shall be made automatically to the town firm. 
(2)  Tie bids involving only town firms or only out-of-town firms shall be resolved by the flip of a coin in the office of the procurement officer, witnessed by all interested parties. 
(c)  Cancellation of invitation for bids on request for proposals . An invitation for bids, a request for proposals, or other solicitation may be cancelled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or part as may be specified in the solicitation, when it is in the best interest of the town. The reasons for rejecting, supported with documentation sufficient to satisfy an external audit, shall be made a part of the contract file. 
(Code 1996, § 10-1-7) 
Sec. 10-1-8. - Award of contracts. 
    The town manager may reflect or approve bids and purchase agreements and award contracts in accordance with regulations, provided that contracts involving in excess of $5,000.00 shall be approved by the town council prior to award. 
(Code 1996, § 10-1-8) 
Sec. 10-1-9. - Department heads to authorize purchases under $500.00. 
    All purchases duly approved by the town council in the budget process that do not exceed $500.00 must be authorized by the appropriate department head or their designee prior to a purchase order number being issued. 
(Code 1996, § 10-1-9) 
Sec. 10-1-10. - Town manager to authorize purchases between $500.00 and $1,000.00. 
    All purchases duly approved by the town council in the budget process that exceed the authority of the department head but do not exceed $1,000.00 must be approved by the town manager or his designee prior to a purchase order number being issued. 
(Code 1996, § 10-1-10) 
Sec. 10-1-11. - Town council to approve purchases over $1,000.00; exceptions. 
    All purchases exceeding $1,000.00 must have the prior approval of the town council. This excludes only duly approved insurance payments, all utilities, emergency vehicle repairs, legal or professional fees, or any payment or refund ordered by an appropriate court having proper jurisdiction to issue such order. 
(Code 1996, § 10-1-11) 
Sec. 10-1-12. - Bids required for purchases exceeding $1,000.00. 
    All purchases exceeding $1,000.00 will be bid out and the lowest bid of acceptable quality shall be awarded. The town reserves the right to reject any and all bids. Local business shall have equal opportunity to bid on any purchase made by the town. 
(Code 1996, § 10-1-12) 
Sec. 10-1-13. - Purchase orders. 
(a)  All purchases made by the town shall have a purchase order number issued by the clerk-treasurer, excluding minor purchases made from petty cash funds and reoccurring purchases such as those itemized in section 10-1-11. 
(b)  Purchase orders shall contain the name of the business, description of item to be purchased, amount to be spent, approved budget line item number and person authorizing the purchase. The clerk-treasurer shall maintain a purchase order book and appropriately record all purchases made by the town. 
(Code 1996, § 10-1-13) 
CHAPTER 2. - PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Political subdivisions required to develop and adopt procurement laws, S.C. Code 1976, § 11-35-50. 

Sec. 10-2-1. - Town procurement regulations. 
    These regulations issued by the town manager, establish policies, procedures and guidelines relating to the procurement, management, control, and disposal of supplies, services, information technology and construction, as applicable, under the authority of the town procurement code. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2-1) 
Sec. 10-2-2. - Department heads may develop specifications and receive bids. 
    The town manager may designate, in writing, the authority to certain department heads to develop their own specifications and handle bidding procedures as outlined in these regulations. The term "procurement officer," as used in these regulations, shall mean the purchasing agent or any person duly authorized to handle a procurement. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2-2) 
Sec. 10-2-3. - Competitive sealed bidding. 
(a)  The invitation for bids . The invitation for bids by newspaper or by mail invitation to selective suppliers shall be used to initiate a competitive sealed bid procurement and shall include the following: 
(1)  Instructions and information to bidders concerning the bid submission requirements, including the time and date set for receipt of bids, the individual to whom the bid is to be submitted, the address of the office to which bids are to be delivered, the maximum time for bid acceptance by the town and any other special information; 
(2)  The purchase description, evaluation factors, delivery or performance schedule, and such inspection and acceptance requirements as are not included in the purchase description; 
(3)  The contract terms and conditions, including warranty and bonding or other security requirements, as applicable; and 
(4)  Instructions to bidders to visibly mark as confidential each part of their bid which they consider to be proprietary information. Bidding time will be set to provide bidders a reasonable time to prepare their bids. A minimum of seven days shall be allowed unless a shorter time for a particular procurement is specified in the instructions. 
(b)  Bond and security . 
(1)  Bid security . 
a.  Requirements for bid security . Bid security shall be required for all competitive sealed bidding for construction contracts and such other contracts as may be prescribed by the town manager. Bid security shall be a bond provided by a surety company meeting the approval of the town attorney. 
b.  Amount of bid security . Bid security shall be in an amount equal to at least five percent of the amount of the bid. 
c.  Rejection of bids for noncompliance with bid security requirements . When the invitation of bids requires security, noncompliance requires that the bid be rejected. 
d.  Withdrawal of bids . After the bids are opened, they shall be irrevocable for the period specified in the invitation for bids. If a bidder is permitted to withdraw its bid before bid opening, no action shall be had against the bidder or the bid security. 
(2)  Contract performance and payment bonds . 
a.  When contract awarded. When a construction contract is awarded, the following bonds or security shall be delivered to the procurement officer and shall become binding on the parties upon the execution of the contract: 
1.  A performance bond satisfactory to the town manager, executed by a surety company, or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the town manager, in an amount equal to 100 percent of the price specified in the contract; 
2.  A payment bond satisfactory to the town attorney, executed by a surety company, or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the town manager, for the protection of all persons supplying labor and material to the contractor or its subcontractors for the performance of the work provided for in the contract. The bond shall be in an amount equal to 100 percent of the contract price. 
b.  Additional bonds . Nothing in subsection (b) of this section shall be construed to limit the requirements of other appropriate bonds or other security in addition to these bonds. 
(3)  Retention . 
a.  Minimum amount to be withheld . In any contract or subcontract of reconstruction which contract or subcontract provides for progress payment in installments based upon an estimated percentage of completion, with a percentage of the contractor's proceeds to be retained by the town or general contractor pending completion of the contract or subcontract, the retained amount of each progress payment or installment shall be no less than five percent. 
b.  Release of retained refunds . When the work to be performed on a construction project or pursuant to a construction contract is to be performed by multiple prime contractors or by a prime contractor and multiple subcontractors, the work contracted to be done by each individual contractor or subcontractor will be considered a separate division of the contract for the purpose of retention. As each such division of the contract is certified as having been completed, that portion of the retained funds which is allocable to the completed division of the contract may be released to the prime contractor, who shall, within ten days of its receipt, release to the subcontractor responsible for the completed work the full amount of any retention previously withheld from him by the prime contractor. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2-3) 
Sec. 10-2-4. - Receipt and safeguarding of bids. 
    All bids, including modifications, received prior to the time of opening shall be kept secure and unopened. If an invitation for bids is cancelled, bids shall be returned to the bidders. When bid samples are submitted, they shall be handled with sufficient care to prevent disclosure of characteristics before bid opening. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2-4) 
Sec. 10-2-5. - Bid opening. 
(a)  Procedures . The procurement officer of the governmental body or his designee shall decide when the time set for bid opening has arrived, and shall so declare to those present. He shall then personally and publicly open all bids received prior to that time and, when practicable, read them aloud to those persons present and have the bids recorded. The amount of each bid and such other relevant information, together with the name of each bidder, shall be tabulated. The tabulation shall be open to the public inspection. 
(b)  Postponement of bid opening . An amendment postponing bid openings may be issued by the procurement officers as follows: 
(1)  Causes beyond control of bidders (e.g., flood, fire, accident, weather conditions); or 
(2)  When emergency or unanticipated events interrupt normal governmental operations. 
(c)  Disclosure of bid information . Only the information disclosed by the procurement officer or his designee at bid opening is considered to be public information under the Freedom of Information Act, chapter 3 of title 30, Code of Laws South Carolina 1976, until the award is made. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2-5) 
Sec. 10-2-6. - Bid acceptance and bid evaluation. 
    When necessary for the best interest of the town, bid criteria to determine acceptability may include inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery and suitability for a particular purpose. Those criteria that will affect the bid price and be considered in evaluation for award shall be measurable costs to include, but not be limited to, discounts, transportation costs, total or life cycle costs. All sole source requests shall be forwarded first to the town manager for review and recommendation to the town council. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2-6) 
Sec. 10-2-7. - Telegraphic bids. 
    As a general rule, telegraphic bids will not be authorized. When, in the judgment of the procurement officers, the date for the opening of bids will not allow bidders sufficient time to prepare and submit bids on the prescribed forms or when prices are subject to frequent changes, telegraphic bids may be authorized. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2-7) 
Sec. 10-2-8. - Rejection of bids. 
(a)  Application . Unless there is a compelling reason to reject one or more bids, award will be made to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder. Every effort shall be made to anticipate changes in a requirement prior to the date of opening and to notify all prospective bidders to change their bids and preventing the unnecessary exposure of bid process. 
(b)  Cancellation of bids prior to award . When it is determined prior to an award, but after opening, that the requirements relating to the availability and identification of specifications have not been met, the invitation for bids shall be canceled. Invitations for bids may be canceled after opening, but prior to award, when the procurement officers determines, in writing, that: 
(1)  Inadequate or ambiguous specifications were cited in the invitation; 
(2)  Specifications have been revised; 
(3)  The supplies or services being procured are no longer required; 
(4)  The invitation did not provide for consideration of all factors of costs to the town, such as cost of transporting town-furnished property to bidders' plants; 
(5)  Bids received indicate that the needs of the town can be satisfied by a less expensive article differing from that on which the bids were invited; 
(6)  All otherwise acceptable bids received are at unreasonable prices; 
(7)  The bids were not independently arrived at in open competition, were collusive, or were submitted in bad faith; or 
(8)  For other reasons, cancellation is clearly in the best interest of the town. 
Determinations to cancel invitations for bids shall state the reasons therefor. 
(c)  Extension of bid acceptance period . Should administrative difficulties be encountered after bid opening which may delay award beyond bidders' acceptance periods, the several lowest bidders should be requested, before expiration of their bids, to extend the bid acceptance period (with consent of sureties, if any) in order to avoid the need for re-advertisement. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2-8) 
Sec. 10-2-9. - Rejection of individual bids. 
(a)  General application . Any bid which fails to conform to the essential requirements of the invitation for bids shall be rejected. 
(b)  Alternate bids . Any bid which does not conform to the specifications contained or referenced in the invitation for bids may be reflected, unless the invitation authorized the submission of alternate bids and the supplies offered as alternates meet the requirements specified in the invitation. 
(c)  Nonresponsive bids . Any bid which fails to conform to the delivery schedule or permissible alternates thereto stated in the invitation for bids may be rejected as nonresponsive. 
(d)  Modification of requirements by bidder . Ordinarily a bid should be rejected when the bidder attempts to impose conditions which would modify requirements of the invitation for bids or limit his liability to the town, since to allow the bidder to impose such conditions would be prejudicial to other bidders. For example, bids should be rejected in which the bidder: 
(1)  Attempts to protect himself against future changes in conditions, such as increased costs, if total possible cost to the town cannot be determined; 
(2)  Fails to state a price and in lieu thereof states that price shall be "price in effect at same time of delivery;" 
(3)  States a price but qualified such price as being subject to "price in effect at same time of delivery;" 
(4)  When not authorized by the invitation, conditions or qualifies his bid by stipulating that his bid is to be considered only if, prior to date of award, bidder received (or does not receive) award under a separate procurement; 
(5)  Requires the town to determine that the bidder's product meets town specifications; or 
(6)  Limits the rights of the town under any contract clause. 
The lowest responsive and responsible bidder may be requested to delete objectionable conditions from his bid, provided that these conditions do not go to the substance, as distinguished from the form, of the bid or work an injustice on other bidders. 
(e)  Price unreasonableness . Any bid may be rejected if the procurement officer determines in writing that it is unreasonable as to price. 
(f)  Bid guarantee requirement . When a bid guarantee is required and a bidder fails to furnish it in accordance with the requirements of the invitation for bids, the bid shall be rejected. 
(g)  Unsigned bid . Unsigned bids shall be rejected unless a representative of the invitation for bids is present. 
(h)  Late bids . Any bid received after the procurement officer or his designee has declared that the time set for bid opening has arrived shall be rejected. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2-9) 
Sec. 10-2-10. - All-or-none qualifications. 
    Unless the invitation for bids so provides, a bid is not rendered nonresponsive by the fact that the bidder specifies that award will be accepted only on all, or a specified group, of the items included in the invitation for bids. However, bidders shall not be permitted to withdraw or modify all-or-none qualifications after bid opening since such qualification is substantive and affects the rights of the other bidders. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2-10) 
Sec. 10-2-11. - Minor informalities and irregularities in bids. 
    A minor informality or irregularity is one which is merely a matter of form or is some immaterial variation from the exact requirements of the invitation for bids, having to effect or merely a trivial or negligible effect on price, quality, quantity, or delivery of the supplies or performance of the services being procured, and the correction or waiver of which would not affect the relative standing of, or be otherwise prejudicial to, bidders. The procurement officer shall either give the bidder an opportunity to cure any deficiency resulting from a minor informality or irregularity in a bid or waive any such deficiency where it is to the advantage of the town. Such communication or determination shall be in writing. Examples of minor informalities or irregularities include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Failure of bidder to return the number of copies of signed bids required by the invitation. 
(2)  Failure to furnish the required information concerning the number of the bidder's employees or failure to make a representation concerning his status. 
(3)  Failure of a bidder to sign his bid, but only if: 
a.  The firm submitting the bid has formally adopted or authorized the execution of documents by typewritten, printed or rubber stamped signature and submits evidence of such authorization and the bid carries such a signature; or 
b.  The unsigned bid is accompanied by other material indicating the bidder's intention to be bound by the unsigned bid document such as the submissions of a bid guarantee with the bid, or a letter signed by the bidder with the bid referring to and clearly identifying the bid itself. 
(4)  Failure of a bidder to acknowledge receipt of an amendment to an invitation for bids, but only if: 
a.  The bid received clearly indicates that the bidder received the amendment, such as where the amendment added another item to the invitation for bids and the bidder submitted a bid thereon; 
b.  The amendment clearly would have no effect or merely a trivial or negligible effect on price, quantity, delivery or the relative standing of bidders, such as an amendment correcting a typographical mistake in the name of the governmental body; 
c.  There is a failure to furnish an affidavit concerning affiliates, if required; or 
d.  There is a failure to execute the certifications with respect to equal opportunity and affirmative action programs. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2-11) 
Sec. 10-2-12. - Correction or withdrawal of bids; cancellation of awards. 
(a)  General procedure . A bidder or offeror must submit in writing a request to either correct or withdraw a bid to the procurement officer. Each written request must document the fact that the bidder's or offeror's mistake is clearly an error that will cause him substantial loss. 
(b)  Correction creates low bid . To maintain the integrity of the competitive sealed bidding system, a bidder shall not be permitted to correct a bid mistake after bid opening that would cause such bidder to have the low bid unless the mistake, in the judgment of the procurement officers, is clearly evident from examining the bid document; for example, extension of unit prices or errors in addition. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2-12) 
Sec. 10-2-13. - Award. 
(a)  Application . The contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids. 
(b)  Time of award . The contract award shall be made within 30 days from the bid opening, unless the procurement officer shall determine that a longer review time is necessary. Notice of a time extension shall be given to each bidder by the procurement officer. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2-13) 
Sec. 10-2-14. - Competitive sealed proposals. 
(a)  Receipt and safeguarding of proposals . The provisions of section 10-2-4 shall apply for the receipt and safeguarding of proposals. 
(b)  Receipt of proposals . Proposals shall be opened publicly by the procurement officer or his designee in the presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the request for proposals. A tabulation of those offering a proposal shall be made public record. Contents of competing offers shall not be disclosed during the process of negotiation. All offerors must visibly mark as "confidential" each part of their proposal which they consider to be proprietary information. 
(c)  Other applicable provisions . The provisions of section 10-2-6 shall apply to bid evaluation. 
(d)  Other applicable provisions . The provisions of the following regulations shall apply to competitive sealed proposals: 
(1)  Section 10-2-7, telegraphic bids; 
(2)  Section 10-2-8, rejection of bids; 
(3)  Section 10-2-9, rejection of individual bids; 
(4)  Section 10-2-10, all-or-none qualifications; 
(5)  Section 10-2-11, minor informalities and irregularities in bids; and 
(6)  Section 10-2-12, correction or withdrawal of bids; cancellation of awards. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2-14) 
Sec. 10-2-15. - Small procurements and other simplified purchasing procedures. 
(a)  Authority . Procurement requirements shall not be artificially divided by departments so as to constitute a small purchase under this subsection. Related items, such as small hardware items or spare parts for vehicles, may be included in one solicitation, and the award made on an all-or-none basis. In such cases, suppliers shall be advised of this award procedure when quotations are requested. 
(b)  Competition and price reasonableness. 
(1)  Procurement not in excess of $500.00. Small procurements not exceeding $500.00 may be accomplished upon approval of the department head or their designee without securing competitive quotations if the prices are considered to be reasonable. The clerk shall annotate the requisition: "Price is fair and reasonable," and sign. Such procurements shall be distributed equitably among qualified suppliers. When practical, a quotation will be solicited from other than the previous supplier prior to placing a repeat order. The administrative cost of verifying the reasonableness of the price of procurements "not in excess of" may more than offset potential savings in detecting instances of overpricing; therefore, action to verify the reasonableness of the price may not be reasonable, e.g., comparison to previous price paid, or personal knowledge of the item involved. 
(2)  Procurements from $500.01 to $1,000.00. Solicitations of verbal or written quotes from a minimum of three qualified sources of supply shall be made and documented that the procurement is to the advantage of the town, price and other factors considered, including the administrative cost of the purchase. Such documentation shall be attached to the purchase requisition and the procurement must be approved by the purchasing agent. 
(3)  Procurements from $1,000.01 to $10,000.00. Solicitation of written quotations from three qualified sources of supply shall be made and documented, that the procurement is to the advantage of the town, price and other factors considered, including the administrative cost of the purchase. Such documentation shall be attached to the purchase requisition and the procurement must be approved by the purchasing agent. 
(c)  Establishment of blanket purchase agreements. 
(1)  Generally. A blanket purchase agreement (BPA) is a simplified method of filling anticipated repetitive needs for small quantities of supplies or services by establishing charge accounts with qualified sources of supply. Blanket purchase agreements are designed to reduce administrative costs in accomplishing small purchases by eliminating the need for issuing individual purchase documents. 
(2)  Alternate sources . To the extent practicable, blanket purchase agreements for items of the same type should be placed concurrently with more than one supplier and all competitive sources given an equal opportunity to furnish supplies or services under such agreements. 
(3)  Terms and conditions . Blanket purchase agreements shall contain the following provisions: 
a.  Description of agreement . A statement that the supplier shall furnish supplies or services, described therein in general terms, if and when requested by the purchasing agent, or his authorized representative, during a specified period and within a stipulated aggregate amount, if any blanket agreements may encompass all items that the supplier is in a position to furnish. 
b.  Extent of obligation . A statement that the town is obligated only to the extent of authorized calls actually placed against the blanket purchase agreement. 
c.  Notice of individuals authorized to place calls and dollar limitations . A provision that a list of names of individuals authorized to place calls under the agreement, identified by organizational component, and the dollar limitation per call for each individual shall be furnished to the supplier by the purchasing agent. 
d.  Delivery tickets . A requirement that all shipments under the agreement, except subscriptions and other charges for newspapers, magazines, or other periodicals, shall be accompanied by delivery tickets or sales slips which shall contain the following minimum information: 
1.  Name of supplier; 
2.  Blanket purchase agreement number; 
3.  Date of call; 
4.  Call number; 
5.  Itemized list of suppliers or services furnished; 
6.  Quantity, unit price, and extension of each item less applicable discounts (unit price and extensions need not be shown when incompatible with the use of automated systems, provided that the invoice is itemized to show this information); and 
7.  Date of delivery or shipment. 
e.  Invoices . 
1.  One of the following statements: 
(i)  A summary invoice shall be submitted at least monthly or upon expiration of the blanket purchase agreement, whichever occurs first, for all deliveries made during a billing period, identifying the delivery tickets covered therein, stating their total dollar value and supported by receipted copies of the delivery tickets; or 
(ii)  An itemized invoice shall be submitted at least monthly or upon expiration of the blanket purchase agreement, whichever occurs first, for all deliveries made during a billing period and for which payment has not been received. Such invoices need not be supported by copies of delivery tickets; 
2.  When billing procedures provide for an individual invoice for each delivery, these invoices shall be accumulated, provided that a consolidated payment will be made for each specified period; and the period of any discounts will commence on the final date of the billing period or on the date of the receipt of the invoices for all deliveries accepted during the billing period, whichever is later. This procedure shall not be used if the accumulation of the individual invoices materially increases the administrative costs of this purchase method; 
3.  An invoice for subscriptions or other charges for newspapers, magazines or other periodicals shall show the starting and ending dates and shall state either that orders have been placed in effect or will be placed in effect upon receipt of payment. 
(d)  Competition under blanket purchase agreement . Calls against concurrent agreements for similar items are in effect; calls shall be equitably distributed. In those instances where there is an insufficient number of BPAs for any given class of suppliers or services to ensure adequate competition, the individual placing the order shall solicit quotations from other sources. 
(e)  Calls against blanket purchase agreement . Calls against blanket purchase agreements generally will be made orally, except that informal correspondence may be used when ordering against agreements outside the local trade area. 
(f)  Receipt and acceptance of supplies or services . Acceptance of supplies or services shall be indicated by signature and date on the appropriate form by the authorized town representative after verification and notation of any exceptions. A sales slip or delivery ticket may be used for receipt and acceptance when purchases are retained for administration. 
(g)  Blanket purchase agreements . Blanket purchase agreements shall be issued for a period of no longer than 12 months. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2-15) 
Sec. 10-2-16. - Sole source procurements. 
(a)  Application . The provisions of these regulations shall apply to all sole source procurements unless emergency conditions exist as defined in section 10-2-17. 
(b)  Exceptions . Sole source procurement is not permissible unless there is only a single supplier. The following are examples of circumstances which could necessitate sole procurement: 
(1)  Where the compatibility of equipment, accessories or replacement parts is the paramount consideration; 
(2)  Where a sole supplier's item is needed for trial use or testing; 
(3)  Where a sole supplier's item is to be procured for resale; 
(4)  Where public utility services are to be procured; 
(5)  Where the item is one of a kind; and 
(6)  Printed forms, pamphlets, brochures, exclusive of printing equipment. 
(c)  Determination. The determination as to whether a procurement shall be made as a sole source shall be made by the procurement officer or designee. Such determination and the basis therefor shall be in writing. In cases of reasonable doubt, competition should be solicited. Any request by a department that a procurement is restricted to one potential contractor shall be accompanied by an explanation as to why no other will be suitable or acceptable to meet the need. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2-16) 
Sec. 10-2-17. - Emergency procurements. 
(a)  Application . The provisions of this section apply to every procurement made under emergency conditions that will not permit other source selection methods to be used. 
(b)  Definition . An emergency condition is a situation which creates a threat to public health, welfare or safety, such as may arise by reason of floods, epidemics, riots, equipment failures, fire loss, or such other reason as may be proclaimed by the town manager. The existence of such conditions must create an immediate and serious need for supplies, services, or construction that cannot be met through normal procurement methods and the lack of which would seriously threaten: 
(1)  The functioning of town government; 
(2)  The preservation or protection of property; or 
(3)  The health or safety of any person. 
(c)  General procedures . Competitive sealed bidding is unsuccessful when bids received pursuant to an invitation for bids are unreasonable, noncompetitive, or the low bid exceeds available funds as certified by the appropriate fiscal officer, and time or other circumstances will not permit the delay required to re-solicit competitive sealed bids. If emergency conditions exist after an unsuccessful attempt to use competitive sealed bidding, an emergency procurement may be made. 
(d)  Limitations . Emergency procurements may be made when an emergency condition arises and the need cannot be met through normal procurement methods. 
(e)  Selection of method of procurement . The procedure used shall be selected to ensure that the required supplies, services, or construction items are procured in time to meet the emergency; given the constraint that such competition as is practicable shall be obtained. 
(f)  Written determination . The procurement officer, department head or a designee shall make a written determination stating the basis for an emergency procurement and for the selection of the particular contractor. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2-17) 
Sec. 10-2-18. - Responsibility of bidders and offerors. 
(a)  Standards of responsibility . Factors to be considered in determining whether standards or responsibility have been met include whether a prospective contractor has: 
(1)  Available the appropriate financial, material, equipment, facility and personnel resources and expertise, or the ability to obtain them, necessary to indicate its capability to meet all contractual requirements; 
(2)  A satisfactory record of performance; 
(3)  A satisfactory record of integrity; 
(4)  Qualified legally to contract with the town; and 
(5)  Supplied all necessary information in connection with the inquiry concerning responsibility. 
(b)  Duty of contractor to supply information . The prospective contractor shall supply information requested by the procurement officer concerning the responsibility of such contractor. If such contractor fails to supply the requested information, the procurement officer shall base the determination of responsibility upon any available information or may find the prospective contractor non-responsible if such failure is unreasonable. 
(c)  Demonstration of responsibility . The prospective contractor may demonstrate the availability of necessary financing, equipment, facilities, expertise and personnel by submitting upon request: 
(1)  Evidence that such subcontract is necessary for such necessary items; 
(2)  Acceptable plans to subcontract for such necessary items; or 
(3)  A documented commitment from or explicit arrangement with a satisfactory source to provide the necessary items. 
(d)  Written determination of non-responsibility . If a bidder or offeror who otherwise would have been awarded a contract is found non-responsible, a written determination of non-responsibility setting forth the basis of the finding shall be prepared by the procurement officer. A copy of the determination shall be sent promptly to the non-responsible bidder or offeror. The final determination shall be made part of the procurement file upon approval of the town manager. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2-18) 
Sec. 10-2-19. - Prequalification of supplies. 
    A qualified products list may be developed with the testing or examination of the supplies or construction items prior to issuance of the solicitation to best satisfy town requirements. The procedures for the inclusion of a product on the qualified products list (QPL) must be available to prospective vendors for consideration of their product to the list. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2-19) 
Sec. 10-2-20. - Specifications. 
(a)  Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Brand name or equal specification means a specification which uses one or more manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers to describe the standard of quality, performance and other characteristics needed to meet state requirements, and which provides for the submission of equivalent products. 
    Brand name specification means a specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers' names or catalogue number. 
    Qualified products list (QPL) means an approved list of supplies, services or construction items described by model or catalogue number, which, prior to competitive solicitation, the town has determined will meet the applicable specification requirements. 
    Specification means any description of the physical, functional, or performance characteristics, or of the nature of a supply, service or construction item. A specification includes, as appropriate, requirements for inspecting, testing or preparing a supply, service or construction item for delivery. Unless the context requires otherwise, the terms "specification" and "purchase description" are used interchangeably throughout the regulations. 
    Specification for a common or general use item means a specification which has been developed and approved for repeated use in procurements. 
(b)  Issuance of specifications . The purpose of a specification is to serve as a basis for obtaining a supply, service or construction item adequate and suitable for the town needs in a cost effective manner, taking into account, to the extent practicable, the cost of ownership and operation as well as initial acquisition costs. It is the policy of the town that specifications permit maximum practicable competition consistent with the purpose. Specifications shall be drafted with the objective of clearly describing the town's requirements. All specifications shall be written in a non-restrictive manner as to describe the requirements to be met. 
(c)  Use of functional or performance descriptions . Specifications shall, to the extent practicable, emphasize functional or performance criteria while limiting design or other detailed physical descriptions to those necessary to meet the needs of the town. To facilitate the use of such criteria, using departments shall endeavor to include as a part of their purchase requisitions the principal functional or performance needs to be met. It is recognized, however, that the preference for use of functional or performance specifications is primarily applicable to the procurement of supplies and services. Such preference is often not practicable in construction, apart from the procurement of supply type items for a construction project. 
(d)  Preference for commercially available products . It is the general policy of this town to procure standard commercial products whenever practicable. In developing specifications, accepted commercial standards shall be used and unique requirements shall be avoided, to the extent practicable. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2-20) 
Sec. 10-2-21. - Supply management. 
(a)  Authority . The sale of all town-owned surplus supplies and property not in actual public use shall be conducted by the purchasing division at such places and in such manner most advantageous to the town as may be approved by the town manager. The purchasing division shall deposit the proceeds from such sales, in the town's general fund unless a department requests in writing the need to retain such proceeds, for the purchase of a like kind item. 
(b)  Disposition of surplus property and scrap . Surplus property and scrap shall be offered through competitive sealed bids or public auction. It is recognized, however, that some types and classes of items can be sold or disposed of more readily and advantageously by other means, including barter. In such cases, and also where the nature of the supply or unusual circumstances call for its sale to be restricted or controlled, the purchasing agent or his designee may employ such other means, including, but not limited to, appraisal, provided he makes a written determination that such procedure is advantageous to the town. Only cashiers' checks, United States' currency or personal checks shall be accepted for sales of surplus or property. 
(c)  Competitive sealed bidding . 
(1)  Solicitation and opening . When making sales by competitive sealed bidding, notice of the sale should be given by at least 15 days before the date set for opening bids. Notice shall be given by mailing a notice of sale to prospective bidders, including those bidders on lists maintained for this purpose, and by making the notice of sale publicly available. Newspaper advertisement or publication in the official town publication may also be used. The notice of sale shall list the property offered for sale; designate the location and how it may be inspected; and state the terms and conditions of sale and instructions to bidders, including the place, date and time set for bid opening. Bids shall be opened publicly. 
(2)  Award . Award shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the notice of sale to the highest responsive and responsible bidder, provided that the price offered by such bidder is acceptable to the purchasing agent. Where such price is not acceptable, the purchasing agent may reject the bids in whole or in part and negotiate the sale, provided the negotiated sale price is higher than the highest responsive and responsible bid. 
(d)  Auctions . Property may be sold at auction by an experienced auctioneer to cry the sale and assist in preparation of the sale. The solicitation to bidders should stipulate, at a minimum, all terms and conditions of any sale and the fact that the town retains the right to reject any and all bids. 
(e)  Trade-in sales . The purchasing agent may trade in personal property, the trade-in value of which may be applied to the purchase of new like items. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2-21) 
Sec. 10-2-22. - Protested solicitation and awards. 
(a)  Right to protest . Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror, contractor or subcontractor who is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of a contract may protest to the appropriate procurement officer. The protest, setting forth the grievance, shall be submitted, in writing, within five days after such aggrieved persons know or should have known of the facts giving rise thereto, but in no circumstance after ten days of notification of award of contract. 
(b)  Authority to resolve protests . The appropriate procurement officer shall have authority, prior to the commencement of an administrative review, as provided in this article, to settle and resolve a protest of an aggrieved bidder, offeror, contractor or subcontractor, actual or prospective, concerning the solicitation or award of a contract. This authority shall be utilized in a manner consistent with regulations or laws governing the procurement of supplies, services and construction for the town. 
(c)  Decision . If the protest is not resolved by mutual agreement, the appropriate procurement officer shall promptly issue a decision in writing within ten days. The decision shall state the reasons for the action taken. 
(d)  Notice of decision . A copy of the decision under subsection (c) of this section shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the protestant and any other party intervening. 
(e)  Finality of decision . A decision under subsection (c) of this section shall be final and conclusive, unless fraudulent, or unless any person adversely affected by the decision requests a review in writing, setting forth the grievance, to the town manager within ten days of the decision. The protestant may also request an interview with the town manager. 
(f)  Request for review . The request for a review shall not stay the contract unless fraudulent. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2-22) 
Sec. 10-2-23. - Debarment or suspension. 
(a)  Applicability . This section applies to a debarment for cause from consideration for award of contracts or a suspension from such consideration during an investigation where there is probable cause for such debarment. 
(b)  Authority . After reasonable opportunity for such person or firm to be heard, the appropriate procurement officer shall have the authority to debar a person for cause from consideration for award of contracts, provided that doing so is in the best interest of the town. The debarment shall be for a period as set forth by the appropriate procurement officer. The same officer shall have authority to suspend a person from consideration for award of contracts, provided that doing so is in the best interest of the town, and there is probable cause for debarment. The suspension shall be for a period as prescribed by the appropriate procurement officer. 
(c)  Causes for debarment or suspension . The causes for debarment or suspension shall include, but not be limited to, the following; 
(1)  Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an incident to obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the performance of such contractor or subcontractor; 
(2)  Conviction under state or federal statutes of embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or professional honesty which currently, seriously and directly affects responsibility as a town contractor; 
(3)  Conviction under state or federal antitrust laws arising out of the submission of bids or proposals; 
(4)  Violation of contract provisions, as set forth below, of a character which is regarded by the appropriate procurement officer to be so serious as to justify debarment action; 
(5)  Deliberate failure, without good cause, to perform in accordance with the specifications or within the time limit to provided in the contract; 
(6)  A recent record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory performance in accordance with the terms of one or more contracts; or 
(7)  Any other cause the appropriate procurement officer determines to be so serious and compelling as to affect responsibility as a town contractor, including debarment by another governmental entity for any cause listed herein. 
(d)  Decision . The appropriate procurement officer shall issue a written decision to debar or suspend within ten days. The decision shall state the specific reasons for the action taken. 
(e)  Notice of decision . A copy of the decision under subsection (d) of this section shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the debarred or suspended person and any other party intervening. 
(f)  Finality of decision . A decision under subsection (d) of this section shall be final and conclusive, unless the debarred or suspended person requests a review, in writing, setting forth the reasons, to the town manager within ten days of the decision. The person may also request an interview with the town manager. The written decision of the town manager may be appealed to the town council within ten days in writing. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2-23) 
Sec. 10-2-24. - Recycled materials. 
    The town supports the concept of using recycled materials whenever possible. Recycled materials will be used whenever economically feasible and within the guidelines of the procurement code. 
(Code 1996, § 10-2-24) 
Title 11 - TAXES 
CHAPTER 1. - LOCAL HOSPITALITY TAX 

Sec. 11-1-1. - Authority. 
    This tax is enacted pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, §§ 6-1-700-6-1-770, which provides in part that a local governing body may impose, by ordinance, a local hospitality tax, not to exceed two percent of the charges for food and beverages sold in establishments with the town. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2018(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 11-1-2. - Purpose and intent. 
    This local hospitality tax is enacted to preserve the general health, safety, and welfare of the general public within the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, South Carolina, and to specifically improve and increase tourism-related activities and facilities and to enhance the quality of life in the town for its citizens and its visitors. The revenue generated by the local hospitality tax must be used exclusively for the following purposes: 
(1)  Tourism-related buildings, including, but not limited to, civic centers, coliseums, and aquariums; 
(2)  Cultural, recreational, or historic facilities; 
(3)  Highways, roads, streets, and bridges providing access to tourist destinations; 
(4)  Advertisements and promotions related to tourism development; or 
(5)  Water and sewer infrastructure to serve tourism-related demand. 
    Further, no amount of the revenue of the local hospitality tax may be used for the operation and maintenance of items (1) through (5) including police, fire protection, emergency medical services, and emergency-preparedness operations directly attendant to those facilities. More specifically, the revenue generated by this tax shall be used for the purposes set forth in Exhibit "B" only. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2018(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Editor's note- Exhibit B is not set out herein but is on file in the offices of the town. 
Sec. 11-1-3. - Imposition of local hospitality tax. 
    A uniform tax equal to two percent is hereby imposed on the gross proceeds derived from the sale of prepared meals and beverages sold in establishments or sales of prepared meals and beverages sold in establishments licensed for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages, beer or wine, and is imposed on every person engaged in the business of furnishing food and beverage services, whether dine in or take out, within the town. In addition, the local hospitality tax shall be imposed on all food and beverages prepared or modified by convenience stores, fast food service outlets, or grocery stores within the town. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2018(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 11-1-4. - Accounting for local hospitality tax. 
    All proceeds derived from the local hospitality tax must be kept in a separate fund segregated from the Town of Batesburg-Leesville General Fund known as the local hospitality tax budget, of which all monies collected and expended by the town under this chapter shall be itemized. All monies transferred to another fund shall be used in a manner consistent with state law and the provisions of this chapter. Any and all funds in the local hospitality tax budget, including any interest as may accrue thereon, shall be used solely for the purposes as set forth in S.C. Code 1976, § 6-1-730, as the same may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2018(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 11-1-5. - Payment of local hospitality tax. 
    Payment of the local hospitality tax shall be the responsibility of the consumer of the services described in section 11-1-3. This tax shall be paid at the time of the delivery of the services or items to which the tax applies and shall be collected by the provider or seller of the service(s), or item(s). 
(Ord. of 9-10-2018(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 11-1-6. - Remittance to the town. 
    The taxes collected by the seller or provider of the services or items as required in section 11-1-5 shall be remitted to the Town of Batesburg-Leesville Business License Administrator as set forth herein along with such return or form as may be established by the business license administrator for such purpose. When the estimated amount of average tax is more than $50.00 per month, that seller or provider shall remit the amount due on a monthly basis. When the estimated amount of average tax is $25.00 to $50.00 per month, that seller or provider shall remit on a quarterly basis. When the estimated amount is less than $25.00 per month, that seller or provider shall remit on an annual basis. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2018(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 11-1-7. - Payment due dates. 
    Taxes and required reports shall be submitted to the business license administrator by the 20th day of the month following the due date of the tax payment and shall cover sales of the previous month, quarter, and/or year depending on the seller's monthly average tax. Any taxes not timely remitted shall be subject to a penalty of five percent of the unpaid tax for each month or portion thereof after the due date until paid. The failure to collect from patrons the tax imposed by this chapter shall not relieve any establishment subject to this chapter from making the required remittance. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2018(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 11-1-8. - Penalties for violations. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be subject to punishment under the appropriate sections of the Code of the town upon conviction. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. Punishment for violation shall not relieve the offender of liability for delinquent taxes, penalties, and costs provided for herein. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2018(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 11-1-9. - Expenditure of future proceeds. 
    As part of the annual budget process, the town manager shall report to town council regarding the annual revenue received from this tax and the annual expenditures. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2018(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 11-1-10. - Inspections, audits and administration. 
    For the purpose of enforcing this chapter, the license official or other authorized agent of the town is empowered to enter upon the premises of any person or entity subject to this chapter and to make inspections, and examine and audit books and records. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to fail or refuse to make available the necessary books and records during normal business hours upon 24-hours' written notice. In the event an audit reveals that false information has been filed by the remitter, the cost of the audit shall be added to the correct amount of fees determined to be due. The license official or other authorized agent may make systematic inspections of all establishments within the town to ensure compliance with this chapter. Records of inspections shall not be deemed public records. The license official shall administer the provisions of this chapter and make reasonable regulations relating to its administration. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2018(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 11-1-11. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Establishments means businesses, mobile or fixed-based, within the town which sell prepared meals, food, and beverages for consumption. The term includes restaurants, bars and lounges, hotel and motels with restaurants and/or lounge facilities, caterers, ice cream shops, bakery shops, and other food service facilities including convenience and grocery stores. 
    Prepared meals and beverages mean, the product/s prepared or modified by an establishment, which, at the time of sale, is ready for consumption by members of the public. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2018(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 11-1-12. - Exemptions. 
    The local hospitality tax does not apply to organizations that are exempt from collecting state sales tax. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2018(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Appendix A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Published herein is the zoning ordinance adopted June 9, 1997, as amended through the date of adoption of the 2014 Code of Ordinances. Sections with no parenthetical history note are as originally adopted in 1997; provisions created or amended after June 9, 1997, do have parenthetical history notes. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

[ARTICLE] 1. - PREAMBLE AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE 

1-1. - AUTHORITY. 
    Pursuant to authority conferred by the 1994 "South Carolina Local Government Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act," SC Code Sections 6-29-310 through 6-29-1200, and to promote the public health, safety[,] morals and general welfare, lessen congestion in the streets, secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers, provide adequate light and air, prevent the overcrowding of land, avoid undue concentration of population, and facilitate adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and other public requirements in accordance with the comprehensive plan for the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, the Town Council does ordain and enact into law the following regulations: 
(1)  Dividing the Town of Batesburg-Leesville into districts and establishing the boundaries thereof; 
(2)  Regulating and restricting the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures; 
(3)  Regulating and restricting the percentage of lot area that may be occupied; 
(4)  Regulating and restricting the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces; 
(5)  Regulating and restricting the density of population; 
(6)  Regulating and restricting the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence and other purposes; 
(7)  Providing for the method of administration and amendment; 
(8)  Defining powers and duties of the Board of Appeals with respect to these regulations; 
(9)  Providing the penalties for violations of these regulations; 
(10)  Defining certain terms used herein; 
(11)  Repealing the previous zoning ordinance; and 
(12)  For other purposes. 
1-2. - TITLE. 
    These regulations, together with the Official Zoning Map, shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance for the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, South Carolina." 
[ARTICLE] 2. - AREA OF APPLICABILITY 

2-1. - AREA. 
    These regulations shall apply to all land and improvements thereon within the Town limits of Batesburg-Leesville, areas annexed thereto, and such adjacent unincorporated areas of Lexington County, Saluda County and Aiken County as the Town may control for planning and zoning responsibilities under right of extra-territorial jurisdiction as agreed upon by the Town Council and the Counties' governing authorities. 
2-2. - BOUNDARIES. 
    The boundaries of the zoning area are delineated by the official Zoning Map. Rules for determining boundaries are stated in Section 4-3. 
[ARTICLE] 3. - DEFINITION OF TERMS USED IN THIS ORDINANCE 

3-1. - INTERPRETATION OF CERTAIN TERMS AND WORDS. 
3-1.1.  Words used in this Ordinance shall have their customary meanings except for specific words which shall be defined as follows. 
3-1.2.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the singular number include the plural and the singular; the word "person" includes a firm, company, partnership or corporation; the word "building" includes the word "structure"; the word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be constructed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
3-2. - LIST OF DEFINITIONS. 
3-2.1.  ACCESSORY: As applied to a use or structure, means customarily and clearly subordinate or incidental, and on the same premises of such use or structure. 
3-2.2.  ALLEY: A public or private thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
3-2.3.  ALTERATION OF BUILDING: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as leaning walls, beams, columns, or girders, except such change as may be required for its safety; and in addition to a building; any change in use from that of one district classification to another; or of a building from one location to another. 
3-2.4.  APARTMENT HOTEL: A building designed for and containing apartments and/or individual guest rooms or suites of rooms and apartments, and which may furnish services ordinarily furnished by hotels, such as drugstore, barber shop, newsstand, and restaurant. 
3-2.5.  AUTOMOBILE FILLING STATION: A building or lot having pumps and storage tanks at which fuels, oils or accessories for the use of motor vehicles are dispersed, sold, or offered for sale at retail and where repair service is incidental. 
3-2.6.  AUTOMOBILE REPAIR AND SERVICE STATION: A building, lot, or both, in or upon which the business of general motor vehicle repair and service is conducted, but excluding junk and/or auto wrecking business. 
3-2.6.1.  BED AND BREAKFAST: An owner-occupied house or portion thereof, where short-term (no more than a week at a time) lodging rooms and meals are provided. No more than eight (8) guest rooms can be available for accommodations and breakfast service in such an establishment at any one time. 
3-2.7.  BUILDING: Any structure, except a trailer, having a roof support by columns or by walls and which is designed for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
3-2.8.  BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A building subordinate or supplemental to the main building on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to that of a main or principal building and located on the same lot. 
3-2.9.  BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A building in which is conducted the main use of the lot on which said building is located. 
3-2.10.  CLUB, LODGE, CIVIC OR FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION: An incorporated or unincorporated association for civic, social, cultural, religious, literary, political, recreational or like activities, but not including shooting clubs, operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public. 
3-2.11.  COMMUNICATION TOWER: A tower of any size which supports communication (broadcasting or receiving) equipment utilized by commercial, governmental, or other public or quasi-public users. This does not include private home use of satellite dishes and television antennas, or amateur radio operators as licensed by the FCC. 
3-2.12.  COURT: An open space which may or may not have direct street access and around which is arranged a single building or a group of related buildings. 
3-2.13.  CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation, profession or trade customarily carried on by an occupant in a dwelling unit as a secondary use which is clearly incidental to the dwelling unit for residential purposes. 
3-2.14.  DAY NURSERY: Any agency, institution, center, home, nursery, nursery school, kindergarten, play school, or other place, however styled and whether operated under public auspices, as a private business, or by an established religious denomination, in which are received for temporary custodial care apart from their parents, part of the day or all of the day or night, and upon any number of successive days, one (1) or more children not related to the persons providing such temporary custodial care. 
3-2.15.  DRIVE-IN EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT: Any eating or drinking establishment which, by its structural design, site characteristics or manner of food service encourages consumption of food or beverages in automobiles on the premises or upon public streets adjacent thereto. 
3-2.16.  DWELLING: A building or portion thereof arranged and designed to provide living facilities for one (1) or more families. 
3-2.17.  DWELLING UNIT: One (1) or more rooms designed as a unit to provide complete housekeeping facilities for one (1) day. 
3-2.18.  SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A detached building containing one (1) dwelling unit only. 
3-2.19.  TWO-FAMILY DWELLING: A detached building containing two (2) dwelling units only. 
3-2.20.  MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING: A detached building containing three (3) or more dwelling units. 
3-2.21.  FAMILY: An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, or a group of not more than five (5) persons who need not be related by blood or marriage. 
3-2.22.  FLOOR AREA, RESIDENTIAL: The gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a dwelling, exclusive of carport, garages, basement, storage areas with only outside access and open porches, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls of a building. 
3-2.23.  GROUP COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENTS: A single lot containing more than one (1) building used for commercial or industrial purposes and all the structures thereon. 
3-2.24.  GROUP HOUSING PROJECT: A single lot of record upon which is erected more than one (1) building containing dwelling units, and all the structures thereon; or a single lot upon which is erected a single structure designed to contain more than four (4) dwelling units on the first floor level thereof or designed to contain more than eight (8) dwelling units throughout; except that high rise apartments are not defined as group housing developments. 
3-2.25.  HEIGHT OF BUILDING: The vertical distance measured from the mean finished ground level adjoining the building to the highest point of the roof, excluding spires, belfries, cupolas, chimneys, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, elevator housing, mechanical equipment or other such structures placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2007) 
3-2.26.  HIGH RISE APARTMENT: Any building which contains not less than twenty (20) dwelling units and exceeds five (5) stories or fifty (50) feet in height. 
3-2.27.  JUNK, SALVAGE, SCRAP, OR WRECKING YARDS: Any use involving storage or processing of inoperable, unused, dismantled, or wrecked vehicles, equipment, or machinery or the storage or processing of scrap metal, waste paper, rags, food processing wastes, construction wastes, industrial waste, secondhand building materials, or other scrap, salvage, waste, or junk materials. 
3-2.27.5.  LIVE/WORK SPACE: A building or spaces within a building used jointly for commercial and residential purposes where the residential use of the space is secondary or accessory to the primary use as a place of work. 
3-2.28.  LOT OF RECORD: An area of land clearly defined by plat or by metes and bounds description recorded in the register of Mesne Conveyances of Lexington County, Saluda County or Aiken County. 
3-2.29.  LOT FRONTAGE: The front of the interior lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage and yards shall be provided upon that basis. The phrase "street frontage" shall be interpreted to have the same meaning as the phrase "lot frontage." 
3-2.30.  LOT, CORNER: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost point of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot (or an extension of the lot where it has been rounded by a street radius) meets at an interior angle of less than one hundred and thirty-five (135) degrees. 
3-2.31.  LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot, with only one (1) frontage on a street. 
3-2.32.  LOT, REVERSED FRONTAGE: A lot which is at right angles, or approximately right angles to the general pattern in the area involved. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot or an interior lot or rarely, a through lot. 
3-2.33.  LOT, THROUGH: A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one (1) street other than an alley. Through lots with frontage on two (2) streets may be referred to as double frontage lots. 
3-2.34.  LOT, WIDTH: The distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the required front yard; provided, however, that width between side lot lines at their foremost points (where they intersect with the street line) shall not be less than eighty (80) percent of the required lot width; in the case of lots fronting on a cul-de-sac, the width between side lot lines at their foremost points shall not be less than thirty (30) feet. 
3-2.35.  MANUFACTURED HOME: A transportable dwelling unit over fifty (50) feet in length and twelve (12) or more feet in width, designed without a permanent foundation, capable of supporting year-round occupancy, and which may be joined into one unit at the final site of occupancy. The house must be permanently attached to the ground once moved to its site of occupancy and all transportable features used to move the house to the site of occupancy must be removed. 
3-2.36.  MOBILE HOME: A movable or portable unit fifty (50) feet or less in length and less than twelve (12) feet in width, constructed to be towed on its own chassis, designed without a permanent foundation, capable of supporting year-round occupancy, which may include one (1) or more components that can be retracted for towing purposes and subsequently expanded, or which may consists of two (2) or more unites separately towable but designed to be joined into one (1) integral unit. A mobile home may or may not be permanently attached to the ground and its transport features may or may not be removed. 
3-2.37.  MOBILE HOME PARK: A lot used, designed, or intended to be used for the purpose of supplying parking space for one (1) or more occupied mobile homes and which includes buildings, structures, vehicles, or enclosures used or intended to be used as a part of such mobile home park. Sales or storage lots for unoccupied mobile homes are not considered to be mobile home parks. 
3-2.38.  NONCONFORMING: A term applied to lots, structures, uses of land or structures, and characteristics of use of land or structures which were lawful before the passage of the amendment of this Ordinance, but which are prohibited by this Ordinance or which are not in compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
3-2.39.  PARK: An area or facility intended to be used for recreation, exercise, sports, or similar activities, or an area intended to enhance the enjoyment of natural features or natural beauty, but specifically excluding commercially operated amusement parks. 
3-2.40.  PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET: An area adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly related access to a public street arranged so that no maneuvering incidental to parking shall be on any public street and so that an automobile may be parked or unparked therein without moving any other automobile. 
3-2.41.  PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE: A structure (or building) having significant or primary uses and justifying its own utilization (such as a dwelling or office building) as contrasted to accessory structures which are incidental or subordinate to primary structures and do not alone justify their utilization (such as a tool shed or auto garage used in conjunction with a dwelling). Certain structures may be either principal or accessory depending on utilization, such as a parking garage as an accessory structure to a high rise apartment or as a principal structure when operated commercially in a business area. 
3-2.42.  PRINCIPAL USE: The significant or primary activity carried out within a structure or upon land (such as retail sales within a store or occupancy of a dwelling unit as a residence) as contrasted to accessory uses which are incidental or subordinate to primary uses (such as sale of soft drinks at an automobile service station). Certain uses may be either principal or accessory, depending upon their relationship with other uses, as for example a newsstand as an accessory use within a hotel or as a principal use within a separate structure. 
3-2.43.  PUBLIC DRINKING PLACE: An establishment engaged in the retail sale of drinks, such as beer, ale, wine, liquor and other alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises, and where the sale of food amounts to less than fifty (50) percent of the total receipts of such establishment. 
3-2.44.  RESIDENCE: Same as "Dwelling Unit." 
3-2.45.  ROOMING AND BOARDING HOUSES: Any dwelling, other than a hotel or motel, in which one or more persons who are not members of the owner's or operator's family are housed or lodged in rooms used or intended to be used for living and sleeping but not for cooking or eating purposes, for compensation, with or without meals being provided. Any dwelling in which such accommodations are offered in ten (10) or more rooms shall be considered to be a hotel or motel. 
3-2.46.  SALVAGE YARD: Same as "Junk Yard." 
3-2.47.  SCRAP YARD: Same as "Junk Yard." 
3-2.48.  SETBACK LINE: The setback line is the same as the depth or width of any required yard. Note that such line defines the minimum distance between any structure and an adjacent lot boundary and is not necessarily the same as the building line, which is the distance between the actual structure and an adjacent lot boundary. 
3-2.49.  SIGN: Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not on the premises on which the device is located, with certain exceptions as enumerated in [Article] 9. 
3-2.50.  SIGN, ADVERTISING: Any sign which relates in its subject matter to products, accommodations, services, or activities sold or offered elsewhere other than upon the premises on which such sign is located, and as further defined in [Article] 9. 
3-2.51.  SIGN, BUSINESS: Any sign which relates in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located or to products, accommodations, services, or activities offered, sold, or engaged in on the premises, and as further defined in [Article] 9. 
3-2.52.  SIGN, OTHER TERMS RELATED THERETO: Additional terms related to signs and the regulation thereof are defined in [Article] 9, including: 
Display Surface Area. 
Marquee. 
Sign Copy. 
Freestanding Sign. 
Mobile Sign. 
Portable Sign. 
Projecting Sign. 
Wall Sign. 
3-2.53.  SOLAR COLLECTOR: A device, or combination of devices, structure, or part of a device or structure that transforms direct solar energy into thermal, chemical, or electrical energy and that contributes significantly to that structure's energy supply. 
3-2.54.  SOLAR ENERGY: Radiant energy (direct, diffused, and reflected) received from the sun. 
3-2.55.  SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A complete design or assembly consisting of a solar energy collector, and energy storage facility (where used), and components for the distribution of transformed energy (to the extent that they cannot be used jointly with a conventional energy system). Passive solar energy systems are included in this definition but not to the extent that they fulfill other functions such as structural and recreational. Passive solar systems are those that use natural and architectural components to collect and store solar energy without using any external mechanical power. 
3-2.56.  STREET: A public thoroughfare designed to provide the principal means of access to abutting property, or designed to serve as a roadway for vehicular travel, or both, but excluding alleys. 
3-2.57.  STREET LINE: The dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street right-of-way. 
3-2.58.  STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected including signs, the use of which requires location on the ground, or attachment to something having location on the ground. 
3-2.59.  TRAVEL OR CAMPING VEHICLE: A vehicular portable structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel or recreational use, not exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in length. 
3-2.60.  YARD: An open or unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
3-2.61.  YARD, FRONT: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the street or road and the front line of the building. 
3-2.62.  YARD, REAR: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the street or road and the front line of the lot and the rear line of the building. 
3-2.63.  YARD, SIDE: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002; Ord. of 9-9-2013) 
[ARTICLE] 4. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

4-1. - DIVISION OF AREA INTO DISTRICTS. 
    For the purposes of this Ordinance, the area described in Article 2 hereof is divided into eight (8) districts as follows: 
District Description R-1 Residential, Single-Family R-1A Manufactured Home District R-2 Residential, General R-3 Residential, Multi-Family C-1 Commercial, General C-2 Commercial, Office and Institutional I-1 Industrial PDD Planned Development District  
4-2. - ZONING MAP AND DISTRICT BOUNDARIES. 
    The boundaries of the districts listed in Section 4-1 are hereby established as shown on the map entitled "Zoning Map of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, South Carolina," dated as of the effective date of this Ordinance or any subsequent major amendments thereto. The Zoning Map described above is made a part of this Ordinance. An official copy of the Zoning Map shall be kept on file in the Office of the Zoning Administrator. 
4-3. - RULES FOR DETERMINING BOUNDARIES. 
4-3.1.  Where reasonable uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the Zoning Administrator shall decide the location of said boundaries, and in so doing shall be guided by the following rules: 
4-3.2.  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams, railroads, streets or highways, or street, highway or railroad right-of-way lines, then such center lines or right-of-way line shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
4-3.3.  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. 
4-3.4.  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the center lines of streets, highways or railroads, or rights-of-way of same, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and such district therefrom as indicated on the Zoning Map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on said Zoning Map. 
4-3.5.  Where a district boundary line as appearing on the Zoning Map divides a lot in single ownership at the time of this enactment, the district requirements for the least restricted portion of such lot shall be deemed to apply to the whole thereof, provided that such extensions shall not include any part of such a lot more than one hundred (100) feet beyond the district boundary line. 
4-3.6.  The word "contiguous" as applied to lots or districts shall be interpreted to mean sharing a common boundary of ten (10) feet or more. 
[ARTICLE] 5. - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 
    The regulations set by this Ordinance within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, except as hereinafter provided. 

5-1. - ZONING AFFECTS EYERY BUILDING AND USE. 
    No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
5-2. - HEIGHT AND DENSITY. 
    No building or other structure shall hereafter be created or altered: 
5-2.1.  To exceed the height; or 
5-2.2.  To house a greater number of families or occupy a smaller lot area per family or occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or 
5-2.3.  To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein required; or in any other manner be created or altered to be contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance. 
5-2.4.  If proposed solar or wind energy system exceeds the height limits imposed in a zoning district, the applicant may seek relief by requesting a variance from the Zoning Board of Appeal. The Zoning Board of Appeal may grant a height variance if the proposed facilities do not infringe the solar skyspace of adjoining structures. For purposes of this ordinance, solar skyspace is the space between a solar energy collector or windmills and the sun which must be free of obstructions that shade the collector to an extent which precludes its cost effective operations. 
5-3. - YARD SERVICE TO ONE BUILDING. 
    No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this Ordinance shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building. 
5-4. - ONE PRINCIPAL BUILDING TO A RESIDENTIAL LOT. 
    Only one (1) principal building and its customary accessory buildings may hereinafter be erected on any lot zoned residential except as otherwise provided by this Ordinance (see Section 8-1 for exceptions permitting Group Housing Projects). 
5-5. - REDUCTION OF LOT AREA. 
    No lot, even though it may consist of one (1) or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in size so that the lot width or depth, front, side or rear yard, lot area per family, or other requirements of this Ordinance, are not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for public purposes. 
5-6. - INSPECTION OF REQUIRED BUFFERS. 
    In the event a screen, wall, fence, planted dividing strip, or any other type of buffer is required by this Ordinance for any use or is required by the Zoning Board of Appeal, such screen, wall, et cetera, shall be subjected to periodic inspections by the Zoning Administrator to determine that such required walls, fences, etc., are being properly maintained in a neat and orderly appearance. Failure to maintain such required walls, fences, etc., to an acceptable standard shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance. 
5-7. - SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS. 
    Existing uses which by terms of this ordinance would be permissible only as special exceptions are hereby declared existing, conforming uses requiring no further action. Any use for which a special exception may be granted as provided in this ordinance, in any district in which such use is provisionally permitted, shall be considered a conforming use once approval is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeal. 
5-8. - [ADMINISTRATOR AUTHORITY AND PENDING ORDINANCES.] 
    The Zoning Administrator has the authority to refuse a permit for a use which is repugnant to the terms of a proposed zoning ordinance or amendment pending at the time of application for a permit. An ordinance is legally pending when the governing body has resolved to consider a particular scheme of rezoning and has advertised to the public its intention to hold public hearings on the subject. 
(Ord. of xx-xx-xxxx) 
[ARTICLE] 6. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 

6-1. - CONTINUANCE OF NON-CONFORMING USES. 
    The lawful use of any building or structure or land or off-premises advertising sign existing at the time of the enactment or subsequent amendment to this Ordinance may be continued (with the exception of those uses listed in Section 6-2) subject to the restrictions contained in this Ordinance even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this Ordinance except that the nonconforming structure or use shall not be: 
6-1.1.  Changed to Another Nonconforming Use: A nonconforming use, structure or characteristic of use shall not be changed to any other nonconforming use, structure, or characteristic of use unless the Zoning Board of Appeal finds that the proposed use, structures, or characteristic of use is equally or more in character with the uses permitted in the district, in which case the Zoning Board of Appeal may permit such change by majority vote. In permitting such change, the Zoning Board of Appeal may require appropriate conditions and safe guards in accord with the purpose of this Ordinance; 
6-1.2.  Torn down and rebuilt as non-conforming use; 
6-1.3.  Extended or enlarged except in conformity with this Ordinance; 
6-1.4.  Re-established after vacancy or discontinuance for one (1) year; 
6-1.5.  Rebuilt, altered, or repaired, if damaged to an extent that these costs exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the fair market value of the structure. Fair market value will be determined from the tax records of Lexington, Saluda, or Aiken Counties; provided, however, this provision shall not apply to owner-occupied dwellings. Any and all repairs or alterations must be in conformity with this Ordinance; or 
6-1.6.  Repaired or altered to an extent that the cost of repair or alteration, made in any twelve (12) consecutive months, exceeds 10% of the current replacement cost of the building. Work may be done on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-load bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, provided that the cubic content of the building, as it existed at the effective date of this Ordinance shall not be increased and that the cost and time limits set by this section are not exceeded. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002; Ord. of 5-8-2006) 
6-2. - DISCONTINUANCE OF NON-CONFORMING USES. 
    The following non-conforming uses of land shall be discontinues or made to conform with the use provisions of this Ordinance within the following periods of time from the date of adoption of this ordinance or subsequent amendments affecting a non-conforming use. 
6-2.1.  Non-conforming outdoor on-premises advertising signs - five years. 
6-2.2.  A non-conforming use of land involving no buildings other than accessory buildings - two (2) years; and 
6-2.3.  Display of merchandise for sale in required front yards - one (1) year. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2006) 
6-3. - TEMPORARY NON-CONFORMING USES. 
    A temporary use permit may be issued by the Zoning Administrator for an appropriate period of time not to exceed twelve (12) month increments for non-conforming buildings, structures or uses incidental to building construction or land development or deemed to be beneficial, provided that the owner of such temporary non-conforming use agrees to remove the temporary nonconforming use upon expiration of the permit. 
6-4. - LOTS OF RECORD. 
6-4.1.  Single Lots: Where the owner of a lot at the time of adoption of this Ordinance or his successor in title thereto does not own sufficient land to enable him to conform to the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, such lot may be used as a building site for a single-family residence in a district where residences are permitted. 
6-4.2.  Adjoining Lots: If two or more adjoining lots with continuous frontage are in a continuous ownership at any time after the adoption of this Ordinance and such lots individually are too small to meet the yard, width and area requirements of the district in which they are located, such groups of lots shall be considered as a single lot or several lots of minimum permitted size and the lot or lots in one ownership shall be subject to the requirements of this Ordinance. 
6-5. - ANNEXED PROPERTY. 
6-5.1.  Designation of Zoning Classification: 
(a)  When annexation is accomplished by ordinance, the Town Council, after receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission, shall specify an interim zoning district classification or classifications to become effective upon the effective date of the annexation. 
(b)  When annexation is accomplished by election or referendum, the annexed area shall be classified R-1, with such zoning district classification effective upon the effective date of the annexation. 
6-5.2.  Amendment proceedings to be Initiated: Immediately after the effective date of such annexation the Zoning Administrator shall initiate zoning amendment proceedings as specified by Article 12 for purposes of establishing or confirming appropriate zoning classifications for such annexed area, and the public hearing therefor shall be scheduled to be held not more than sixty (60) days after the effective date of annexation, further provided that the proposal to be brought before such hearing may either be to retain all such annexed area in the classification or classifications originally designated to be effective upon annexation or to change all or part of such annexed area to classifications other than those originally designated. 
6-6. - BUILDINGS AND LOTS TO HAVE ACCESS. 
    Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot which has access to a public street. 
(Ord. of xx-xx-xxxx) 
6-7. - STRUCTURES IN REQUIRED YARDS. 
    The general definition of "yards" set forth in Section 3-2.59 states that yards are unoccupied and unobstructed by a structure or portion of a structure from thirty (30) inches above the finished grade level of the ground upward. Structures are not defined to include minor landscaping features such as ornamental pools, bird baths, paved surfaces, walkways, flagpoles and mailboxes. 
6-7.1.  Steps and open porches without roofs shall be allowed in any required yard. 
6-7.2.  Screening walls and fences over thirty (30) inches in height that substantially impeded vision shall not be permitted in a required yard. However, screening walls and fences not over eight (8) feet in height are permitted outright in side and rear yards, provided no screening wall or fence in excess of six (6) feet is permitted within six (6) feet of a residential structure on adjacent property. 
6-7.3.  Eaves, cornices, gutters, and other minor architectural features projecting less than eighteen (18) inches from the main portion of a building shall be allowed to project into any yard. 
6-7.4.  In C-2 and I-1 districts, structures and devices incidental to servicing, and roofs over such structures and devices are permitted within required front yards, provided that they do not constitute a substantial impediment to visibility across such yards which would contribute to the creation of traffic hazards, and further provided that servicing operations in connection therewith can be conducted so as not to interfere with public use of adjacent sidewalks or public streets. 
6-7.5.  No fence or wall shall be permitted in any required front yard which substantially impedes vision above a height of thirty (30) inches, except as provided for C-2 and I-1 districts in Section 6-7.4 above. 
6-7.6.  Retaining walls in excess of thirty (30) inches in height may be permitted as a special exception in any yard; however, retaining walls that do not project more than thirty (30) inches above the grade level at the property lines of adjoining lots are permitted outright. 
6-7.7.  Signs are permitted to encroach upon required yards in certain instances as set forth in [Article] 9 "Regulation of Signs." 
6-7.8.  Screening between commercial or industrial uses and lots zoned residentially, as required by Section 6-13 of this Ordinance. 
6-7.9.  Also permitted to project into required yards from a principal or accessory structure is apparatus needed for the operation of active and passive solar energy systems, including but not limited to overhangs, moveable insulating walls and roofs, detached solar collectors, reflectors and piping. Such solar energy system related projections shall not restrict vehicle driver or pedestrian visibility. 
6-7.10.  Signs in Required Yards: See [Article] 9. 
6-7.11.  Fence must be consistent with Lexington County Stormwater Management Ordinance, which is it can not cause flooding, erosion or noncompliance with water quality standards. 
(Ord. of xx-xx-xxxx; Ord. of 9-10-2012) 
6-8. - VISION CLEARANCE. 
    In any residential district on any corner lot, no fence, sign or other structure, planting, or other obstruction to vision between two and one-half (21/2) and ten (10) feet above the established street grades shall be erected or maintained within the line connecting points on the street lot line twenty (20) feet distant from the corner. 
6-9. - HEIGHT LIMITS. 
    The height limitations of this Ordinance shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy, monuments, water towers, observation towers, electrical transmission towers, television towers, radio towers, conveyors, flag poles, chimneys, masts, aerials and similar structures. (For requirements relating to communication towers see section 6-18.) 
6-10. - FRONT-YARD SETBACKS FOR DWELLINGS. 
    The setback requirements of this Ordinance for dwellings shall not apply to any lot where the average existing setback line on lots located wholly or in part within one hundred (100) feet on each side of such lot, within the same block and zoning district and fronting on the same side of the street or road as such lot is less than the minimum setback required. In such cases the setback on such lots may be less than the required setback, but not less than the average setbacks on the aforementioned lots, and in no case less than ten (10) feet from the street or road right-of-way. 
6-11. - YARD REQUIREMENTS-EXISTING BUILDINGS. 
    The minimum yard requirements set forth in this ordinance shall not be construed as prohibiting the conversion of an existing building which does not meet said yard requirements to another permitted use, so long as no further encroachment is made into the existing yards. 
6-12. - SIDE AND REAR-YARD SETBACKS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. 
    Accessory structures and accessory uses shall not be permitted in the side and rear-yard setbacks for a distance of four (4) feet from the property line for residential districts. Dumpsters or other garbage and trash disposal facilities shall not be permitted in the side and rear-yard setbacks for a distance of ten (10) feet from the property line. 
(Ord. of 10-5-1998) 
6-13. - REQUIRED BUFFER BETWEEN COMMERCIAL AND RESIDENTIAL LOTS. 
    When the rear or side lot line of a lot used for commercial or industrial purposes adjoins the rear or side lot line of a lot used for residential purposes, a visual screen or buffer shall be provided at the rear or side lot used for commercial purposes. This buffer may consist of vegetative screening designed to be at least four (4) feet deep and five (5) feet tall or a solid wall at least five (5) feet tall, or an equivalent buffer as authorized by the zoning administrator. 
6-14. - ORIENTATION OF REQUIRED YARDS. 
6-14.1.  Street Frontage: No principal building shall be erected on any lot which does not have immediate frontage on at least one (1) public street or road for a distance of not less than twenty (20) feet. 
6-14.2.  Corner Lots: Minimum side yards for corner lots in residential districts shall meet the minimum front yard requirements on the sides adjacent to a street. 
6-14.3.  Double Frontage Lots: On each double-frontage lot, front yard requirements, as stated in [Section] 6-11, shall be observed for principal and/or accessory buildings on each street. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002) 
6-15. - LOT COVERAGE. 
    The area of the lot, which when viewed directly from above, would be covered by all principal accessory buildings and structures. A portion of the principal of accessory building, or any terrace, balcony, breezeway, porch or portions thereof, or any solar collection device or related apparatus, not included as floor area of the building, by definition shall not be included in computing lot coverage. 
6-16. - OFF-STREET AUTOMOBILE PARKING AND STORAGE. 
    Off-street automobile parking and storage space shall be provided on every lot on which any of the uses mentioned in this section are hereafter established. Such automobile parking or storage space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley and shall be equal in area to at least the minimum requirements for the specific uses as set forth below. Each automobile parking space, along with its necessary maneuvering space, shall be in accordance with the requirements shown on Page 20-A. If the required automobile parking or storage space cannot be provided on the same lot on which the principal use is located, the Zoning Board of Appeal may permit such space to be provided on other off-street property provided such space is within five hundred (500) feet of such principal use. Such spaces shall be associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. All off-street automobile parking and storage space except for single two-family residential uses shall be so arranged that vehicles will not be required to back onto a public street, road, or highway when leaving the premises. Off-street automobile parking and storage spaces shall be equal in number to at least the minimum requirements for the specific uses set forth below: 
6-16.1.  Auto Sales and Repair: One (1) space for each two hundred and fifty (250) square feet of auto repair or maintenance space; 
6-16.2.  Churches, Synagogues, or Other Places of Worship: One (1) space for each four (4) seats in the main assembly room or sanctuary; 
6-16.3.  Filling Stations: Automobile service stations providing vehicle fuel, oil and service, three (3) spaces for each grease rack or similar facility, plus (1) space for each employee on the shift with the highest employment; 
6-16.4.  Hospitals, Nursing Homes, Sanitariums, or Similar Institutions: One (1) space for each two (2) beds intended for patients, not including bassinets, plus one (1) space for each three (3) employees on the shift with highest employment; 
6-16.5.  Industries; One (1) space for each three (3) employees on the shift with highest employment; 
6-16.6.  Mortuaries or Funeral Parlors: One (1) space for each four (4) seats in the chapel, one (1) additional space for each two (2) employees, one (1) additional space for each resident family, and one (1) additional space for each funeral vehicle; 
6-16.7.  Motels, Hotels, Tourist Homes, Rooming and Boarding Houses: One (1) space for each room to be let, plus one (1) space for each two (2) employees on the shift with highest employment; 
6-16.8.  Offices, Including Banks: One (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area; 
6-16.9.  Places of Public Assembly, Fraternal Organizations: One (1) space for each four (4) seats of maximum seating capacity in the main assembly room; 
6-16.10.  Restaurants or Similar Eating Establishments: One (1) space for each four (4) seats provided for patron use and one (1) additional space for each two (2) employees on the shift with highest employment; 
6-16.11.  Residences: Single-family, duplex, and multi-family: Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit; 
6-16.12.  Retail and Service Businesses: One (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross sales floor area; 
6-16.13.  Schools, Public and Private: One (1) space for each four (4) seats in the main auditorium or assembly room; 
6-16.14.  Shopping Centers: One (1) space for each two-hundred and fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area; 
6-16.15.  Wholesaling and Warehousing: One (1) space for each three (3) employees on the shift with the highest employment. 
(Ord. of xx-xx-xxxx) 
6-17. - OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE. 
    Every building or structure used for business, trade or industry shall provide space as indicated herein for the loading and unloading of vehicles off a street or public alley. Such space shall have access to an alley or to a street. Such space shall be so arranged that no vehicle is required to back onto a public street, road or highway in order to leave the premises. 
6-17.1.  Retail Business and Service: One (1) space ten (10) feet by twenty-five (25) feet for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of total floor area or fraction thereof; 
6-17.2.  Wholesale and Industry: One (1) space ten (10) feet by fifty (50) feet for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area plus one (1) additional space for each sixty thousand (60,000) additional square feet of total floor area or fraction thereof; 
6-17.3.  Bus and Truck Terminals: Sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or to be loading or unloading at the terminal at any one time. 
6-18. - COMMUNICATION TOWERS. 
    Communication towers are permitted in those districts where utility substations are listed as a permitted principal use or special exception. 
6-18.1.  At the time of the zoning permit application for a free standing tower, satisfactory evidence shall be submitted that alternative towers, buildings, or other structures do not exist within the applicant's tower site search area that are structurally capable of supporting the intended antenna or meeting the applicant's necessary height criteria, or provide a location free of interference from other communication towers. 
6-18.2.  Communications towers shall have a maximum height of 300 feet, except that for towers on buildings, the maximum height shall be 20 feet above the roofline of buildings 40 feet or less in height, and 40 feet above the roofline of buildings 50 feet in height or greater. 
6-18.3.  The minimum setback from any residential zoning district shall be as follows: 
(a)  For communication towers one hundred fifty (150) feet in height or less, the setback shall be one foot per one foot of tower height, as measured from the base of the tower. 
(b)  For communication towers greater than one hundred fifty (150) feet in height, the setback shall be one foot per one foot of tower height, as measured from the base of the tower. 
6-18.4.  The location of communication towers within residential zoning districts shall be such that any tower cannot be less than 1000 feet from any other communication tower, unless on the same property. 
6-18.5.  Landscaping and fencing shall be provided such that: 
(a)  An eight (8) foot high fence shall be provided around the tower and any associated buildings. 
(b)  Around the base of the tower, outside of the fencing, at least one row of evergreen shrubs capable of forming a continuous hedge at least five feet in height shall be provided, with individual plantings spaced not more than five feet apart. 
6-18.6.  Towers shall be illuminated only to the extent required by applicable federal or state statute or regulation. 
6-18.7.  Advertising signage is not permitted. 
6-18.8.  A tower that is no longer used for communication purposes must be removed within 120 days of the date it is taken out of service. 
6-18.9.  A zoning permit is required to be issued prior to the beginning of any site work or tower construction. 
(Ord. of xx-xx-xxxx) 
[ARTICLE] 7. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

7-1. - R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. 
7-1.1.  PURPOSE. 
To establish low-density single-family residential district and to protect property in the district from the depreciating effects of incompatible land uses. 
7-1.2.  PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES. 
a.  Single-family dwellings located on individual lots; 
b.  Churches, including Sunday School or educational buildings and other places of worship; 
d.  Home occupations subject to the provisions of Section 8-5; 
7-1.3.  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. 
a.  Noncommercial greenhouses and plant nurseries, private garages, garden sheds, and tool houses. 
b.  Private swimming pools, provided that those built after the adoption of this ordinance are surrounded by a minimum six (6) foot tall enclosed fenced area. 
c.  Solar energy systems. 
d.  Garage sales subject to the provisions of [Section] 8-8. 
e.  Satellite dish antennae subject to the requirements of Section 8-10. 
g.  Other structures and uses which: 
i.  Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses and structures. 
ii.  Do not involve the conduct of trade on the premises other than permitted as a principal use. 
iii.  Are located on the same lot as the permitted principal use or structure, or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership. 
iv.  Are not likely to attract visitors in larger numbers than would be expected in the neighborhood. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002; Ord. of xx-xx-xxxx) 
7-1.4.  PERMITTED SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS. 
    After public notice and hearing, the Board of Appeals may permit as special exception: 
a.  Schools; 
b.  Public and semi-public recreational facilities and uses not operated for profit, which may include parks, playgrounds, country clubs, community centers, neighborhood buildings; 
c.  Nursing or convalescent homes; 
d.  Public utilities, transformer stations, water tanks and towers, electrical transmission lines and towers, communication towers, telephone exchanges with no vehicles or equipment stored on the premises, subject to the height requirements of Section 6-9; 
e.  Private, non-profit clubs and fraternal lodges; 
f.  Hospitals and medical treatment facilities; 
g.  Governmental buildings; 
h.  Cluster housing developments subject to the terms of Section 8-6; 
i.  Group housing projects containing single-family dwellings only, subject to the provisions of Section 8-1; 
j.  Adult or child day care centers; 
k.  Cemeteries; 
l.  Agricultural and forestry uses; 
m.  Reuse of Commercial Building (see section 8-12 under "special provisions"). 
(Ord. of xx-xx-xxxx) 
7-1.5.  PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES. 
a.  Manufacturing. 
b.  Storage or parking of commercial or industrial vehicles in excess of seventy-two (72) hours. 
c.  Storage of building materials except in connection with active construction activities on the premises. 
d.  Storage or use of mobile homes. 
e.  Outdoor storage of flammable liquids. 
f.  Sexually oriented businesses. 
7-1.6.  MINIMUM LOT AREA AND WIDTH. 
    Minimum lot area for all uses shall be 10,000 square feet, and the minimum lot width for all uses shall be 70 feet. 
7-1.7.  MINIMUM SETBACK REQUIREMENTS. 
    The depth of front and rear setbacks, and the width of side setbacks shall be as follows for single family detached dwellings and for other permitted or permissible structures, unless otherwise specified: 
(1)  Front Yard: 30 feet. 
(2)  Side Yard: 8 feet. 
(3)  Rear Yard: 25 feet. 
7-1.8.  MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE BY ALL BUILDINGS. 
    All permitted and permissible buildings and structures and their accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed a total of 25% lot coverage. 
7-1.9.  HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES. 
    No portion of any building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, nor may accessory structures exceed the height of the principal structure. 
7-1.10.  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS. 
    Off-street parking and loading requirements are set forth in Article 6. 
7-1.11.  SIGNS. 
    Signs are permitted in the R-1 District as in accordance with provisions of Article 9. 
7-2. - R-1A, SINGLE-FAMILY AND MANUFACTURED HOUSING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. 
7-2.1.  PURPOSE. 
    To establish low-density single-family residential district and to protect property in the district from the depreciating effects of incompatible land uses. 
7-2.2.  PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES. 
a.  Single-family dwellings located on individual lots; 
b.  Churches, including Sunday School or educational buildings and other places of worship; 
d.  Home occupations subject to the provisions of Section 8-5; 
e.  Manufactured homes on individual lots. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002) 
7-2.3.  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. 
a.  Noncommercial greenhouses and plant nurseries, private garages, garden sheds, and tool houses. 
b.  Private swimming pools, provided that those built after the adoption of this ordinance are surrounded by a minimum six (6) foot tall enclosed fenced area. 
c.  Solar energy systems. 
d.  Garage sales subject to the provisions of Article 8-8. 
e.  Satellite dish antennae subject to the requirements of Section 8-10. 
g.  Other structures and uses which: 
i.  Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses and structures. 
ii.  Do not involve the conduct of trade on the premises other than permitted as a principal use. 
iii.  Are located on the same lot as the permitted principal use or structure, or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership. 
iv.  Are not likely to attract visitors in larger numbers than would be expected in the neighborhood. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002; Ord. of xx-xx-xxxx) 
7-2.4.  PERMITTED SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS. 
    After public notice and hearing, the Board of Appeals may permit as special exceptions: 
a.  Schools; 
b.  Public and semi-public recreational facilities and uses not operated for profit, which may include parks, playgrounds, country clubs, community centers, neighborhood buildings; 
c.  Nursing or convalescent homes; 
d.  Public utilities, transformer stations, water tanks and towers, electrical transmission lines and towers, communication towers, telephone exchanges with no vehicles or equipment stored on the premises, subject to the height requirements of Section 6-9; 
e.  Private, non-profit clubs and fraternal organizations; 
f.  Hospitals and medical treatment facilities; 
g.  Governmental buildings 
h.  Cluster housing developments subject to the terms of Section 8-6; 
i.  Group housing projects containing single-family dwellings only, subject to the provisions of Section 8-1; 
j.  Adult or child day care centers; 
k.  Cemeteries; 
l.  Agricultural and forestry uses; 
m.  Reuse of Commercial Building (see section 8-12 under "special provisions"). 
(Ord. of xx-xx-xxxx) 
7-2.5.  PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES. 
a.  Manufacturing. 
b.  Storage or parking of commercial or industrial vehicles in excess of seventy-two (72) hours. 
c.  Storage of building materials except in connection with active construction activities on the premises. 
d.  Storage or use of mobile homes. 
e.  Outdoor storage of flammable liquids. 
f.  Sexually oriented businesses. 
7-2.6.  MINIMUM LOT AREA AND WIDTH. 
    Minimum lot area for all uses shall be 10,000 square feet, and the minimum lot width for all uses shall be 80 feet. 
7-2.7.  MINIMUM SETBACK REQUIREMENTS. 
    The depth of front and rear setbacks, and the width of side setbacks shall be as follows for single family detached dwellings and for other permitted or permissible structures, unless otherwise specified: 
(1)  Front Yard: 25 feet. 
(2)  Side Yard: 5 feet. 
(3)  Rear Yard: 20 feet. 
7-2.8.  MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE BY ALL BUILDINGS. 
    All permitted and permissible buildings and structures and their accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed a total of 25% lot coverage. 
7-2.9.  HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES. 
    No portion of any building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, nor may accessory structures exceed the height of the principal structure. 
7-2.10.  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS. 
    Off-street parking an loading requirements are set forth in Article 6. 
7-2.11.  SIGNS. 
    Signs are permitted in the R-1A District as in accordance with provisions of Article 9. 
7-3. - R-2, GENERAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. 
7-3.1.  PURPOSE. 
    To establish a medium-density residential district and to protect property in the district from the depreciating effects of incompatible land uses. 
7-3.2.  PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES. 
a.  Single-family and two-family dwellings on single lots or in group housing projects subject to the provisions of Section 8-1; 
b.  Churches, including Sunday School or educational buildings and other places of worship; 
c.  Home occupations subject to the provisions of Section 8-5; 
d.  Cluster housing developments subject to the terms of Section 8-6. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002) 
7-3.3.  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. 
a.  Noncommercial greenhouses and plant nurseries, private garages, garden sheds, and tool houses. 
b.  Private swimming pools, provided that those built after the adoption of this ordinance are surrounded by a minimum six (6) foot tall enclosed fenced area. 
c.  Solar energy systems. 
d.  Garage sales subject to the provisions of Article 8-8. 
e.  Satellite dish antennae subject to the requirements of Section 8-10. 
g.  Other structures and uses which: 
i.  Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses and structures. 
ii.  Do not involve the conduct of trade on the premises other than permitted as a principal use. 
iii.  Are located on the same lot as the permitted principal use or structure, or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership. 
iv.  Are not likely to attract visitors in larger numbers than would be expected in the neighborhood. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002; Ord. of xx-xx-xxxx) 
7-3.4.  PERMITTED SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS. 
    After public notice and hearing, the Board of Appeals may permit as special exceptions: 
a.  Schools; 
b.  Public and semi-public recreational facilities and uses not operated for profit, which may include parks, playgrounds, country clubs, community centers, neighborhood buildings; 
c.  Nursing or convalescent homes; 
d.  Public utilities, transformer stations, water tanks and towers, electrical transmission lines and towers, communication towers, telephone exchanges with no vehicles or equipment stored on the premises, subject to the height requirements of Sections 6-9; 
e.  Private, non-profit clubs and lodges; 
f.  Hospitals and medical treatment facilities; 
g.  Governmental buildings; 
h.  Adult or child day care centers; 
i.  Bed and Breakfast operations; 
j.  Cemeteries; 
k.  Reuse of Commercial Building (see section 8-12 under "special provisions"). 
(Ord. of xx-xx-xxxx) 
7-3.5.  PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES. 
a.  Manufacturing. 
b.  Storage or parking of commercial or industrial vehicles in excess of seventy-two (72) hours. 
c.  Storage of building materials except in connection with active construction activities on the premises. 
d.  Storage or use of mobile homes. 
e.  Outdoor storage of flammable liquids. 
f.  Sexually oriented businesses. 
7-3.6.  MINIMUM LOT AREA AND WIDTH. 
    Minimum lot area for the first unit shall be 6,000 square feet, and 2,000 square feet for each additional unit. Minimum lot width for all uses shall be 50 feet. 
7-3.7.  MINIMUM SETBACK REQUIREMENTS. 
    The depth of front and rear setbacks, and the width of side setbacks shall be as follows for single family detached dwellings and for other permitted or permissible structures, unless otherwise specified: 
(1)  Front Yard: 20 feet. 
(2)  Side Yard: 5 feet. 
(3)  Rear Yard: 20 feet. 
7-3.8.  MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE BY ALL BUILDINGS. 
    All permitted and permissible buildings and structures and their accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed a total of 40% lot coverage. 
7-3.9.  HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES. 
    No portion of any building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, nor may accessory structures exceed the height of the principal structure. 
7-3.10.  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS. 
    Off-street parking an loading requirements are set forth in Article 6. 
7-3.11.  SIGNS. 
    Signs are permitted in the R-2 District as in accordance with provisions of Article 9. 
7-4. - R-3 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. 
7-4.1.  PURPOSE. 
    To permit the compatible existence of all residential types; to ensure a healthful environment for families living in single-family, two-family, and multi-family structures by providing for adequate light and air, preventing undue overcrowding of land by buildings and other structures; to protect property in the district from the depreciating effects of incompatible land uses; and for other purposes. 
7-4.2.  PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES. 
a.  Single-family, two-family and multi-family dwellings on single lots or in group housing projects subject to the provisions of Section 8-1; 
b.  Churches, including Sunday school or educational buildings and other places of worship; 
c.  Home occupations subject to the provisions of Section 8-5; 
d.  Rooming and boarding houses; 
e.  High-rise buildings subject to the provisions of Section 8-3; 
f.  Cluster housing developments subject to the terms of Section 8-6; 
g.  Bed and Breakfast operations; 
h.  Mobile Home Parks according to the provisions of section 8-2. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002) 
7-4.3.  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. 
a.  Noncommercial greenhouses and plant nurseries, private garages, garden sheds, and tool houses. 
b.  Private swimming pools, provided that those built after the adoption of this ordinance are surrounded by a minimum six (6) foot tall enclosed fenced area. 
c.  Solar energy systems. 
d.  Garage sales subject to the provisions of [Section] 8-8. 
e.  Satellite dish antennae subject to the requirements of Section 8-10. 
g.  Other structures and uses which: 
i.  Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses and structures. 
ii.  Do not involve the conduct of trade on the premises other than permitted as a principal use. 
iii.  Are located on the same lot as the permitted principal use or structure, or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership. 
iv.  Are not likely to attract visitors in larger numbers than would be expected in the neighborhood. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002; Ord. of xx-xx-xxxx) 
7-4.4.  PERMITTED SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS. 
    After public notice and hearing, the Board of Appeals may permit as special exceptions: 
a.  Schools; 
b.  Public and semi-public recreational facilities and uses not operated for profit, which may include parks, playgrounds, country clubs, community centers, neighborhood buildings; 
c.  Nursing or convalescent homes; 
d.  Public utilities, transformer stations, water tanks and towers, electrical transmission lines and towers, communication towers, telephone exchanges with no vehicles or equipment stored on the premises, subject to the height requirements of Section 6-9; 
e.  Private, non-profit clubs and lodges; 
f.  Hospitals and medical treatment facilities; 
g.  Governmental buildings; 
h.  Adult or child day care centers; 
i.  Cemeteries; 
j.  Reuse of Commercial Building (see section 8-12 under "special provisions"); 
k.  Testing laboratories. 
(Ord. of xx-xx-xxxx; Ord. of 1-11-2016) 
7-4.5.  PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES. 
a.  Manufacturing. 
b.  Storage or parking of commercial or industrial vehicles in excess of seventy-two (72) hours. 
c.  Storage of building materials except in connection with active construction activities on the premises. 
d.  Storage or use of mobile homes. 
e.  Outdoor storage of flammable liquids. 
f.  Sexually oriented businesses. 
7-4.6.  MINIMUM LOT AREA AND WIDTH. 
    Minimum lot area for the first unit shall be 6,000 square feet, and 2,000 square feet for each additional unit. Minimum lot width for all uses shall be 50 feet. 
7-4.7.  MINIMUM SETBACK REQUIREMENTS. 
    The depth of front and rear setbacks, and the width of side setbacks shall be as follows for single family detached dwellings and for other permitted or permissible structures, unless otherwise specified: 
(1)  Front Yard: 20 feet. 
(2)  Side Yard: 5 feet. 
(3)  Rear Yard: 20 feet. 
7-4.8.  MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE BY ALL BUILDINGS. 
    All permitted and permissible buildings and structures and their accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed a total of 40% lot coverage. 
7-4.9.  HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES. 
    No portion of any building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, nor may accessory structures exceed the height of the principal structure. 
7-4.10.  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS. 
    Off-street parking an loading requirements are set forth in Article 6. 
7-4.11.  SIGNS. 
    Signs are permitted in the R-3 District as in accordance with provisions of Article 9. 
7-5. - C-1, GENERAL COMMERCIAL. 
7-5.1.  PURPOSE. 
a.  To provide a district for general commercial and related uses. 
b.  Commercial districts should have access from major traffic arteries; however, it is not the intent of this ordinance to encourage the development of long, narrow strips of commercial development fronting on major arteries, often referred to as "strip commercial" areas. Strip commercial development leads to the eventual formation of commercial slums, damages the traffic carrying capacity of streets, increases congestion, is often incompatible with adjacent residential uses, frequently leads to depreciation of property values in adjacent residential areas, encourages undue scatteration of commercial facilities to the inconvenience of the public, and creates disproportionate costs in the provision of governmental services. 
c.  Extensions of commercial zoning via amendments to this ordinance should be made principally for the provision of planned, unified commercial areas, and not in such a way that strip commercial areas are encouraged. Extension of commercial zoning should only be made after careful consideration of compatibility with adjacent uses, the need for additional commercial facilities, and whether or not other land is available which is already zoned for commercial use. 
7-5.2.  PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES. 
a.  Banks and other financial institutions; 
b.  Service establishments - personal, business, professional and repair; 
c.  Commercial recreational facilities and uses excepting video poker and other similar establishments; 
d.  Clubs, lodges, museums and related cultural establishments; 
e.  Restaurant establishments including drive-in facilities; 
f.  Retail establishments; 
g.  Wholesale establishments; 
h.  Hotels and motels; 
i.  Passenger Terminals 
j.  Offices - business, professional, governmental; 
k.  Public buildings and land uses; 
l.  Printing establishments; 
m.  T.V. and radio studios; 
n.  Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics; 
o.  Farm equipment sales and services; 
p.  Automobile servicing and repair; 
q.  Parking lots and garages; 
r.  High-rise buildings subject to the provisions of Section 8-3; 
s.  Public drinking places, subject to the following provisions: 
i.  Lots used as public drinking places shall not be located closer than six hundred (600) feet from any lot which contains a school or place of worship; 
ii.  The hours of operation shall be no later than 11:00 o'clock p.m. when such establishment is located within 600 feet of a residential zone; 
iii.  One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each fifty (50) square feet of gross floor area for public use; 
iv.  Adequate ingress and egress shall be provided; 
t.  Cemeteries; 
u.  Funeral homes. 
(Ord. of 8-11-1997; Ord. of 9-9-2002; Ord. of 1-14-2008) 
7-5.3.  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. 
    All use permitted in the C-2 Office and Institutional Commercial District, excluding the residential use, are permitted, in addition to the following: 
a.  Solar energy systems. 
b.  Garage sales subject to the provisions of Article 8-8. 
c.  Satellite dish antennae subject to the requirements of Section 8-10. 
d.  Home Occupations subject to the provisions of Article 8-5. 
e.  Other structures and uses which: 
i.  Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses and structures. 
ii.  Do not involve the conduct of trade on the premises other than permitted as a principal use. 
iii.  Are located on the same lot as the permitted principal use or structure, or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership. 
iv.  Are not likely to attract visitors in larger numbers than would be expected in the neighborhood. 
7-5.4.  PERMITTED SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS. 
a.  Dwelling unit(s), provided all following conditions are met: 
(1)  Dwelling unit(s) must be on a level above the grade level floor. 
(2)  Dwelling unit(s) must have access to a street as required by building and fire codes. 
b.  Wholesaling or distribution establishments. 
c.  Storage yards for permitted uses but not junk yards or recycling facilities. 
d.  Light manufacturing uses such as a bakery, dairy products processing, soft-drink bottling, dry cleaning plant, and electronic production. 
e.  Public utilities, transformer stations, water tanks and towers, electrical transmission lines and towers, communication towers, telephone exchanges with no vehicles or equipment stored on the premises, subject to the height requirements of Section 6-9. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2007) 
7-5.5.  PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES. 
a.  Any use other than as provided under "Permitted Principal Uses and structures" or "Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures," or as permitted in connection with "Special Exceptions." 
b.  Dwellings, except as provided under "Permitted Special Exceptions." 
c.  Any outside storage or new or used building materials, or for any scrap or salvage operations, or for storage or display of any scrap, salvage or second-hand materials. 
d.  Truck terminals and warehouses for storage of wares in connection with wholesale or distribution of operations; storage of distribution centers for bulk petroleum products. 
e.  Outdoor storage of flammable liquids. 
7-5.6.  MINIMUM LOT AREA AND WIDTH. 
    For all permitted or permissible uses and structures, no minimum lot area is required except as needed to meet other requirements herein. 
7-5.7.  MINIMUM SETBACK REQUIREMENTS. 
    The depth of front and rear setbacks, and the width of side setbacks shall be as follows for all permitted or permissible structures, unless otherwise specified: 
(1)  Front Yard: 20 feet. 
(2)  Side Yard: 3 feet.* 
* Note-No yard setback is required if building is constructed to lot line, otherwise the setback must be at least three (3) feet. 
(3)  Rear Yard: 15 feet. 
7-5.8.  MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE BY ALL BUILDINGS. 
    For all permitted or permissible uses and structures, no maximum lot coverage is required. 
7-5.9.  HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES. 
    No portion of any building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, nor may accessory structures exceed the height of the principal structure. 
7-5.10.  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS. 
    Off-street parking an loading requirements are set forth in Article 6. 
7-5.11.  SIGNS. 
    Signs are permitted in the C-1 District as in accordance with provisions of Article 9. 
7-5.12.  PROMENADE. 
    Definition of the Promenade includes: 
1.  U.S Highway #1 from Main Street in the Leesville District to Pine Street in the Batesburg District. 
2.  S.C Highway #23 from Main Street in the Leesville District to Pine Street in the Batesburg District. 
a.  These requirements apply to any C-1 properties located along the Promenade area as well as any properties transitioning to C-1. 
b.  Requirements: 
1.  As the town and promenade grow, sidewalks should be consistent in size with a design of brick ribbons and handicapped ramps at curb cuts with skid plats to provide safe pedestrian travel. New businesses, renovation projects, and refurbishing projects would adhere to the requirements. The Zoning Administrator would have the authority to enforce, alter or wave certain parts of these requirements. 
2.  Decorative streetlights consistent with current lights installed in the most recent streetscape project would be required. Electrical components and installation would be furnished by the property owner and/or SCE&G with the town supply the new streetlight and fixture a determining the location thereof. 
3.  A promenade society would be established to work with the town to promote and maintain the corridor. The society would be comprised of business owners and residence owners along the promenade, as well as persons interested in beautification of our town and making the promenade a scenic corridor. Promoting the area would include such things as historical markers or other points of interest to the community. The society would also coordinate with the Chamber of Commerce Merchants Association and the town to secure grants as a continuous work-in-progress to enhance the corridor. 
(Ord. of 5-10-2010) 
7-6. - C-2, OFFICE AND INSTITUTIONAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT. 
7-6.1.  PURPOSE. 
    This district is intended for areas undergoing transitions from residential to commercial uses and is intended to accomplish the transition with a minimum of conflict among uses. Strip commercial areas should be avoided as discussed in Section 10-1. 
7-6.2.  PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES. 
a.  Single-family, two-family and multi-family dwellings on single lots or in group housing projects subject to the provisions of Section 14-8; 
b.  Schools, colleges and universities; 
c.  Nursery and kindergarten schools provided that all state requirements are met and subject to the provisions of Section 8-4; 
d.  Adult day care centers and in-home adult day care centers; 
e.  Public and semi-public recreational facilities and uses not operated for profit, which may include parks, playgrounds, country clubs, community centers, neighborhood buildings; 
f.  Churches, including Sunday school or educational buildings and other places of worship; 
g.  Cemeteries; 
h.  Libraries, auditoriums, museums, and theaters; 
i.  Home occupations subject to the provisions of Section 8-5; 
j.  Nursing or convalescent homes and rehabilitation centers; 
k.  Rooming and boarding houses or group homes; 
l.  Hospitals and medical treatment facilities; 
m.  Pharmacies, medical and dental laboratories, establishments for the fitting and sales of prosthetic devices; 
n.  Governmental buildings and uses except those relating to purposes of penology and corrections; 
o.  High-rise buildings subject to the provisions of Section 8-3; 
p.  Cluster housing developments subject to the terms of Section 8-6; 
q.  Professional, business and civic offices; 
r.  Photography studios, art studios, art galleries, art sales, interior design studios, craft studios, craft sales, antique shops, establishments for the teaching of music, dancing or performing arts; 
s.  Business and vocational schools 
t.  Retail stores of under 2,500 square feet of interior floor space; 
u.  Bed and Breakfast operations; 
v.  Funeral homes. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002) 
7-6.3.  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. 
a.  Noncommercial greenhouses and plant nurseries, private garages, garden sheds, and tool houses. 
b.  Private swimming pools, provided that those built after the adoption of this ordinance are surrounded by a minimum five (5) foot tall enclosed fenced area. 
c.  Solar energy systems. 
d.  Garage sales subject to the provisions of Article 8-8. 
e.  Satellite dish antennae subject to the requirements of Section 8-10. 
f.  Home Occupations subject to the provisions of Article 8-5. 
g.  Other structures and uses which: 
i.  Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses and structures. 
ii.  Do not involve the conduct of trade on the premises other than permitted as a principal use. 
iii.  Are located on the same lot as the permitted principal use or structure, or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership. 
iv.  Are not likely to attract visitors in larger numbers than would be expected in the neighborhood. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002; Ord. of xx-xx-xxxx) 
7-6.4.  PERMITTED SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS. 
a.  Public utilities, transformer stations, water tanks and towers, electrical transmission lines and towers, communication towers, telephone exchanges with no vehicles or equipment stored on the premises, subject to the height requirements of Section 6-9; 
b.  Private, non-profit clubs and lodges; 
c.  Motels and motels with eating establishments, provided the eating facilities are intended primarily for the convenience of the motel patrons and located within the principal structure. 
7-6.5.  PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES. 
a.  Wholesale sales and service; 
b.  Drive-in eating and drinking establishments; 
c.  Automobile service stations; 
d.  Industrial uses; 
e.  Commercial recreation uses; 
f.  Storage yards, including junk yards and recycling facilities; 
g.  Video or other inside games of chance. 
7-6.6.  MINIMUM LOT AREA AND WIDTH. 
    Minimum lot area for the first unit shall be 6,000 square feet, and 2,000 square feet for each additional unit. Minimum lot width for all uses shall be 50 feet. 
7-6.7.  MINIMUM SETBACK REQUIREMENTS. 
    The depth of front and rear setbacks, and the width of side setbacks shall be as follows for single family detached dwellings and for other permitted or permissible structures, unless otherwise specified: 
(1)  Front Yard: 20 feet. 
(2)  Side Yard: 3 feet. 
(3)  Rear Yard: 15 feet. 
7-6.8.  MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE BY ALL BUILDINGS. 
    All permitted and permissible buildings and structures and their accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed a total of 50% lot coverage. 
7-6.9.  HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES. 
    No portion of any building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, nor may accessory structures exceed the height of the principal structure. 
7-6.10.  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS. 
    Off-street parking an loading requirements are set forth in Article 6. 
7-6.11.  SIGNS. 
    Signs are permitted in the C-2 District as in accordance with provisions of Article 9. 
7-7. - I-1, INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT. 
7-7.1.  PURPOSE. 
    This district is intended to provide areas for industrial and closely related uses, to encourage the proper design, placement, and grouping industrial uses, and to protect adjacent districts from potentially harmful effects. This district is not intended to accommodate general commercial uses or residential uses. 
7-7.2.  PERMITTED USES. 
a.  Manufacturing plants, processing plants, and industrial uses which would not produce excessive noise, excessive vibration, excessive smoke or particulate matter in the atmosphere or in water bodies, dangerous levels of radiation, hazards of fire or excessive humidity, heat, or glare, or electromagnetic interference, or other similar conditions which would be incompatible with adjacent development outside of the Industrial District in which the use is located. Where reasonable doubt exists as to whether or not a particular use may exceed the limitations described above, the Zoning Administrator may refer the question to the Zoning Board of Appeal for determination; 
b.  Warehousing, wholesaling, bulk storage, supply and distribution; 
c.  Public utilities, including all facilities, structures, or uses associated therewith, and subject to the height requirements of Section 6-9; 
d.  Truck terminals; 
e.  Business offices associated with, and secondary to, individual industrial uses within the district; 
f.  Junk yards, salvage yards, scrap yards, and second-hand materials operations including processing, display and sale thereof; 
g.  Laundry and dry cleaning processing plants; 
h.  Automotive repair garages; 
i.  Trade schools and technical schools engaging in activities of an industrial nature; 
j.  Lumber and building supply yards, yards for storage of contractors' equipment and supplies, outdoor storage of materials, supplies or equipment; 
k.  Scientific, technical, and medical laboratories and research facilities; 
l.  Offices, storage yards, and other facilities of the building trades such as building, mechanical or electrical contractors; 
m.  Radio and television stations; 
n.  Veterinary establishments; 
o.  Buildings used by Federal, State, County or City governments; 
p.  Private airports; 
q.  Agricultural uses such as general farming, dairy farming, truck farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, forestry, wild crop harvesting, vineyards and orchards; 
r.  High-rise buildings for non-residential uses subject to the provisions of Section 8-3; 
s.  Retail and service establishments; 
t.  Sexually Oriented businesses; 
u.  Tattoo parlor, subject to South Caroline Legislature, Section 44-34-10 through 44-34-110. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2006) 
7-7.3.  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. 
a.  Solar energy systems. 
b.  Satellite dish antennae subject to the requirements of Section 8-10. 
c.  Other structures and uses which: 
i.  Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses and structures. 
ii.  Do not involve the conduct of trade on the premises other than permitted as a principal use. 
iii.  Are located on the same lot as the permitted principal use or structure, or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership. 
iv.  Are not likely to attract visitors in larger numbers than would be expected in the neighborhood. 
7-7.4.  PERMITTED SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS. 
a.  Vocational schools. 
b.  Automobile junk yards, scrap yards, salvage yards or yards used in whole or in part for scrap or salvage operations or for processing, storage, recycling display, or sales of junk, scrap, or salvaged materials, provided that: 
i.  No storage of display of scrap or junk material shall be permitted within 35 feet of any public road right-of-way. 
ii.  Opaque screening (vegetative, fence, wall or combination) shall be provided around the perimeter of the active use. 
7-7.5.  PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES. 
a.  Dwelling units. 
b.  Schools, colleges or universities. 
c.  Hospitals, sanitariums, rest homes, convalescent homes or rehabilitation centers. 
d.  Hotels and motels. 
e.  Funeral Homes. 
f.  Churches. 
7-7.6.  MINIMUM LOT AREA AND WIDTH. 
    For all permitted or permissible uses and structures, no minimum lot area is required except as needed to meet other requirements herein. 
7-7.7.  MINIMUM SETBACK REQUIREMENTS. 
    The depth of front and rear setbacks, and the width of side setbacks shall be as follows for other permitted or permissible structures, unless otherwise specified: 
(1)  Front Yard: 50 feet. 
(2)  Side Yard: 10 feet. 
(3)  Rear Yard: 15 feet. 
7-7.8.  MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE BY ALL BUILDINGS. 
    For all permitted or permissible uses and structures, no maximum lot coverage is required. 
7-7.9.  HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES. 
    No portion of any building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, nor may accessory structures exceed the height of the principal structure. 
7-7.10.  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS. 
    Off-street parking an loading requirements are set forth in Article 6. 
7-7.11.  SIGNS. 
    Signs are permitted in the I-1 District as in accordance with provisions of Article 9. 
7-8. - [PDD,] PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT. 
7-8.1.  INTENT. 
    The intent of the planned development district is to better bridge the inherent difference between residential and nonresidential uses; and to better accommodate change within those areas of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville where due to economics or other factors responsible for change, potentially incompatible development could compromise property values or adversely impact existing land use, transportation facilities, or infrastructure. 
    Through the planned development district advocated by this district, it is possible to ameliorate differences between potentially incompatible uses by exacting concessions and conditions as necessary to achieve "land use compatibility." 
7-8.2.  MINIMUM SITE REQUIREMENTS. 
    Minimum area requirements for a planned development district shall be two (2) acres. 
7-8.3.  PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES. 
    Any use proposed by the developer and considered by the planning commission as being compatible to other nearby uses within and beyond the district may be permitted in such district, upon approval by the Planning Commission and Town Council. 
7-8.4.  RESIDENTIAL DENSITY PERMITTED. 
    Residential density shall not exceed an average of seventeen (17) dwelling units per acre. The acreage devoted to residential use shall be used to determine density. 
7-8.5.  MINIMUM LOT AREA. 
    The minimum lot area for any portion of the planned development district shall conform to the requirements of the applicable zoning district standards for the density approved in the general development plan. 
7-8.6.  MINIMUM LOT WIDTH, MINIMUM SETBACK REQUIREMENTS, MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE, MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES. 
    The minimum lot width, minimum setback requirements, maximum lot coverage and maximum height of structures for all or any one portion of the planned development district shall conform to the requirements of the applicable zoning district standards for the density approved in the general development plan. 
7-8.7.  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING. 
    Off street parking and loading requirements as set forth in Article 6 of the Zoning Ordinance shall be met for each specified use. 
7-8.8.  SIGNS. 
    Signs are permitted in planned development districts only in accordance with provisions of Article 9, "Regulation of Signs" of this Ordinance. 
7-8.9.  SCREENING REQUIREMENTS. 
    A minimum screen which meets the requirements of the Section of this Ordinance must be provided. The planning commission may require additional screening between uses and densities of development as a condition of plat approval. 
7-8.10.  SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS. 
    A site plan shall be submitted with a request for rezoning and shall contain the following information: 
a.  The proposed title of the project and the name of the engineer, architect, designer, or landscape architect, and the developer. 
b.  The northpoint, scale and date. The scale of the site plan shall be not more than fifty (50) feet to one inch for projects less than one hundred (100) acres or one hundred (100) feet to one inch for those over one hundred (100) acres. 
c.  Existing zoning and zoning district boundaries and proposed changes in zoning, if any. 
d.  The boundaries of the property involved, the location of all existing easements, property lines, existing streets, buildings and other existing physical features on and immediately adjacent to the project. 
e.  The location and dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, driveways, curb cuts, entrances and exist, parking and load areas (including number of parking spaces). 
f.  The location of proposed lots, setback lines, easements and land use. 
g.  The proposed location and approximate heights of all multifamily and nonresidential buildings and dimensions of structures drawn to scale. 
h.  The proposed location and description of all fences, walls, screens, buffers, plantings, and landscaping. 
i.  The proposed location and number of dwelling units (by bedroom type) for multifamily project. 
j.  The proposed location, character, size and height of all signs. 
k.  A location map showing the position of the proposed development in relation to the community. 
l.  A tabulation of total number of acres in the project to be devoted to public and/or private reservations. 
m.  The planning commission may establish additional requirements for site plan approval, and in cases, may waive a particular requirement if, in its opinion, the inclusion of that requirement is not essential to a proper assessment of the project. 
7-8.11.  ACTIONS BY PLANNING COMMISSION AND TOWN COUNCIL. 
    Actions by the Planning Commission and Town Council shall be as provided for amendments generally. Said bodies may approve the application, may include specific modifications of the proposal or other applicable regulations, or may deny the application. 
    If the amendment is granted, Town Council shall, in it amending action, approve the application as it may have been changed during earlier procedures, or indicate required modifications; and be binding on the applicant. If modifications are required, council shall officially state its reasons for the record. 
    If the amendment is granted, the developer shall be required to proceed in accord with the approved planned development district, as supplemental or modified by council in the particular case, and shall conform to any time or priority limitations established by council for initiating and/or completing the development in whole, or in specified stages. 
    In taking action to amend the zoning map to establish the approved planned development district, council shall pass upon the adequacy of the application, in form and substance relative to any agreements, contract, sureties, or other instruments involved; and before development may proceed, such instruments shall be approved by appropriate officers and agencies. 
7.8.12.  ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION ON APPROVED PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT. 
    Once a planned development district is established on the official zoning map, no zoning or building permit shall be issued therein, unless in compliance with the site plan and other documents approved by council. Except as provided below, all plans and reports approved by council shall be binding on the applicant and any successors in title so long as the planned development district zoning is applicable. 
7-8.13.  CHANGES IN APPROVED PLANS. 
    Changes in approved final plans and reports may be approved by the planning commission only upon findings that such changes will not increase the density of the project, amount of traffic generated, reduce screening or off-street parking requirements, or substantially alter the composition of the project. Any such change to the contrary shall be approved subject to further study by the planning commission and amendatory action by Town Council. 
[ARTICLE] 8. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 

8-1. - GROUP HOUSING PROJECTS. 
8-1.1.  General: Group housing projects consist of more than one residential structure (single-family, duplex or multi-family) on a single lot in permitted residential districts. All group housing projects shall conform to the following minimum standards: 
a.  Lot Size: A group housing project shall not be permitted on a lot having an area of less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet; 
b.  Street Access: Any building established in connection with such group housing project which cannot properly be served by emergency or service vehicles from an abutting street shall be made accessible to such vehicles by a paved driveway having a roadbed width of not less than twenty (20) feet, exclusive of parking spaces; 
c.  Off-Street Parking Facilities: Off-street parking facilities established in connection with such developments shall be of such design, location and arrangement that will not interfere with the efficient flow of traffic through the area and that will not interfere with the access of emergency or service vehicles; 
d.  Separation of Buildings: All buildings and structures established in connection with such projects shall not be less than twenty (20) feet apart, nor less than forty (40) feet apart of front-to-front; 
e.  Setback Requirements: Unless otherwise provided by this ordinance, all buildings and structures established in connection with such development shall comply with the front-yard setbacks established for the districts in which located and shall be set back not less than fifteen (15) feet from any side or rear property line. Parking facilities or driveways shall not be permitted in the side and rear-yard setbacks for a distance of ten (10) feet from the property line; 
f.  Uses Prohibited: In no case shall a use be permitted in connection with such developments that is not permitted by this Ordinance in the district in which such project is to be located; 
g.  lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: A group housing project shall conform to the minimum lot area per dwelling unit for the district in which it is located; 
h.  Position of Dwelling Structure: No dwelling structure established in connection with a group housing project shall be situated on a lot as to face the rear of another building or structure within the development or on adjoining properties for a distance of one hundred (100) feet; 
i.  Screening: Group housing projects shall be effectively screened along the side and rear property line by a planting of trees or shrubs designed at least five (5) feet high and four (4) feet deep, or a solid wall or fence at least five (5) feet high, or an equivalent screen approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
8-2. - MOBILE HOME PARKS. 
    The purposes of this ordinance are to better accommodate mobile homes in the corporate limits of Batesburg-Leesville; to minimize any adverse affects of mobiles - both physical and psychological - on low-density residential development; to provide for sound, orderly and healthy environments sufficient to meet the unique needs of mobile home inhabitants; to protect mobile home developments and mobile homes from encroachment by incompatible uses; and to encourage the consolidation of mobile homes into mobile home parks. 
8-2.1.  APPLICATION. 
    No mobile home shall be established, erected, placed or located on any lot, site, parcel, or in any park in the corporate areas of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville without first meeting the minimum requirements of this ordinance. The application of this ordinance shall be limited to the regulation of mobile homes for residential purposes. Mobile home sales, mobile home offices and other non-residential uses are not subject to regulation under the terms of this ordinance. 
8-2.2.  DEFINITIONS. 
    In addition to the definitions set forth in Article 2 of this Ordinance, the following definitions relate to mobile home parks: 
a.  ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE: An accessory building or use is: 
1.  Subordinate to and serves the mobile home users; 
2.  Designed for the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the mobile home(s) being served; and 
3.  Located on the same site or lot as the mobile home(s) it serves. 
b.  HEALTH AUTHORITY: An authorized representative of the County, District or South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control. 
c.  MOBILE HOME: A movable or portable unit fifty (50) feet or less in length and less than twelve (12) feet in width, constructed to be towed on its own chassis, designed without a permanent foundation, capable of supporting year-round occupancy, which may include one (1) or more components that can be retracted for towing purposes and subsequently expanded, or which may consists of two (2) or more unites separately towable but designed to be joined into one (1) integral unit. A mobile home may or may not be permanently attached to the ground and its transport features may or may not be removed. 
The term mobile home used in these regulations shall not include pre-fabricated, modular or unitized dwellings placed on permanent foundations, nor shall it refer to travel trailers, campers or similar units designed or recreation or other short term uses. 
d.  MOBILE HOME PARK: A lot used, designed, or intended to be used for the purpose of supplying parking space for one (1) or more occupied mobile homes and which includes buildings, structures, vehicles, or enclosures used or intended to be used as a part of such mobile home park. Sales or storage lots for unoccupied mobile homes are not considered to be mobile home parks. 
e.  STREET: A public thoroughfare designed to provide the principal means of access to abutting property, or designed to serve as a roadway for vehicular travel, or both, but excluding alleys. For the purposes of this ordinance, "streets" are divided into the following categories: 
1.  Collector street A public way designed primarily to connect arterial or to provide access from residential areas to major destination points such as shopping employment centers and which may be expected to carry a significant volume of traffic having neither origin nor destination on the street, and which is designated as a collector street by the Town of Batesburg-Leesville. 
2.  Major arterial thoroughfare: A street or highway which is used to move fast or heavy traffic between population centers, around population centers, or from one section of the town to another. 
3.  Cul-de-sac: A minor street of short length having one end open to traffic and one end terminating in a vehicular turn-around. 
4.  Minor street: A street that serves traffic to and from residences and a small amount of low intensity commercial development. Minor streets are treated separately from other types of streets because, in some residential areas, they carry significant volumes of foot and bicycle traffic and are used by children. In rural areas, minor streets carry slow moving farm vehicles and frequently have short sight distances. A minor street typically serves up to 140 dwelling units and has average daily traffic (ADT) of 1,400 vehicles or fewer. 
f.  PARCEL: A quantity of land with specific dimensions and location which has been recorded as the property of an owner(s) and which has been assigned a parcel identification number (PIDN) by the Lexington County Assessor's Office. 
g.  TRAVEL OR CAMPING VEHICLE: A vehicular portable structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel or recreational use, not exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in length. 
8-2.3.  TYPES OF MOBILE HOME DEVELOPMENT. 
    The mobile home is recognized as a special form of housing, and is therefore subject to specific and special standards provided herein. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002) 
8-2.4.  LICENSING AND PERMITS. 
a.  Operating License Required: After enactment of this ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any existing or proposed mobile home park to operate within the corporate areas of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville without first obtaining a license from the Building Code, Inspections Department and Business License (see Business License Ordinances). Existing mobile homes may have up to two years after the enactment of this ordinance to conform with the ordinance and obtain a license. Proposed mobile home parks will receive a license upon approval of their Mobile Home Park Plan by the Planning Commission. 
b.  Application of Original License: Four copies of an application for an original license are required on forms provided by the Building Codes and Inspections Department, signed by the applicant, and shall contain the following: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant; 
2.  The interest of the applicant in, and the location and legal description of the mobile home park; 
3.  The size (number of acres) and number of mobile homes which it is designed to accommodate; 
4.  An approved building permit number; 
5.  Assessor's Officer Parcel Identification Number(s). 
c.  Building Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to build, construct or develop a mobile home park in the corporate parts of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville without securing a building permit thereof, as provide for the Town of Batesburg-Leesville Ordinances. 
d.  Application for Building Permit: The applicant developer or his representative shall prepare and present eight (8) copies of a Park Plan to the Town of Batesburg-Leesville Planning Department not less than thirty (30) days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered by the Planning Commission. Within this thirty (30) day period, the Planning Department will retain one (1) copy of the plan, which it shall review for conformance with the provisions of this ordinance, and distribute the remain copies to the following agencies for review and comment: 
1.  Public Works Department (1 copy). 
2.  South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control (3 copies). 
The Planning Commission shall review and act upon the Park Plan within forty-five (45) days of the date of its submission by the applicant. If no action is taken by the Commission within this time, the plan shall be deemed to have been approved; provided however, that the application may waive this requirement and the Planning Commission shall not act to overrule the requirements of the other agencies. It may, however, seek to bring agreement in cases of conflicts between the various reviewing agencies or a reviewing agency and the applicant developer. 
e.  Issuance of Building Permit: In order to obtain a building permit, the developer shall submit one copy of the approved development plan including all necessary endorsements to the Director of the Building Code and Inspection Department. Issuance of a building permit will allow the developer to start construction. 
f.  Issuance of Original Operating License: Prior to the issuance of an operating license, as required by the ordinance, final inspection of the mobile home park shall be conducted by the Building Codes and Inspection Department to determine compliance with the approved plan, and by the above listed review agencies to determine compliance with all other regulations. 
g.  Renewal of License: Operating licenses shall be renewed annually. Application for renewal of a license shall be in writing by the holder of the license to be renewed and shall contain the following: 
1.  Name and address of the applicant; 
2.  Name and address of the mobile home park; 
3.  Assessor's Office Parcel Identification Number(s); and 
4.  Any change in the information submitted since the original license was issued or the last renewal granted. 
h.  Denial of License: Any person whose application for a license under these regulations has been denied may request, and shall be granted, a hearing on the matter before the Appeals Board under the procedure provided by these regulations. 
i.  Revocation of License: Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, the inspecting officer finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of these regulations, the officer shall give notice in writing to the owner or agent that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of time specified in the notice, the license will be suspended. At the end of such period, the officers shall reinspect such mobile home park, and if such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he shall suspend the license and give notice in writing of such suspension to the owner or agent. When a license to operate a mobile home park has been suspended, all occupants of the park shall be notified of the suspension and be given notice that they must vacate the park within forty-five (45) days. 
Any person whose license has been suspended, or who has received notice that his license will be suspended unless certain conditions or practices at the mobile home park are corrected, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before Town Council under the procedure provided by these regulations, provided that when no petition for hearing shall be filed within ten (10) days following the day on which notice of suspension was served, such license shall be deemed to have been automatically revoked at the expiration of such ten (10) day period. 
8-2.5.  EXISTING MOBILE HOME PARKS. 
    Existing mobile home parks are required to meet the following selected requirement of this ordinance: 
a.  Registration with the Planning Department within 180 days. The following information must be provided: 
1.  Name of the mobile home park; 
2.  Name of the record owner(s); 
3.  A copy of the Assessor's Office block map sheet showing the location of the park and the number of available spaces. 
b.  Existing mobile home parks must comply with the following selected requirements within a period of two (2) years from the date of enactment: 
1.  Setback requirements from the rights-of-way, front and rear property lines. (See Section 8-2.7c.) 
2.  Spacing requirement between mobile homes. (See Section 8-2.7k.) 
3.  Buffer yard requirement (See Section 8-2.6d.) 
4.  All mobile homes in the park shall be securely anchored against high winds to the ground. ([See Section] 8-2.71) 
8-2.6.  REQUIREMENTS FOR PROPOSED MOBILE HOME PARKS. 
    A required development or park plan shall contain the following information: 
a.  General Information. 
1.  Proposed name of mobile home park; 
2.  North arrow, graphic scale and written scale; 
3.  Name of record owner(s), developer(s), and surveyor(s) or engineer(s); 
4.  Existing zoning classifications of the tract, if any; 
5.  A vicinity map, for the purposes of locating the proposed park; 
6.  Assessor's Office Parcel Identification Number(s). 
b.  Existing Site Data. 
1.  Total tract boundaries of the park, and a statement of total acreage of the property; 
2.  Topographical map if available; 
3.  All existing rights-of-way, easements sewer lines, fire hydrants, utility transmission lines, storm drainage ditches, water courses, building flood plain areas based on a one hundred (100) year, if available, wood areas, and all other significant man-made or natural features within the propose park and within fifty (50) feet from the boundaries of the park; 
4.  All existing streets on or abutting the park, including names, right-of-way widths, pavement widths and approximate grades. 
c.  Proposed Site Data. 
1.  Street rights-of-way, pavement widths, grades and street names; 
2.  Preliminary plans for sanitary sewerage disposal systems, storm sewers, water, electricity and gas lines, showing connections to existing system or proposals for developing new systems, storm and sanitary sewer profiles, cross-sections and size shall be provided when required by the Planning Commission; 
3.  Other easements and rights-of way, including location, dimensions and purposes; 
4.  Contour changes to be made by grading, if any; 
5.  Location, size and number of proposed and existing mobile home sites or stands and all existing and proposed automobile parking areas; 
6.  Location, width and plantings of buffer yard areas; 
7.  Such other information as may be required by the Planning Commission. 
8-2.7.  PARK DESIGN STANDARDS. 
a.  Density: The maximum number of mobile homes per acre shall not exceed six (6). 
b.  Minimum Square Foot Standards: No mobile home will be allowed in any mobile home park with less than 700 square foot of heated space. 
c.  Setbacks: All mobile homes and all buildings or structures within a mobile home park shall observe the following minimum setback requirements: 
1.  Minimum front setback depth measured from the nearest street right-of-way line: 
Parks facing a Major Arterial/Thoroughfare 50 feet Parks facing a Collector Street 40 feet Parks facing a Minor Street 30 feet  
2.  All building structures and mobile homes shall be setback from the side property line a distance of 15 feet and 20 feet from the rear property line. The requirements of this section may be superseded by the requirements of Section 8-2.7d Buffer yard Requirements since the selected buffer yard may be wider than the side or rear setback. 
d.  Buffer yard Requirements: An improved buffer yard is a portion of a yard which contains fences, walls, berms and plantings located along the outside perimeter of a parcel of land to lessen the impact of noise, land use intensity and light on or from adjoining property. 
The area used in buffer yard must be a portion of the property under development and may be a portion of the rear or side yard setback requirements of this ordinance. Buffer yards are inclusive of the applicable setbacks. No development, including accessory buildings, parking lots or drives, may be located in the improved buffer yard. 
To determine the appropriate improved buffer yard required under this section, refer to Table 1. Match the abutting use with the proposed use to find the appropriate buffer yard type. Should a question arise as to the land use classification of an existing use, the Planning Commission staff shall determine the classification. Next refer to Table 2 to determine the amount of space required. Several options of landscaping are available under each buffer yard. The requirements are given in 100 foot units measured along the property line. 
TABLE 1. BUFFER YARD REQUIREMENTS 
Existing Land Use Proposed 
Mobile Home 
Single lot Proposed 
Mobile Home Park/ 
Subdivision Single Family 1 3 Subdivision of 25 dwelling units or more 2 4 Multi-family 1 1 Office/institutional NR 2 Commercial NR 3 Traffic Intensive NR 3 Shopping and Commercial >= 250,000 sq. ft. NR 3 Businesses with outside storage NR 3 Light Industry NR 3 Heavy Industry NR 4  
TABLE 2. BUFFER YARD CODES 
Buffer yard Required Depth of Buffer yard Landscaping and/or Manmade Screening 
Requirements (per 100 feet) 1 5 feet 5 trees or 3 trees and 6 shrubs or 12 shrubs or 6' fence (wood-solid) 2 10 feet 10 trees or 6 trees and 12 shrubs or 24 shrubs or 6' fence 3 15 feet 15 trees or 8 trees and 24 shrubs or 48 shrubs or 6' fence and 20 shrubs or trees 4 25 feet 25 trees and 30 shrubs or 12 trees and 60 shrubs or 8 foot fence and 10 trees or shrubs  
The plant size and caliper of materials used in buffer yards are as follows: 
1.  The minimum tree shall be 6 to 7 feet in height and 1.5 inches in diameter at a height of 18 inches above the ground. 
2.  The minimum shrub shall be 2 to 3 feet in height. 
3.  Both trees and shrubs shall be nursery stock with well developed root systems unless plants found in place can be used. If the property being developed is wooded and provides a screen equal or greater than that which would be planted, no other requirements of plant material is required. In case of open woods, an additional planting of eye level shrubs such as hemlock or pines may be needed to improve screening. Fencing requirements are not changed by a wooded site. At least one half of all trees or shrubs shall be evergreens. 
e.  Sign Location: Mobile home park signs may not be located within the clear sight triangle areas. 
f.  Parking: A minimum of two parking spaces adjacent to the mobile home park shall be provided. Parking spaces shall be paved and properly marked. Concrete curbs or other appropriate car stops shall be installed at the end of all parking bays which are not the "drive through" type. 
g.  Interior Roadways - Construction and Drainage. 
1.  Construction: All interior roadways shall provide a fifty (50) foot right-of-way and be constructed on a prepared soil base that has had all tree stumps and other vegetative matter removed to a depth of two (2) feet below subgrade and is properly compacted. No permanent parking or structures shall be permitted in the right-of-way. The paved portion of the roadway shall be at least 16 feet wide and consist of 1.5 inches of compacted tar and gravel on a 4-inch compacted stone base or 1.5 inches of compacted asphalt surface on two (2) inches of compacted asphalt base. Construction of all roadways shall be in compliance with Lexington County Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads. 
A centerline profile of each street shall be submitted. The Public Works Department shall review and approve all roadway plans and shall inspect all roadway installations. Roadway intersections shall be at least one hundred and fifty (150) feet apart. A paved or piped ditch is required along an section of roadway that is in excess of a 5% grade. All dead-end roadways shall terminate in a "cul-de-sac." Other methods to achieve vehicular turn around may be approved by the Planning Commission. All road names are subject to approval by the Planning Commission. 
2.  Drainage: A drainage plan with specifications shall be prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer authorized and licensed by the State of South Carolina. The plan should address all surface runoff relating to internal streets in such a manner that present and future development property, as well as adjoining properties, will be protected from damage of excessive annual drainage maintenance costs. The drainage plan shall include all calculations, graphs, charts and other information necessary to check the design. Calculations shall list the methodology used for the design and include information on spacing of catch basins, channel velocities, pipe and culvert design. The plan shall define all necessary open ditches, pipes, culverts, catch basins and cross drains. The plan shall indicate that flared end sections or head walls shall be constructed at the end of all pipes and culverts and that riprap shall be placed at the end of all pipes and culverts. The plan shall indicate that drainage channels have been established at all outlets and that the channels are lined with appropriate material depending on the channel velocity. If applicable, the drainage shall be in conformance with the Lexington County Ordinance on Sediment Reduction and Stormwater Management Ordinance. 
h.  Exterior Roadways: It is in the interest of public safety and good traffic management that exterior roadways/streets serving mobile home parks be of sufficient width to accommodate mobile homes that are being transported to the mobile home park. Therefore, any exterior roadway/street serving a mobile home park development, regardless of classification (e.g., arterial, collector, minor street), must be a minimum of 20 feet pavement width. 
i.  Traffic Generation Standards for Minor Streets: If development is permitted to "overload" and exceed the design capacity of streets, they cannot properly function as designed and built. Overloaded streets detract from accessibility to any existing commercial or residential development and increase the risk of accidents. Therefore, developments which are expected to generate traffic volumes in excess of 500 passenger cars per day and taking primary access form a minor street will be evaluated by the Town Planning Staff. The staff will use techniques described in the current Highway Capacity Manual, The National Cooperative Highway Research Program Report No. 187, Institute of Traffic Engineers Handbooks and readily available traffic counts to estimate the design capacity and traffic volume for the subject road section. If staff finds that, in combination with existing and planned developments on road, the proposed development will generate traffic volumes that exceed the capacity of the road, they shall recommend actions to be considered by the Planning Commission. The action may include that consideration be given to the following options: 
1.  The size, density, or number of units in the development may be adjusted to lessen the amount of traffic produced to comply with the regulation. 
2.  The roadway, to the nearest arterial/collector, may be upgraded to accommodate the increased traffic. The improvements may consist of repaving, widening, signs, signalization of intersections or other appropriate improvements. The improvements must be approved by the Planning Commission and by the proper road authority (County Department of Public Works or State Highway Department). In addition to traffic considerations, Planning Commission will also consider any major negative impact on existing residential neighborhoods. 
It is also the intent of this Section to encourage partnership between private development and the public sector in upgrading roadway facilities for development purposes. Appropriate cost sharing arrangements are possible and should be fully explored. It is not the intent of this section to burden private development with the full cost of upgrading a public roadway facility. Such cost sharing arrangements as purchase of materials by the developer and installation by the public sector are to be encouraged. 
j.  Ingress/Egress: No access road to a mobile home park shall be located closer than the following distances to any other intersecting street: 
Arterial street 125 feet Collector street 100 feet Minor street 75 feet  
The number of entrances/exits shall not exceed a ratio of one per one hundred fifty (150) feet of park frontage. Parks with less than one hundred fifty (150) feet frontage are only allowed one (1) combined ingress/egress road. 

Mobile home parks with 100 or more mobile home spaces must provide an entrance/exit as defined in Illustration 1. As a result of the higher traffic volumes produced by such developments, these entrances/exits require a higher design standard than other ingress/egress points. This requirement may be waived if the developer can demonstrate that there will be a sufficient number of entrances/exits to handle the estimated additional traffic volumes safely without imposing undue problems on traffic safety or management. 
k.  Spacing Requirements: Mobile homes shall be placed at least twenty (20) feet apart and twenty (20) feet from any common building or structure in the park. 
l.  Foundations: On a single wide home, double blocking must occur at all corners and in front and back of axles for a total of eight (8) double blocked piers. Multi-wide homes must have all piers double blocked. Piers may be not further than ten (10) feet apart. 
Piers or load-bearing supports or devices shall be designed and constructed to evenly distribute the loads. Piers shall extend at least six (6) inches from the centerline of the frame member. Manufactured load-bearing supports or devices shall be listed or approved for the use intended, or piers shall be constructed as follows: 
1.  Except for corner piers, piers less than 40 inches high shall be constructed of masonry units, placed with cores or cells vertically. Piers shall be installed with their long dimensions perpendicular to the main (I-beam) frame member that supports and shall have a minimum cross-sectional area of 119 square inches. Piers shall be capped with a minimum 2-inch sold masonry unit or concrete cap or equivalent. 
2.  Piers between 40 and 80 inches high and all corner piers over 24 inches shall be at least 16 x 16 inches consisting of interlocking masonry units and shall be fully capped with a minimum of 4-inch solid masonry unit or equivalent. 
3.  Piers over 80 inches high shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 above, provided the piers shall be filled solid with grout and reinforced with four continuous No. 5 bars. One bar shall be placed in each corner cell of hollow masonry unit piers, or in each corner of the grouted space of piers constructed of solid masonry units. 
4.  Cast-in-place concrete piers meeting the same size and height limitation of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 above may be substituted for piers constructed of masonry units. 
5.  All piers shall be constructed on footings of solid concrete, poured in place or pre-cast concrete not less than 16 x 16 x 4 inches. 
m.  Tie-downs and Skirting: All mobile homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movements by providing over-the-top and/or frame ties to ground anchors. Specific requirements shall be that: 
1.  There must be at least three (3) tie-downs per side if the home is under 50 feet in length. If the home is fifty (50) feet or greater in length, then there must be four (4) tie-downs per side. Tie-downs must be placed in all corners and at intermediate points. 
2.  Skirting is required within sixty (60) days of set up. The skirting is to be of solid skirting material (wood, vinyl, metal, masonry). All materials must be painted or stained except brick and stone. Material are to be erected in a fashion as not to create a fire hazard or harbor trash or rodents. Skirting must have an access door and properly vented. Skirting shall be maintained in a good state of repair. 
8-2.8.  NOTICE, HEARINGS AND ORDERS. 
a.  Whenever the health authority determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of these regulations, it shall give a notice of such alleged violation to the owner or agent of the park, as hereinafter provided: 
1.  Be in writing; 
2.  Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance; 
3.  Allow reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires; 
4.  Be served upon the owner or his agent as the case may require, provided that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent when a copy of the inspection report form or other notice has been delivered personally to the permit holder or person in charge or such notice has been sent by registered mail to his last know address; or when he has been served with such notice by any other method authorized or required by the laws of this State; and 
5.  Contain an outline of remedial action, which if taken, will affect compliance with the provisions of these regulations. 
b.  Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of these regulations may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the health authority, provided that such person shall file in the office of health authority a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds thereof: Upon receipt of such petition, the health authority shall set a time and place for such hearing, and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given the opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced no later than ten (10) days after the day on which the petition was filled, provided that upon application the petitioner, the health authority may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten (10) day period when in its judgment the petitioner has submitted good and sufficient reasons for such postponement. 
c.  After such hearing, the health authority shall make findings as to compliance with the provisions of these regulations and shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the notice which shall be served as provided in Section 8-2.8a4. Upon failure to comply with any order sustaining or modifying a notice, the permit of the mobile home park affected by the order may be revoked. Revoked permits may not be reissued by a new permit may be issued, if all requirements of there regulations are met. 
d.  Whenever the health authority finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, it may, without notice or hearing, issue an order citing the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as may deem necessary to meet the emergency including the suspension of the permit. Notwithstanding any other provisions of these regulations, such order shall be effective immediately Any person to whom such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the health authority, shall be afforded a hearing as provided in Section 8-2.8b. The provisions of 8-2.8c and 8-2.8d shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter. 
8-2.9.  WATER SUPPLY. 
a.  General requirements: Mobile home parks shall be connected to the Town's public water supply system. The developer of the park shall be responsible for the installation of the lines to connect to the system. All lines shall meet the requirements of the S.C. Department of Health and Environmental Control and the coordination guidelines of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville. 
b.  Taps: 
1.  Water systems for mobile home parks in which the mobile homes are intended primarily for rental shall be connected to a master meter at or near the entrance of the park. Parks in which mobile home are primarily intended for individual ownership shall be provided with individual meters at the front of each lot on the common property. Mobile home parks which change from primarily individual owner to rental shall be required to install a master meter and to pay a new tap fee at the then prevailing rate based upon the size of the master meter required. The individual meters shall be removed at the owner expense and shall be returned to the Town of Batesburg-Leesville. 
2.  Each mobile home shall be considered as a separate water tap requiring the payment of separate tap fee. 
c.  Water Distribution System: 
1.  All water piping, fixtures, and other equipment shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with state and local regulations. 
2.  The water piping system shall not be connected with non-potable or questionable water supplies and shall be protected against the hazards of backflow or back-siphonage. All plastic pipe must bear the NSF seal of approval. 
3.  The mobile home park water system shall be adequate to provide a minimum of twenty (20) pounds per square inch of pressure at all service buildings and mobile home connections. 
4.  Where drinking fountains are provided for public use, they shall be of a type and in locations approved by the health authority. 
d.  Individual Water-riser Pipes and Connections: 
1.  Individual water-riser pipes shall be located within the confined area of the mobile home stand at a point where the water connection will approximate a vertical position, thereby insuring the shortest water connection possible and decreasing susceptibility to water pipe freezing. 
2.  The water riser pipe shall have a minimum inside diameter of three fourths (3/4) inches, terminating at least four (4) inches above the ground surface, with two (2) three-fourths (3/4) inch valve outlets. The outlets shall be threaded so that a connection can be made from one outlet to the mobile home water piping system and the other connection can serve as an outside connection. 
3.  Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service lines, valves and riser pipe and to protect risers from heaving and thawing actions of grounds during freezing weather. Surface drainage shall be diverted from the location of the riser pipe individual service connections shall be constructed as to protect the line from infiltration by the ground water. 
4.  A shut-off valve below the frost line shall be provided near the water-riser pipe of each mobile home lot. Underground stop-and-waste-cocks shall be installed on any connection. 
5.  Disinfection of Water Systems: All water systems shall be disinfected and analyzed in accordance with South Carolina State Department of Health and Environmental Control requirements before use for domestic purposes. 
8-2.10.  SEWAGE DISPOSAL. 
a.  General Requirements: Mobile home parks shall be connected to the public sewer system. The construction of lines and appurtenances to make a connection to the existing lines of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville shall be at the expense of the park developer. All sewer lines must be constructed in accordance with the S.C. Department of Health and Environmental Control requirements and the provision of the Town's construction guidelines. 
b.  Individual Connections: 
1.  Each mobile home shall be considered a separate tap for the purpose of calculating tap fees. Parks with a master water meter shall be charged sewer charges at the commercial rate. Parks with individual meters shall be charged at residential rate. Each mobile home lot shall be provided with at least a four (4) inch nominal diameter sewer riser pipe. The sewer riser pipe shall be so located on each stand that the provisions of section 8-2.10b2 can be met. 
2.  The sewer connection shall have a nominal size of four (4) inches, and the slope of any portion thereof shall be at least one forth (1/4) inch per foot. The sewer connection shall be provided with suitable fittings, so the water tight and gas tight connection can be made between the mobile home drain, the sewer connection and the sewer riser. Taped connections are not acceptable. 
3.  All materials used for sewer connections shall be semi-ridged corrosive resistant, non-absorbent and durable. The inner surface shall be smooth. 
4.  Provisions shall be made for capping the sewer riser pipe in a gas-tight manner when a mobile home does not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall be diverted away form the riser. The rim of the riser pipe shall extend at least four (4) inches above the ground. 
8-2.11.  REFUSE DISPOSAL. 
a.  The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park shall be managed so as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect-breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution. 
b.  All refuse shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodent proof containers which shall be located not more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from any mobile home space. If pick-up by the Town's sanitation department is desired, the park owner must provide dumpsters meeting town specifications and located in such a manner as to allow the Town's sanitation vehicle easy access. Dumpsters must be placed on a concrete pad. 
c.  Racks or holders shall be provided for all individual refuse containers. Such container racks or holders shall be so designed as to prevent containers from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration and to facilitate cleaning around them. No wooden racks will be allowed in newly constructed mobile homes. 
d.  If a private sanitation service is used refuse must be collected and removed at least twice per week. 
8-2.12.  INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL. 
a.  Insect and rodent control measures to safeguard the public health as required by the health authority shall be applied to the mobile home park. 
b.  The health authority may require the mobile home park operator to take suitable measures to control other insects, obnoxious weeds and rank vegetation. 
c.  Accumulations of debris which may provide harborage for rodents shall not be permitted in their mobile home park. 
d.  When rats or other objectionable rodents are known to be in the mobile home park, the park operator shall take definite action, as directed by the health authority to examine them. 
8-2.13.  ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM. 
a.  General Requirements: The electrical distribution system shall comply with Section 550 B Mobile Home Parks of the National Electrical Code. 
b.  Power Distribution Lines: 
1.  All power lines (electrical, telephone or cable) shall be underground. 
2.  All direct burial conductors of cable shall be buried at least eighteen (18) inches below the ground surface and shall be insulated and specifically designed for the purpose. Such conductors shall be located not less than one (1) foot radial distances form water, sewer, gas or communication lines. 
8-2.14.  FUEL SUPPLY AND STORAGE. 
a.  Natural Gas System: 
1.  Natural gas piping systems when installed in mobile home parks shall be maintained in conformity with accepted engineering practices. 
2.  Each mobile home lot provided with piped gas shall have an approved shutoff valve installed upstream of the gas outlet. The outlet shall be equipped with an approved cap to prevent accidental discharge of gas when the outlet is not in use. 
b.  Liquefied Petroleum Gas Systems: Liquefied petroleum gas systems provided for mobile homes, service buildings or other structures when installed shall be maintained in conformity with the rules and regulations of the authority having jurisdiction and shall include the following: 
1.  Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive pressures and shall be arranged so that the discharge terminates at a safe location. 
2.  Systems have at least one (1) accessible means for shutting off gas. Such means shall be located outside the mobile home and shall be maintained in effective operating conditions. 
3.  All LPG piping outside the mobile homes shall be well supported and protected against mechanical injury. Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be conveyed through piping equipment and systems in mobile homes. 
4.  Vessels of no more than twelve (12) inches and less than sixty (60) U.S. gallons gross capacity may be installed on a mobile home lot and shall be securely but may not be permanently fastened to prevent accidental overturning. 
5.  No LPG vessel shall be stored or located inside or beneath any storage cabinet, carport, mobile home or any other structure unless such installations are specifically approved by the authority having jurisdiction. 
c.  Fuel Oil Supply Systems: The storage of fuel oil in containers exceeding five (5) gallon capacity is prohibited. Only one such container shall be permitted per mobile home. 
8-2.15.  FIRE PROTECTION. 
a.  The mobile home park area shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the state and local fire prevention authority. 
b.  Mobile home park areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish, and other flammable material. 
8-2.16.  ALTERATION AND ADDITIONS-RESTRICTIONS OF ANIMALS AND PETS. 
a.  All plumbing and electrical alterations or repairs in the mobile home park shall be made in accordance with applicable local regulations. 
b.  No permanent additions shall be built onto or become a part of any mobile home unless they are constructed in accordance with the local building codes and all provisions of this ordinance. A building permit must be obtained prior to the initiation of construction. 
c.  Pets and animals must be inoculated against rabies in accordance with the State Department of Health and Environmental Control. 
d.  Pet and animals may not run at large and must be either confined or kept on a leash and shall comply with other Town ordinances regulating dogs, pet and animals. 
8-2.17.  REGISTRATION OF OCCUPANTS. 
    Every mobile home park owner or operator shall maintain a register containing a record of all mobile homes and occupants using the mobile home park. Such register shall be available to any authorized person inspecting the park and shall be preserved for the period required by the health authority. Such register shall contain the names and addresses of all mobile home occupants residing in the park. 
8-2.18.  SUPERVISION. 
    The person to whom a permit for a mobile home park is issued shall at all times operate the park in compliance with these regulations, and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
8-2.19.  ENFORCEMENT INTERPRETATION. 
    Whenever the provisions of the Mobile Home Park Ordinance impose regulations that are in conflict with those of other Town Ordinances, other governmental agencies, or privately executed restrictions, the more restrictive shall apply. The same shall be true if there is a conflict between provisions within the body of the Mobile Home Park Ordinance. 
8-2.20.  PENALTIES. 
    Violations of this ordinance shall be considered a misdemeanor under the laws of the State of South Carolina. Each day a violation exists shall be considered a separate offense. 
8-3. - HIGH-RISE STRUCTURES. 
    General: For purposes of this Ordinance, a high-rise structure is defined as a structure having four (4) or more stories. In all cases, the proposed high-rise structure shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
8-3.1.  Minimum lot sizes as required by Article 7 and the maximum height as limited by Section 6-9 shall not apply, provided other requirements listed below are met; 
8-3.2.  Minimum yard requirements as listed in Article 7 shall be met. However, in no case shall any front, side or rear yard be less than twenty-five (25) feet; 
8-3.3.  All off-street parking and loading requirements as listed in Sections 6-3 and 6-4 shall be met; 
8-3.4.  Maximum lot coverage for high-rise structures containing residential units shall be not more than thirty (30) percent. Maximum lot coverage for high-rise structures containing no residential units shall be not more than fifty (50) percent; 
8-3.5.  Elevators and escalators shall be provided; 
8-3.6.  All fire codes and other codes relating to high-rise structures shall be met. 
8-4. - DAY NURSERIES AND KINDERGARTENS. 
    Day nurseries and kindergartens shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
8-4.1.  A fenced play area will be provided as shown below: 
Type of Child 
Care Facility Capacity Fenced Play Area Family Child Care Home Up to 6 children 1200 sq. ft. min. Group Child Care Home 7-12 children 2400 sq. ft. min. Child Care Center 13 or more children 2600 sq. ft. min.  
With an additional 200 sq. ft. for each additional child beyond 13. 
No play equipment shall be closer than twenty (20) feet of any fence surrounding the fenced play area. 
(Ord. of 3-9-2009) 
8-4.2.  The fencing referenced in 8-4.1 shall be in such a form as to provide a visual screen from adjoining property. (For example: solid wooden fence, solid masonry fence, chain link fence with vinyl or wooden slats, etc. as approved by the Zoning Administrator.) 
(Ord. of 7-9-2012) 
8-4.3.  Facilities, operation and maintenance shall meet all requirements of the S.C. Department of Social Services. 
8-5. - HOME OCCUPATIONS. 
    Home occupations shall meet the following requirements: 
8-5.1.  The occupation, profession or trade is carried on wholly within the principal building; 
8-5.2.  Not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the principal building is used for the conduct of said home occupations; 
8-5.3.  No merchandise or articles are displayed for advertising purposes nor are displayed in such a way as to be visible from outside the dwelling; 
8-5.4.  No merchandise or articles are stored other than inside the principal building; 
8-5.5.  There is no alteration of the residential character of the building or premises; 
8-5.6.  Only residents are employed; 
8-5.7.  No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volume than would be normally expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard; 
8-5.8.  No name plate or sign is displayed upon the premises except one unlighted sign, not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, and mounted flat against the wall of the principal structure. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002) 
8-6. - CLUSTER HOUSING DEVELOPMENT. 
    It is the intent of this section of the Ordinance to encourage the erection of cluster housing in areas appropriate to such use, subject to conditions and safeguards which will promote the purpose of zoning and the comprehensive plan. In addition to, or in modification of, other applicable provisions and requirements shall apply to the case of Cluster Housing Developments. 
8-6.1.  DEFINITIONS: 
(a)  Detached Cluster House: A single-family dwelling unit which has no common wall with any building other than its accessory structure or structures. 
(b)  Attached Cluster House: A single-family dwelling unit in a building that has not less than two (2) nor more than eight (8) single-family housekeeping units intended for owner occupancy which are erected as a single building, on adjoining lots, each being separated from the adjoining unit or units, and each such building being separated from any other building by space on all sides. No attached cluster houses shall be more than one hundred and fifty (150) feet in length. 
(c)  Detached Cluster Housing Development: A minimum of four detached cluster houses wherein specified real property will be subdivided and sold and wherein other specified real property will be sold and owned in common and managed and maintained by a "Homeowner's Association" or by the developer. 
(d)  Attached Cluster Housing Development: A minimum of two (2) attached cluster houses wherein specified real property will be subdivided and sold and wherein other specified real property will be owned in common and managed and maintained by a "Homeowner's Association" or by the developer. Subdivision regulation procedure of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville concerning group developments shall apply to all Cluster Housing Developments. 
(e)  Combination Cluster Housing Development: A cluster housing development may contain both attached and detached houses. 
(f)  Architectural Style in Cluster Housing Developments: In all cluster housing developments, exterior elevations of all houses must be architecturally compatible and may be mixed in design. 
8-6.2.  ZONING DISTRICT IN WHICH CLUSTER HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS ARE ALLOWED. 
    Cluster Housing Developments containing single-family detached or attached dwelling units are allowed in R-1, R-2, R-3 and C-2 Zoning Districts after approval by the Planning Commission. Subdivision regulation procedure of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville concerning group developments shall apply to all Cluster Housing Developments. 
8-6.3.  MATERIAL TO BE SUBMITTED FOR PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW. 
    All applicants for Cluster Housing Developments shall submit architectural plans including details such as number, location and orientation of dwelling units, site plans, landscaping plans, plans for off-street parking and service areas, ingress and egress arrangements, elevations of all portions of proposed structures within fifty feet of the or property lines of the proposed Cluster Housing development. Also, a copy of the legal documentation for land in common ownership and public ownership must accompany the application for Planning Commission review and be approved by the Planning Commission prior to being recorded in the Lexington, Saluda or Aiken County Register of Mesne Conveyances. The Planning Commission may require additional information, if the members feel there is a need. 
8-6.4.  REQUIREMENTS CONCERNING PLANNING COMMISSION REVIEW. 
    The site plan materials required must be approved by the Planning Commission prior to issuing a building permit. The Planning Commission as a condition of approval may require screening or modifications to the landscaping, parking and circulation plans. The required screening as determined by the Planning Commission and the placement of curb cuts as approved by the Planning Commission along with the arrangement of land in private ownership, common ownership and public ownership are binding upon the applicant. 
    The Zoning Administrator shall issue no zoning permit for the erection of any attached or detached cluster house or any alteration to any cluster house, which: 
(a)  Increases its height or coverage of land; 
(b)  Increases the total number of residential units in the approved Cluster Housing Development; 
(c)  Alters the parking requirements or reduces the number of off-street parking spaces; or 
(d)  Infringes on the common ownership property or the designated exterior buffer areas along the fringe of the identified Cluster Housing Development; 
until the Planning Commission shall have reviewed the application and documents required to be submitted therewith and reported concerning conformity with the provisions, intent and purposes of this Ordinance. At his discretion, the Zoning Administrator may approve minor changes in materials required for submission. 
8-6.5.  MINIMUM SITE SIZE FOR CLUSTER HOUSING DEVELOPMENT. 
MINIMUM SITE SIZE 
ZONING DISTRICT ACRES R-1 4 R-2 4 R-3 2 C-2 2  
    Density for a Cluster Housing Development shall be determined as follows: 
    In an R-1 district, structures and/or building coverage shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of buildable area; 
    In R-2, R-3 or C-2 districts structures and/or building coverage shall not exceed forty (40) percent of buildable area; 
    Street rights-of-way shall not be included in computing buildable area in R-1, R-2, R-3 and C-2 districts. 
8-6.6.  MINIMUM SETBACK FROM EXTERIOR PROPERTY LINES OF CLUSTER HOUSING DEVELOPMENT. 
ZONING DISTRICT DISTANCE FROM RIGHT-OF-WAY ALONG PUBLIC STREET OTHER EXTERIOR PROPERTY LINES R-1 35 feet 10 feet R-2, R-3, C-2 25 feet 10 feet  
8-6.7.  MINIMUM YARD SETBACKS FROM NEW STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAY. 
    A minimum yard setback of twenty (20) feet is required in the primary front yard, and a minimum yard setback of ten (10) feet is required in secondary front yards (or side yards facing a street). 
8-6.8.  MINIMUM SPACING BETWEEN PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS 
ZONING 
DISTRICT FRONT 
TO 
FRONT FRONT 
TO 
SIDE SIDE 
TO 
SIDE REAR 
TO 
FRONT REAR 
TO 
SIDE REAR 
TO 
SIDE R-1, R-2, R-3, C-2 30 Ft 20 Ft 6 Ft 100 Ft 10 Ft 20 Ft  
    The side, rear and front of each structure shall be designed on the site plan of each cluster development submitted to the Planning Commission for approval. 
8-6.9.  MINIMUM REQUIRED OPEN SPACE. 
    Open space for the purpose of Cluster Housing Development is defined as follows: That land area in common ownership of the homeowners, exclusive of parking areas and roadways, which is designed to meet the primary objective of supplying passive or active recreation needs. Only twenty-five (25) percent of the surface water of a natural or man-made body of still or moving surface water shall be counted toward determination of required open space. 
MINIMUM OPEN SPACE 
ZONING DISTRICT PERCENT OF LAND IN OPEN SPACE 
AND IN COMMON OWNERSHIP R-1 30 R-2 20 R-3, C-2 10  
8-6.10.  MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES. 
(a)  Where a Cluster Housing Development is dependent completely on off-street parking grouped in concentrations of greater than four (4) spaces and under common ownership, two (2) off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit; or 
(b)  Two (2) off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit on an individual privately owned driveway and appropriate visitor parking as determined by the Planning Commission. 
8-6.11.  REQUIREMENTS FOR PAVING OF STREETS AND PARKING AREAS. 
(a)  Streets designed for public maintenance must meet the requirements of the subdivision regulations. Streets designed for private maintenance must meet paving quality as provided in the subdivision regulations. Private streets designed for two-way traffic must have a paved width of twenty (20) feet, and private one-way streets must have a paved width of ten (10) feet. Rights-of-way are not required for private streets or roadways. Private streets must meet all other design requirements of the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville. 
(b)  The quality of paving standards for off-street parking areas containing more than four (4) parking spaces are the same as the quality of paving standards for minor residential streets, as set forth in the Town's subdivision regulations. 
(c)  All dwelling units and appropriate community facilities must be provided adequate access to streets meeting the standards of the Town's subdivision regulations. 
8-7. - MANUFACTURED HOMES. 
    Manufactured homes (not mobile homes) are permitted as principal dwellings on individual lots in the R-1A districts provided that: 
8-7.1.  The manufactured homes as defined in Section 8-7 are not more than three (3) years old as proved by a bill of sale or title owned by the person applying for a zoning permit for a manufactured home. 
8-7.2.  The manufactured home is placed on a permanent clay brick or concrete block curtain wall and all transportable features such as the wheels and tongues are removed. 
8-7.3.  The manufactured home is tied down according to specifications of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development to protect against wind damage. 
8-7.4.  The manufactured home can be certified as built according to the provisions of the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Act effective June 15, 1976. 
8-7.6.  The greatest length of the manufactured home shall be parallel with the accessing public street carrying the highest average daily traffic volume. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002) 
8-8. - GARAGE SALES. 
    Garage sales are permitted in all residential districts, provided that: 
8-8.1.  A permit is obtained from city hall for each sale and same to be posted at the site of the sale. The cost of each permit is to be five (5) dollars. The maximum period for each permit is two (2) days. The maximum number of permits allowed per year is three (3) per family. 
8-8.2.  Off-street parking is provided for all persons attending the sale. 
8-8.3.  No new or used merchandise is purchased or brought in for the sale. 
8-8.4.  All merchandise is that of the family or families conducting the sale. 
8-8.5.  Only one sign is posted advertising the sale and that sign is placed on the private property of the person conducting the sale. That the hours of the sale be from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. No Sunday sales will be allowed. 
8-8.6.  No public address system is used. 
8-8.7.  No alcoholic beverages of any type are served or given on or near the premises. 
8-8.8.  If upon inspection by the city manager's designee, (an inspector or a policeman) it is found that ordinance is being violated, a citation will be issued or the right to continue with the sale will be terminated at once. 
8-8.9.  The owner of any residence and/or the person to whom a permit is issued for the purpose of having a garage sale under this Ordinance who shall fail to comply with any part of it shall, upon conviction thereof before the city recorder, be fined not exceeding two-hundred (200) dollars or imprisoned not more than thirty (30) days for each offense. 
8-9. - EXEMPTIONS-HOMES FOR THE HANDICAPPED. 
    A home serving nine or fewer mentally or physically handicapped persons if it provides 24-hour care and is approved or licensed by a state agency, department or under contract with the agency or department for that purpose is exempt from local zoning ordinance requirements. Residents of such a home are perceived as a natural family as if related by blood or marriage. Prior to locating the home, the owner must give notice to the Town Council advising the exact site of the proposed home. 
8-10. - SATELLITE AND TV DISH ANTENNAE. 
    Satellite receiver dishes for TV signal reception are permitted in all residential commercial and industrial districts only if the following requirements are met: 
(a)  Receivers 39" in diameter or less must meet the setback requirements for the district in which it is placed. 
(b)  Receivers over 39" in diameter must meet the setback requirements for the district in which it is placed, and must be screened so as to not be visible from the right-of-way. 
8-11. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES. 
    It is the purpose of this section to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the continued deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of this ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent or effect of this section to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
8-11.1.  DEFINITIONS. 
(a)  ADULT ARCADE: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "certain sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(b)  ADULT BOOKSTORE/ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(i)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion picture, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
(ii)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale of rental of material depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and still be categorized as adult bookstore or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(c)  ADULT CABARET: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(i)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or 
(ii)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or 
(iii)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(d)  ADULT MOTEL: A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(i)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or specified anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or 
(ii)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; 
(iii)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours. 
(e)  ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(f)  ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities." 
(g)  ESCORT: A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
(h)  ESCORT AGENCY: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
(i)  ESTABLISHMENT: Includes any of the following: 
(i)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(ii)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(iii)  The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(iv)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
(j)  PERMITTEE AND/OR LICENSEE: A person in whose name a permit and/or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license. 
(k)  NUDE MODEL STUDIO: Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical area" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
(l)  NUDITY/STATE OF NUDITY: The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast. 
(m)  PERSON: Any individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
(n)  SEMI-NUDITY: A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
(o)  SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER: A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(i)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(ii)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude. 
(p)  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
(q)  SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: The male genitals in a state of sexual arousal and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female genitals. 
(r)  SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Includes any of the following: 
(i)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
(ii)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(iii)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(iv)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in [(i)] through [(iii)] above. 
(s)  SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT: The increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than twenty-five (25) percent, as the floor areas exist on July 1, 1990. 
(t)  TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP CONTROL: Includes any of the following: 
(i)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(ii)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(iii)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
8-11.2.  CLASSIFICATION. 
    Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(a)  Adult arcades; 
(b)  Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
(c)  Adult cabarets; 
(d)  Adult motels; 
(e)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(f)  Adult theaters; 
(g)  Escort agencies; 
(h)  Nude model studios; and 
(i)  Sexual encounter centers. 
8-11.3.  PERMIT REQUIRED. 
(a)  A person commits a misdemeanor if he operates a sexually oriented business without a valid permit issued by the city for the particular type of business. 
(b)  An application for a permit must be made on a form provided by the Zoning Administrator. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. 
(c)  The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the health department, fire department, and building official. 
(d)  If a person who wished to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business, each individual having a (10) percent or greater interest in the corporation must sign the application for a permit as applicant. 
(e)  The fact that a person possesses other types of state, county, or city permits and/or licenses does not exempt him from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business permit. 
8-11.4.  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT AND FEE. 
(a)  The Town Zoning Administrator shall approve the issuance of a permit to an applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application unless he finds one or more of the following to be true: 
(i)  An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(ii)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in his payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against him or imposed upon him in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
(iii)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the permit or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the applicant form. 
(iv)  An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a permit by the city to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding twelve (12) months, or residing with a person whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months. 
(v)  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the health department, fire department, and the building official as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(vi)  The permit fee required by this ordinance has not been paid. 
(vii)  An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this ordinance. 
(viii)  The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(b)  The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
8-11.5.  INSPECTION. 
    An application of permittee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, zoning department, or other city departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business, and it is unlawful to refuse to permit such inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
8-11.6.  EXPIRATION OF PERMIT. 
(a)  Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided herein. Application for renewal should be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date, and when made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be affected except for good cause shown. 
(b)  When the zoning administrator denies renewal of a permit, the applicant shall not be issued a permit for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the zoning administrator finds that the basis for denial of the renewal permit has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a permit. 
8-11.7.  SUSPENSION OF PERMIT. 
    The zoning administrator may suspend a permit for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he determines that a permittee or an employee of a permittee has: 
(a)  Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this ordinance; 
(b)  Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(c)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter; 
(d)  Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises. 
8-11.8.  REVOCATION OF PERMIT. 
(a)  The zoning administrator shall revoke a permit if a cause for suspension in Section 8-9.7 occurs and the permit has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months for willful and knowing violation of this ordinance. 
(b)  The zoning administrator shall revoke a permit if he determines that: 
(i)  A permittee knowingly gave false or misleading material information in the application submitted to the zoning department during the application process; 
(ii)  A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(iii)  A permittee or an employee knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(iv)  A permittee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the permittee's permit was suspended; 
(v)  A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sexual conduct to occur in or on the permitted premises; 
(vi)  A permittee is delinquent in payments to the city, county, or state for any taxes or fees past due related to the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  When the zoning administrator revokes a permit, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the permittee shall not be issued a sexually oriented permit for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation the zoning administrator finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a permit if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. 
8-11.9.  TRANSFER OF PERMIT. 
    A permittee shall not transfer his permit to another, nor shall a permittee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a permit at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
8-11.10.  LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  A person commits a misdemeanor if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business outside of a designated C-1 or I-1 district. All sexually oriented businesses shall be located within a C-1 or I-1 district. 
(c)  A person commits a misdemeanor if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of: 
(i)  A church; 
(ii)  A public or private elementary or secondary school; 
(iii)  A public park adjacent of any residential use; 
(iv)  The property line of a lot devoted to residential use. 
(d)  A person commits a misdemeanor if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(e)  A person commits a misdemeanor if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor areas of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
(f)  For the purpose of this ordinance, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church or public or private elementary or secondary school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district, or residential lot. 
(g)  For purposes of subsection (4) of this section, the distance between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(h)  Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on ___________ that is in violation of subsection (1) through (7) of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a periods not to exceed two (2) years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two (2) or more sexually oriented businesses are within one thousand (1,000) feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later-established business(es) is nonconforming. 
(i)  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business permit, of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, residential district, or a residential lot with one thousand (1,000) feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid permit, and does not apply when an application for a permit is submitted after a permit has expired or has been revoked. 
8-11.11.  ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT MOTELS. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two (2) or more times in a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter. 
(b)  A person commits a misdemeanor if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented permit, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (2) of this section, the terms "rent" or "subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
8-11.12.  REGULATIONS FOR EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR VIDEOS. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or other reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(i)  Upon application for a sexually oriented permit, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The zoning administrator may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(ii)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(iii)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the zoning administrator. 
(iv)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the zoning administrator or his designee. 
(v)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(vi)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (e) remains unobstructed by any walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times and in every booth or room in which viewing of videos, as defined in subsection (a) of this section, is taking place the bottom of the door must be at least eighteen (18) inches above the floor level, and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(vii)  No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time. 
(viii)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor level. 
(ix)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described above, is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsections [(i)] through [(ix)] of subsection [(a)] above commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
8-11.13.  EXEMPTIONS. 
    It is a defense to prosecution under this Article that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(a)  By a proprietary school, licensed by the State of South Carolina; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(b)  By a private college or university which maintains and operated education programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or University supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(c)  In a structure: 
(i)  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and 
(ii)  Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and 
(iii)  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any time. 
8-12. - COMMERCIAL BUILDING RE-USE. 
    The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant the re-use of an existing commercial building in the R-1, R-1A, R-2 and R-3 districts, provided that the following conditions are met: 
a.  The building under consideration is an existing building that was previously used for commercial uses; 
b.  The uses are limited to only the following: 
Advertising Agency; 
Apparel Stores-Men's, Women's, Children, Bridal Shops and Accessories; 
Bakeries; 
Beauty/Barber Shop; 
Computer Repair, Consultation and Sales; 
Confectionery/Candy Stores; 
Custom Tailors; 
Employment Agency; 
Florist; 
Health Food Stores; 
Income Tax Preparation Services; 
Live/Work Space with the following conditions: 
1.  Commercial uses are limited to the ones listed above. 
2.  A minimum of eighty (80) percent of the structure's street front facade at street level shall be occupied by nonresidential uses. 
3.  Parking for live/work spaces is prohibited in the front of the building. 
4.  For parking requirements see section 6-16 "Off-Street Automobile Parking and Storage." 
5.  Live/Work spaces must have at least two (2) exits. 
6.  At least one (1) resident shall maintain a valid business license and special exception approval for a business on the premises. 
Medical Equipment Rental; 
Pet-grooming Services; 
Portrait Photographer; 
Shoe Repair Shop; 
Spa inclusive of Nail Salon; 
c.  Parking requirements for the use requested are met; 
d.  Only wall signs meeting the requirements of Article 9 are permitted; 
e.  The buffer requirements in Section 6-13 are met. 
(Ord. of xx-xx-xxxx; Ord. of 9-9-2013) 
8-13. - BED AND BREAKFAST. 
    Bed and breakfast operations subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The operation shall be located on a lot of record of no less than one (1) acre. 
b.  There shall be one (1) off-street parking space for each room in the bed and breakfast operation made available for overnight occupancy. 
c.  There shall be no more than eight (8) rentable rooms in an individual permitted bed and breakfast establishment. 
d.  No bed and breakfast establishment shall house or shelter the same individual(s) for any period exceeding seven (7) days. A bed and breakfast establishment is not to be confused with a rooming or boarding house which usually provides shelter for transient occupants for a longer period of time. 
e.  Opaque screening shall be provided between any required off-street parking and adjoining residentially occupied structure(s) situated within twenty-five (25) feet of the property line provided that parking is located within fifteen (15) feet of the affected property. No required parking space shall be located nearer than five (5) feet from any side or rear property line. 
f.  The bed and breakfast establishment shall be permitted one (1) non-illuminated wall sign not to exceed nine (9) square feet. 
g.  The owner of the bed and breakfast shall reside at the address where the bed and breakfast is permitted. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002) 
[ARTICLE] 9. - REGULATION OF SIGNS 

9-1. - INTENT. 
    The intent of this [Article] is to establish requirements for placement, installation and maintenance of business and advertising signs, in order to preserve and protect the health, safety, welfare and general well-being of the community's citizens. As regulation of placement, construction and maintenance of buildings and structures is a valid use of the police power, so too is regulation of placement, installation and maintenance of signs, since such signs in the literal sense must ordinarily be considered structures, and in a practical sense are capable of producing many of the same nuisances as are produced by buildings. 
    Regulation of placement, installation and maintenance of signs is further justified by their purpose which is to draw mental attention to them, potentially to the detriment of sound driving practices and to the safety of the motoring public to which a majority of signs are oriented. Therefore, it is the intent of the [Article] to regulate the size and location of business and advertising signs so that their purpose can be served without unduly interfering with motorists and causing unsafe conditions. 
    Finally, it is the objective of this [Article] to protect and preserve the aesthetic qualities of the community by regulating placement, installation and maintenance of signs. The fact that such signs are intended to command visual contact grants to business and advertising signs a proportionately greater role than other structures in determining the overall aesthetic quality of the community. The aesthetic impact of business and advertising signs is an economic fact which may bear heavily upon the enjoyment and value of property; therefore the regulation of signs is validly justified on the basis of conserving the value of property and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the municipality. It is contended that it is not irrational for a community's citizens to plan their physical surroundings in such a way that unsightliness is minimized. 
    With this purpose in mind, it is the intent of the [Article] to authorize the use of business and advertising signs which are: 
a.  Compatible with their surroundings; 
b.  Appropriate to the type of activity to which they pertain; 
c.  Expressive of the identify of the individual proprietors or of the community as a whole; 
d.  Large enough to convey a message about the owner or occupants of a particular property, the products or services available on such property, or the business activities conducted on such property, yet small enough to preserve and protect the natural beauty of the town and limit distractions to motorists. 
9-2. - DEFINITIONS. 
    In addition to the definitions set forth in Article 3 of this Ordinance, the following definitions relate to signs: 
9-2.1.  DISPLAY SURFACE AREA: That area of a sign including the entire area within a regular geometric shape or combination of regular geometric shapes enclosing all of the elements of informational or representational matter displayed, including blank masking or any surface shape intended to convey ideas, information, or meaning. Frames or structural members not bearing informational or representation matter shall not be included in calculating the display surface area. 
9-2.2.  HEIGHT: Distance from top of sign to crown of road. 
9-2.3.  PREMISES: The contiguous land in the same ownership which is not divided by any public highway, street or alley or right-of-way. 
9-2.4.  ROOF LINE: Either the edge of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever forms the top line of the building silhouette. 
9-2.5.  SIGN: Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images, provided however, that the following shall not be included in the application of the regulations herein: 
a.  Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only property numbers, post office box numbers, names of occupants of premises, or other identification of premises not having commercial connotations. 
b.  Flags and insignia of any government except when displayed in connection with commercial promotion. 
c.  Legal notices, identification, informational, or directional signs erected or required by governmental bodies. 
d.  Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings except letters, trademarks, moving parts, or moving lights. 
e.  Signs directing and guiding traffic within private property, but bearing no advertising matter. 
9-2.6.  SIGN, ADVERTISING: Any sign which relates in its subject matter to products, accommodations, services, or activities sold or offered elsewhere than upon the premises on which such sign is located. Mobile signs and portable signs may be advertising signs, and advertising signs include, but are not limited to, those signs commonly referred to as outdoor advertising signs, billboards, or poster boards. 
9-2.7.  SIGN, BENCH: A sign painted, located on, or attached to any part of the surface of a bench, seat, or chair placed on or adjacent to a public place or roadway. 
9-2.8.  SIGN, BUSINESS: A sign that directs attention to a business or profession conducted, or to a commodity or service sold, offered, or manufactured or to an entertainment offered on the premises where the sign is located. Mobile signs and portable signs may be business signs, but billboards or advertising signs as defined in Section 11-2.6 are not business signs. 
9-2.9.  SIGN, CANOPY: Any sign mounted under any canopy, marquee, or awning. 
9-2.10.  SIGN, CHANGING MESSAGE: Any electrically or electronically controlled sign where different messages are shown such as but not limited to time and temperature information. 
9-2.11.  SIGN, COPY: All words, letters, numbers, figures, characters, art works, symbols, or insignia that are used on a display surface area. 
9-2.12.  SIGN, DIRECTIONAL: Non-advertising directional sign or symbol (entrance, exit, no parking, in, out, arrow, etc.) located on and pertaining to a given premise. 
9-2.13.  SIGN, DIRECTORY: A sign listing the tenants or occupants of a building or group of buildings and that may indicate their respective professions or business activities. When an identification of an entity is placed on a common directory board with identical uniform style and size of letters, such identity shall not be defined as a separate sign but considered as a part of a directory board sign. 
9-2.14.  SIGN, FLASHING: A sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light source or gives the illusion thereof and contains no written changing message. 
9-2.15.  SIGN, FREESTANDING: A sign which is permanently affixed to the ground and which is not a part of a building or other structure. 
9-2.16.  SIGN, GROUND OR MONUMENT-TYPE: A freestanding sign which extends from the ground or is attached directly to the ground generally for the entire length of its bottom sign face dimension or which has a support which places the bottom of the sign less than twelve (12) inches from the ground. 
9-2.17.  SIGN, ILLUMINATED: Any sign which emanates lights(s), either by means of exposed tubing or lamps on its surface, or by means of illumination transmitted through the sign faces. 
9-2.18.  SIGN, MARQUEE: Any hood or awning of permanent construction projecting from the wall of a building above an entrance and extending over a thoroughfare. 
9-2.19.  SIGN, MOBILE: A sign which may be moved from one location to another, is not permanently affixed to the ground, and is differentiated from a "portable sign" in that it may be equipped for transporting by motor vehicle or other mechanical means and includes signs referred to as trailer signs. Such signs may be considered as either business signs or advertising signs according to their utilization. 
9-2.20.  SIGN, NONCONFORMING: Any sign that was legally in existence prior to this Ordinance and made illegal by this Ordinance. 
9-2.21.  SIGN, PORTABLE: A sign that is not permanent, affixed to a building, structure, or the ground. 
9-2.22.  SIGN, PROJECTING: A sign attached to a building or other structure and extending more than twelve (12) inches beyond that portion of the building or structure to which it is attached. 
9-2.23.  SIGN, PYLON: A freestanding sign supported by one or more structures or poles that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground, or other surface and otherwise separated from the ground more than twelve (12) inches by air, generally over seven (7) feet in height, and that is independent from any building or other structure. 
9-2.24.  SIGN, REAL ESTATE: A "For Sale," "Rent," or "Lease" sign. 
9-2.25.  SIGN, REVOLVING: Any sign or portion of a sign that moves in a revolving or similar manner. 
9-2.26.  SIGN, ROOF: Any sign extending above the highest portion of the building upon which it is mounted. 
9-2.27.  SIGN, WALL: Any sign attached flat and parallel to the exterior wall or surface of a building or other structure and which projects not more than twelve (12) inches from that wall or surface. 
9-2.28.  SIGN, WINDBLOWN: Any spinner, flag, bunting, banner or other sign or device that may be moved by the wind or other movements of the atmosphere. 
9-2.29.  SIGN, WINDOW: Any sign mounted inside a window for purposes of viewing from the outside, not to include merchandise on display. 
9-3. - ADMINISTRATION. 
9-3.1.  PERMITS. 
(a)  Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, alter or display in the Town any sign without first obtaining a permit indicating compliance with the provisions and regulations of this Ordinance. 
This section shall not be construed to require any permit for a change of copy on any existing sign, not for the repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance or repair of a sign for which a permit has previously been issued, as long as the sign is not modified in any way. A permit shall be required for a new business making any change on any existing sign. 
Every sign permit issued by the Building Official shall become null and void if the sign is not erected or completed within one hundred and eighty (180) days. In the event the applicant wishes to extend the permit he shall do so as set forth in the Standard Building Code. 
(b)  Application for Permit: All applications for permits required by this Ordinance shall be filed by the General Contractor (Class A or B); Sign Manufacturer, Sign Painter or property owner together with the proper fee established herein in the Office of the Building Official upon forms furnished by the Town. Said applications shall be complete and accurately filled out. If the permit is not filed by the property owner, then attached to the application shall be the written permission properly notarized for the erection of such sign from the owner or his agent of the property to contain such sign. 
(c)  Issuance of Permit: The Building Official shall issue to all applicants complying with this Ordinance a written permit evidencing such compliance. 
(d)  Inspection: After inspection of the sign, the Building Official shall affix an identification tag bearing the legend: 
"TOWN OF BATESBURG-LEESVILLE SIGN PERMIT #_________" and the permit number. The identification tag shall be permanently attached to the sign or its supporting structure in such a manner as to be visible from the street or roadway. 
When applicable, inspections are required for all foundations and footings, framing, setbacks and heights. The Building Official, upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, shall make the inspections of the sign and such other inspections as may be necessary, or shall notify the permit holder or his agent wherein the same fails to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance or the requirements of the Standard Building Code. 
(e)  Fees: Fees shall be in accordance with "Batesburg-Leesville Sign Permit Fee Schedule." 
(f)  License: Any sign other than those exempted by this Ordinance shall be erected only by a person, firm or corporation licensed under the Town Business License Ordinance to do business as a sign manufacturer, general contractor (Class A or B) or sign painter, such license to be renewed annually. 
9-4. - COMPLIANCE. 
(a)  Compliance Required: All signs shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this Ordinance. 
(b)  Removal of Signs: Signs shall be removed under any of the following conditions: 
(i)  Any sign erected, constructed, altered or displayed without a sign permit and identification tag. 
(ii)  Any sign not conforming to the Standard Building Code. 
(iii)  Any sign not maintained according to the provisions of Article 9. 
(iv)  Any sign now or hereafter existing and in conformance with this Ordinance which advertises a business no longer conducted, or a product no longer sold shall have the sign copy removed within thirty (30) days after written notification from the Building Official, or sixty (60) days after termination of the business or product, whichever comes first. 
(v)  Any nonconforming sign which advertises a business no longer conducted, or a product no longer sold shall be removed within thirty (30) days after written notification from the Zoning Administrator or sixty (60) days after termination of the business or product, whichever comes first. 
(vi)  Any sign which advertises a business where the sign no longer represents the business on the premises shall be removed or altered to conform to the present Ordinance requirements, and a new sign permit shall be required. 
(vii)  Subject to the provisions of Article 9, any sign that becomes nonconforming under this Ordinance which is more than thirty three and one-third percent (33.3%) destroyed based on current dollar value, shall be removed or altered to conform to present Ordinance requirements, and a new permit shall be required. 
(c)  Upon adoption of this Ordinance, all legal, nonconforming signs within the Town of Batesburg-Leesville shall comply with Article 9. 
9-5. - MAINTENANCE. 
    Signs shall be maintained as follows: 
9-5.1.  Signs shall be kept clean, neatly painted and free from all hazards such as, but not limited to, faulty wiring, loose fastenings and sharp or otherwise dangerous protrusions; and must be maintained at all times not to be detrimental to the public health and safety. No sign shall be allowed to deteriorate to a condition in which it is unsightly in appearance or to a condition in which it requires repairs or renovations in an amount which exceeds forty (40%) percent of its current replacement cost. Signs which deteriorate to such a condition are deemed to be in violation of this Ordinance and as such, must be either removed or improved or the person responsible for maintaining the sign shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter provided for the violation of this Ordinance. 
9-5.2.  Weeds shall be kept cut and no trash or rubbish shall be allowed to accumulate in the area immediately surrounding a sign. 
9-5.3.  It is prohibited to maintain any structure formerly used as a sign and not in use for any other purpose for more than sixty (60) days after its use as a sign has ceased. After this period, the town may cause removal at the owner's expense. 
9-6. - ENFORCEMENT. 
    This [Article] shall be enforced in the following manner: 
9-6.1.  The Zoning Administrator shall be the enforcing official and is charged with the duty of administering the provisions of this [Article] and securing compliance herewith. In furtherance of this responsibility, the enforcing official shall: 
a.  Make such inspections as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes and intent of this [Article] and to initiate appropriate action to bring about compliance with this [Article] if such inspection discloses any instance of non-compliance. 
b.  Investigate thoroughly any complaints of alleged violations of this [Article] , and indicate clearly in writing, as a public record in his office the disposition made of such complaints. 
c.  Order in writing, as set out below, the remedy of all conditions or all violations of the Article found to exist in or on any premises. 
d.  State in the violation order a time limit for compliance herewith as hereinafter set out. 
e.  Request the assistance of the Town Attorney and/or the State Attorney in taking appropriate legal action upon the failure of the responsible party to comply with such violation order by the time specified therein. 
9-6.2.  The enforcing official or his agent is authorized and directed to lawfully enter in and upon all premises at reasonable times to determine their condition insofar as the provisions of this [Article] are applicable, and to obtain search warrants when necessary to do so. 
9-6.3.  Whenever the enforcing official determines that a violation of this [Article] exists, he shall take action as follows: 
a.  Give written notice of the violation to the occupant and the owner shown on the most recent tax roll of the Town, and to the holder of the certificate of occupancy, if different from both the occupant and owner. 
9-6.4.  SERVICE OF NOTICE. 
a.  Service of a written notice is required by this [Article] and shall be deemed complete if the notice is personally delivered to the person or persons required under the provisions of this [Article] to be served with such notice, and if the same cannot reasonably be personally delivered within the Town, then service shall be deemed complete upon sending same by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of such person or persons and by posting a copy of such notice in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
b.  The enforcing official shall endorse on a retained copy of the written notice the manner of service of the notice or notices as are hereby required. 
9-6.5.  EFFECT OF NOTICE. 
    When a notice served in accordance with this [Article] is not appealed within the time limit prescribed hereinafter, or when such a notice is appealed and the decision of the enforcing official is not reversed, or when no appeal is provided for herein, the notice becomes an order. If the notice is appealed and modified, the modified notice becomes an order. Such an order shall be effective as to every day the violation continues, from the first day of the order until the date the order is complied with. 
9-6.6.  ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES. 
    When a notice of violation becomes an order, the enforcing official shall take such steps as are necessary to enforce compliance with the order. Such steps may include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Requesting the assistance of the State Attorney to prosecute for each day of violation, from the first date of the order until the order is complied with. 
b.  Requesting the assistance of the Town Attorney to seek injunctive or other relief. 
c.  Initiating proceedings for revoking the certificate of occupancy for the premises on which the violation occurred. 
9-7. - APPEALS AND VARIANCES. 
9-7.1.  Appeals: There is hereby established an appeals board for violations of this Article. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall serve and perform the duties of such appeals board under the provisions set forth under Section 1 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
9-7.2.  Variances: Any person aggrieved by the effect of this [Article] upon signs may petition to the Board of Appeals for a variance, following procedures and criteria outlined in Section 1 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
9-8. - VIOLATION AND PENALTIES. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, cause to be erected, maintain, or cause to be maintained any sign without full compliance with the restrictions, requirements and provisions of this [Article] , or to otherwise violate any provisions of this Ordinance. Each day a violation occurs or continues, regardless of whether such violation is ultimately corrected, shall constitute a separate offense. Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this [Article] shall be punished as provided in Code of Ordinances of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, South Carolina. 
9-9. - PROHIBITED SIGNS. 
9-9.1.  No sign shall be attached to or placed against a building in such a way as to prevent egress through any door or window required or designed for access to any building, nor shall any sign obstruct or be attached to a fire escape. 
9-9.2.  No sign shall be erected in such a manner as to obstruct the view of roads from pedestrian walks. 
9-9.3.  No sign between a height of two and one-half (21/2) feet and nine (9) feet above the center line grades of intersecting streets shall be permitted within twenty (20) feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two streets, or of a street and a railroad, or of a driveway or alley and a street. Any sign between two and one-half (21/2) and nine (9) feet in height located between twenty (20) and twenty-five (25) feet of a driveway shall be setback at least ten (10) feet from the right-of-way of any street to which the driveway provides access. 
9-9.4.  Signs imitating traffic or emergency signals: No sign shall be permitted which imitates an official traffic sign or signal, or contains words or symbols displayed in a manner which might mislead or confuse drivers of vehicles, or which displays intermittent lights resembling the color, size, shape or order of lights customarily used in traffic signals or on emergency vehicles or law enforcement vehicles, except as a part of a permitted private or public traffic control sign. 
9-9.5.  Any lights used for sign illumination shall be so designed as to concentrate the illumination upon the sign and shall not glare upon the street or upon adjacent property. 
9-9.6.  Flashing, windblown pennants and revolving signs are prohibited. Windblown banners with text are permitted under the portable sign provisions, provided that they have a sign permit, are limited in area to fifty (50) square feet if not attached to the building, and are used for one period a year, not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
9-9.7.  Signs displaying any statements, words, character or illustrations that do not meet community standards as deemed by the Town Council are discouraged. 
9-9.8.  Signs attached to any tree, shrub or utility pole are prohibited. 
9-9.9.  It is prohibited to maintain upon any sign any commercial message, except one which advertises some product, service, activity, event, person, institution or business located on the premises where the sign is located, or the sale or rental of such premises except where permitted in [the] Section regarding Off-Premises Advertising. 
9-9.10.  Roof signs are prohibited. 
9-9.11.  Signs on vehicles either attached to or painted on vehicles or any type which are conspicuously parked in close proximity to the right-of-way and are obviously parked in such a way to advertise any business to the passing motorist or pedestrian are prohibited. 
9-9.12.  Any sign placed on or in any public right-of-way is prohibited. 
9-9.13.  Off-premises advertising signs are prohibited. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2006) 
9-10. - EXEMPTIONS. 
    The following signs may be erected without a permit, subject however to the remaining requirements of these regulations: 
9-10.1.  Occupational signs denoting only the name, street number and occupation of an occupant in a professional office, medical clinic, or nursing home, not exceeding four (4) square feet in surface area. 
9-10.2.  Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other non-combustible material. 
9-10.3.  In Residential Districts one (1) real estate sign not exceeding four (4) square feet. 
9-10.4.  Temporary campaign signs which relate to a candidate or candidates for public office or to a ballot measure which shall be confined wholly to placement on private property and shall be removed within five (5) days after the election or elections. Each parcel is limited to one sign per office or ballot measure. Surface area shall be a maximum of 4.5 square feet with no lights. Campaign signs must adhere to the vision clearance regulations at intersections as contained in Section 6-8. The regulations of this section do not prohibit purchase of advertising space on permitted advertising signs in addition to the signs permitted herein. 
9-10.5.  Civic club, religious, public and eleemosynary organization signs not exceeding four (4) square feet whether on or off the premises, provided these signs are not located in the public right-of-way. 
9-10.6.  Directory signs not exceeding ten (10) square feet, and giving the name and/or occupation of the occupants of the building or buildings. When the identification of any entity is placed on a directory sign, such identification shall not be counted as a separate sign, so long as all lettering on the directory is of uniform style, size and coloration, and such identification does not exceed one (1) square foot in area. 
9-10.7.  Temporary garage sale signs in residential districts. Limitations: advertisement contained on any garage sale sign shall be limited to "Garage Sale" and address only and shall not exceed four (4) square feet in surface area. Only one sign shall be posted advertising the sale, and that sign shall be on private property of the person conducting the sale. 
9-10.8.  Business identification signs painted on or otherwise attached to motor vehicles. 
9-10.9.  "Bumper stickers" attached to motor vehicles. 
9-10.10.  Window signs. 
9-10.11.  Banner signs as approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
9-10.12.  One (1) temporary sign at each entrance announcing a land subdivision development, provided that such sign does not exceed fifty (50) square feet in area, is set back at least twenty (20) feet from any property line, and is removed not more than thirty (30) days from such time as fifty-one (51) percent of the lots are conveyed. 
9-10.13.  One (1) sign each of craftsmen, artisans, house painters, contractors, or subcontractors during the period that such persons are performing repair, remodeling, repainting or improvement work on the premises on which such signs are erected, provided that the size of such signs is not in excess of four (4) square feet and that such signs are removed immediately upon completion of the work. 
9-10.14.  One (1) sign displaying the names of building contractor, architects, engineers, and similar information upon the premises or any work under construction or any work of major repair or improvement, provided that the sign does not exceed fifty (50) square feet in area is removed within seven (7) days after completion of the work. 
9-11. - SIGNS PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. 
    Signs are permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and PDD districts subject to the following regulations: 
9-11.1.  SIGNS EXCLUDED FROM REGULATION BY DEFINITION: Those signs excluded from regulation by Section 9-2.5 are permitted. 
9-11.2.  EXEMPTED SIGNS: Exempted signs permitted in all districts as provided in Section 9-10 shall be permitted. 
9-11.3.  PERMANENT SUBDIVISION SIGNS: Permanent signs displaying no information other than the name of the residential land subdivision in which they are located shall be permitted provided that such signs do not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area, do not encroach upon vision clearances established in Section 6-8, and are maintained in accordance with provisions of Section 9-5. One sign per entrance is allowed. In newly developed properties, the property owner shall be responsible for providing one (1) square foot of planting or lawn for every two (2) square feet of sign within the immediate location of the sign. All such planting plans will be approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
9-11.4.  GROUP RESIDENTIAL USES AND NON-RESIDENTIAL USES Signs relating to permitted group housing developments, mobile home parks, residential high rise structures, and permitted non-residential uses of a recreational, civic, charitable, fraternal, cultural, religious, educational, institutional, governmental and service nature, and not elsewhere regulated or specified, may be erected, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  Size: Not to exceed twenty (20) square feet of display surface area per street frontage. 
b.  Location: Not to exceed one (1) sign per street frontage. If building mounted, such signs shall be flat wall signs. 
c.  Height: If building mounted, such signs shall not project above the roof line. If freestanding, such signs shall not exceed four (4) feet above ground level when located in required front yards, or six (6) feet above ground level when located elsewhere. All vision clearances established by Sections 6-8 must be observed. 
d.  Setbacks: Setbacks for ground signs shall be a minimum of five (5) feet from the legal front property line. Setbacks from the side and rear property lines shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet except as otherwise set out in this Ordinance. 
e.  Additional signs allowed: In addition to those signs allowed under a, b, and c above, not more than one bulletin or notice board displaying information related to activities or services conducted or offered on the premises may be erected provided that display surface area of such bulletin or notice board does not exceed twenty (20) square feet. 
9-11.5.  DIRECTIONAL SIGNS SHALL REQUIRE A PERMIT: One directional sign, not to exceed four (4) square feet in area may be placed at each entrance and exist to a premise. Directional signs are not included toward sign totals. 
9-11.6.  ADVERTISING SIGNS: Advertising signs are prohibited in residential districts except as defined per Section 8-5.8. 
(Ord. of 9-9-2002) 
9-12. - SIGNS PERMITTED IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS. 
    Signs are permitted in the C-1, C-2, and I-1 and the PDD districts [subject to the following regulations:] 
9-12.1.  ADVERTISING SIGNS Advertising signs are permitted in C-1, C-2 and I-1 districts. 
9-12.2.  TEMPORARY CAMPAIGN SIGNS: Temporary campaign signs are permitted subject to the provisions of Section 9-10.4. 
9-12.3.  SIGNS PERMITTED AS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS: Sign excluded from regulation by definition, temporary signs, permanent subdivision signs, group residential use signs, and non-residential use signs shall be permitted as for residential districts, provided, however, that signs meeting the following requirements shall also be permitted, and that the least restrictive requirements for either residential or non-residential districts shall prevail in non-residential districts. 
9-12.4.  DISPLAY SURFACE AREA OF SIGNS: Measurement of sign area will be conducted as follows: where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign, except where two such faces are placed back to back and are at no point more than two (2) feet from one another, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of one face if the two faces are of equal area, or as the area of the larger face if the two faces are of unequal area. Where a sign consists solely of lettering or other sign elements printed or mounted on a wall of a building without any distinguishing border, panel or background, any blank rectangular area which is more than ten (10) percent of the area of the sign as otherwise computed shall be disregarded. All of the lettering and other sign elements printed or painted upon a wall of a building without any distinguishing border, panel or background and pertaining to the same enterprise shall be treated as a single sign for purposes of area computation. 
a.  For signs attached to buildings, the sum total of their area must not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the first story wall to which they are attached. This wall must face a public street or parking lot. Each business within a shopping center for which a separate occupational license has been issued shall be permitted one wall sign not to exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the area of its own individual exterior wall facing a public street or parking lot. 
b.  Freestanding signs for individual businesses on separate lots are limited to a maximum of seventy (70) square feet for the entire lot. 
c.  When more than one business is located on one lot in a shopping center, the maximum permitted area of the freestanding sign is one hundred-fifty (150) square feet for the whole shopping center. 
d.  On-premises, freestanding signs within five hundred (500) feet of an Interstate highway may be up to one hundred-fifty (150) square feet in area. 
9-12.5.  NUMBER OF SIGNS. 
a.  For signs attached to buildings, there can be any number of signs on a particular wall directly facing a public street or parking lot, but their area must not exceed the requirements of Section 9-12.4.a above. 
b.  Only one (1) freestanding sign is permitted per parcel. 
c.  Signs located on interiors of enclosed malls are exempt. 
9-12.6.  HEIGHT LIMITATIONS. 
a.  Freestanding on-premises signs in all other commercial and industrial areas of the Town: twenty (20) feet. 
b.  On-premises, freestanding signs, within five hundred (500) feet of an Interstate, shall be permitted up to forty (40) feet in height outright. These signs may be a maximum of seventy-five (75) feet in height provided that an additional foot in sign setback is created for each additional three (3) feet in height over forty (40) feet. 
c.  Projecting signs: No projecting sign shall project above the highest point of the roof of the structure to which it is attached. No projecting sign shall be supported by any visible guy, braces, or supports of any kind. Internal supports only shall be allowed. 
d.  In the I-1 zone no freestanding sign shall exceed the height of thirty-five (35) feet except that on property adjacent to Interstate highways. 
9-12.7.  LOCATION. 
a.  Wall signs may be located anywhere on any wall of a building. 
b.  Setbacks for freestanding signs: Setbacks for freestanding signs shall be a minimum of 10 feet from the front property line, and 3 feet from the side property lines. 
c.  No sign within a commercial or industrial district shall be erected within ten (10) feet of any residential district boundary line unless such sign would meet the sign requirements for non-residential uses permitted within the residential district to which it is adjacent. 
9-12.8.  PORTABLE SIGNS AND BANNERS: Portable signs and banners are prohibited in the Town of Batesburg-Leesville except in compliance with the following: 
a.  If a sign permit for a specified length of time for the portable sign or banner has been issued to the business. Each parcel is permitted one portable sign or banner permit per year. The portable sign shall be removed from the parcel by the business immediately upon expiration of the sign permit. 
b.  If the sign or banner with text will be in place on the parcel for no more than one period of time per year, such period not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days annually. 
c.  If the portable sign or banner is securely tied down and/or in accordance with the Standard Building Code, whichever is applicable, to ensure public safety. 
d.  If the portable sign is internally lit, it must have a UL label or equivalent and it must have permanently installed electrical service from a permanent structure. 
e.  Setbacks shall be as specified in Section 9-12.7. The Building Official may impose special setback requirements if a situation requires doing so. 
f.  If the freestanding portable sign or banner does not exceed fifty (50) square feet. Banners with text attached to walls may not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the first floor wall surface to which they are attached. 
g.  If the portable sign or banner has not been erected in a required parking space. 
h.  If the portable sign has no flashing lights. 
9-12.9.  BENCH SIGNS: Bench signs are permitted, subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  Only one advertisement per bench; 
b.  The maximum dimensions of the bench sign shall be 8 feet in length by 2 feet in height; 
c.  Only one bench sign per business. 
9-12.10.  DIRECTIONAL SIGNS SHALL REQUIRE A PERMIT: One directional sign not to exceed four (4) square feet in area may be placed at each entrance and exit to a business. Directional signage which includes advertising messages, business names, or logos will be counted as a portion of the total allowable square footage for the freestanding sign on the property. Directional signs without such information are not included towards sign totals. 
9-12.11.  One (1) sign used to display menus at restaurant drive-thrus limited to a size of thirty (30) square feet. 
9-12.12.  Real estate signs in business and industrial zoning districts may be erected by owner or agent of property, not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. Signs shall conform to the remaining requirements of this Ordinance. 
9-12.13.  The contractor shall be responsible for cleaning and removing all trash, rubbish and rock caused by the installation of the sign. 
9-13. - SIGNS PERMITTED IN PDD DISTRICTS. 
    No specific regulations are imposed upon signs located PDD district. However, it is the intent of this Ordinance that signs within districts be appropriate for the locations in which they are established, and that regulations governing the display surface area, number, location, and height of signs should be generally followed as for the least restrictive zone related to site size of the development. 
9-14. - OFF-PREMISES ADVERTISING. 
9-14.1.  INTENT. 
Outdoor advertising signs are herein regulated in the interest of promoting traffic safety, safeguarding public health and preventing adverse community appearance and the overcrowding of land, and protecting the character of the area in which they are located. The regulations are designed to permit maximum legibility and effectiveness of signs and to prevent their over-concentration, improper placement, and excessive height, bulk, and area. it is recognized that, unlike on-premise signs which are in actuality a part of a business, outdoor advertising is a separate and distinct business. With a view to this distinction, outdoor advertising signs are regulated differently from on-premises signs. In general, it is intended that outdoor advertising signs be located away from residential areas, that such signs be regulated to permit industry standard size signs, to protect the character of the area wherein outdoor advertising signs are located and to conserve property values in these areas, and that outdoor advertising signs be located away from adjoining properties and nearby buildings to prevent damage from wind toppled signs. 
9-14.2.  Design Regulations: All outdoor advertising signs shall be consistent with all definitions and shall comply with all standards and regulations of this code. Except for ordinary maintenance, poster panel replacements, copy changes or repair not involving structural, material or electrical changes, no outdoor advertising signs, or part thereof, shall be erected, altered, constructed, changed, converted, enlarged or moved unless in conformity with this code. 
a.  Area of Outdoor Advertising Signs: No outdoor advertising sign, including any cut-out areas, may exceed six hundred and seventy-five (675) square feet area, with a maximum length of sixty (60) feet. The sign area is measured by finding the area of the minimum imaginary rectangle or square of vertical and horizontal lines which fully enclose all extremities of the sign, excluding supports, the base or apron unless such copy, message, announcement, or, decoration appears on the base or apron. The allowable sign area of signs with equal size and shape for both double faced (back-to-back and V-type signs is measured by computing the area of only one (1) side of the sign. 
b.  Height: No outdoor advertising sign, including cut-outs; base or apron; supports, supporting buildings or structures; and trim may exceed the established building height limitation, as provided in this chapter, for the zoning district wherein the sign is located. 
c.  Construction Standards: 
(i)  Compliance with Building Codes: All signs shall comply with the appropriate detailed provisions of the South Carolina and city building codes, the National Electric Code and other provisions of the Code of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville. 
(ii)  Clearance from High Voltage Power Lines: Outdoor advertising signs shall be located in such a way that they maintain horizontal and vertical clearance of all overhead electrical conductors in accordance with the National Electric Code provided that in no case shall an outdoor advertising sign be erected closer than 10 feet horizontally or vertically from any conductor or public utility guy wire. 
(iii)  Corner Lots: To prevent obstructions to motorists, on any corner lot, no part of an outdoor advertising sign may be located within a triangular area formed by the street rights-of-way lines and a line connecting them at points fifty (50) feet from the rights-of-way intersection. 
(iv)  Setback Requirements: All outdoor advertising signs with an area greater than two hundred (200) square feet must be set back from any building or property line a distance, measured from the front and back faces of the sign, equal to the height of the outdoor advertising sign, unless the sign is a wall sign or is constructed to withstand minimum wind velocity pressures of thirty (30) pounds per square foot (PSF). Compliance with all other setback and yard requirements contained in this Section [is] applicable to outdoor advertising signs. 
(v)  Spacing of Signs: Along major access corridors, outdoor advertising signs shall be located five hundred (500) feet apart. Along all other streets, outdoor advertising signs shall be located three hundred (300) feet apart. Off-premises signs, where permitted along Interstate highways, shall be at least two thousand (2,000) feet apart on the same side of the Interstate. Governmental signs and outdoor advertising signs no more than seventy-four (74) square feet in area which provide directional information about religious sites shall not be counted nor shall measurements be made from them for purposes of determining compliance with spacing requirements. The minimum distance between outdoor advertising signs shall be measured linearly along the nearest edge of the pavement between points directly opposite the sign. Spacing requirements shall apply only on outdoor advertising signs located on the same side of the street, highway, or expressway. 
9-14.3.  SPECIFIC OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN REGULATIONS: Outdoor advertising signs which comply with the provisions of this code and which contain no more than two (2) surfaces facing one (1) direction are permitted in [the] I-1 District within five-hundred (500) feet of Interstate highway right-of-ways. 
9-14.4.  PROHIBITED SIGNS: See Section 12-9. 
9-15. - EXISTING NONCONFORMING SIGNS. 
    Any existing sign which is in violation of Sections 9-9.11, 9-12.5, 9-12.6, 9-12.7 or 9-14 shall display the proper permit. For additional regulations regarding nonconforming signs, please see Section 9-4. 
[ARTICLE] 10. - LANDSCAPING 

10-1. - LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS. 
    These requirements apply to all developments or redevelopments with a change in use of greater intensity, or where an expansion or redevelopment of a property results in an increase in the value of the property by 50% or more of the pre-development value, or an increase of 50% or more of the building or parking areas within the Town of Batesburg-Leesville jurisdiction, with the exception of the construction, enlargement or repair of any single-family detached dwelling. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
10-2. - LANDSCAPING PLAN REQUIREMENTS. 
    In addition to the site plan requirements from the appropriate land development regulation sections, the following standards shall apply: 
(a)  North arrow and scale. 
(b)  Topographic information and final grading adequate to identify and properly specify planting for areas needing slope protection. 
(c)  The location and contours, at one (1) foot intervals, of all proposed berms. 
(d  The location and dimensions of all existing (to remain) and proposed structures, setback line and required buffer yards, parking lots, driveways, landscaped islands and strips, sidewalks, service areas, screening, fences, walls, berms, above or underground utilities and storm drainage systems, freestanding electrical equipment, recreational facilities, and other freestanding structural features as determined necessary by the Town. 
(e)  Location of plant material, including name of plants (botanical and common), installation size, spread at time of planting and at maturity, quantities of plants, and other remarks as appropriate to describe plant selection (lawns and beds of annual or perennial plants may be designated by common names only). 
(f)  Onsite and abutting land use features [within 50 feet], and use(s) of adjacent parcel(s). 
(g)  Protection plan for existing trees that are to be saved. 
(h)  Location of irrigation system, if any, to landscaped areas. 
(i)  Such other information as may be deemed necessary because of the landscaping requirements or physical characteristics peculiar to the particular development. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
10-3. - STANDARDS. 
10-3.1.  Planting - Vegetation used in landscaping or screening should be planted during the dormant season to ensure the best chance of survival. A surety bond may be required to insure the installation of landscaping, especially during the growing season. 
10-3.2.  Driver Visibility - Landscaping, including existing or planted material, shall not obstruct the view of motorists using any street, private driveway, parking aisles or the approach to any street intersection. 
10-3.3.  Maintenance - The owner is responsible for maintaining all required plant material in good health. Any dead, unhealthy or missing plants must be replaced with vegetation that conforms to the initial planting standards of this section. All landscape planting areas shall be stabilized from soil erosion immediately upon planting and shall be maintained for the duration of the premises. In the event that plant material is severely damaged due to an unusual weather occurrence or other act of nature, the owner shall have until the end of the dormant season to replant. 
10-3.4.  Existing Landscaping Features - Use of existing trees or shrubs to satisfy off-street landscaping is strongly encouraged. If such existing landscaping is used and consists of mature and semi-mature trees, the Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to reduce the amount of required landscaping by up to fifty (50%) percent based on the following schedule. In no instance shall any paved area within a parking area extend closer to any existing tree used for landscaping than its drip line. 
10-3.5.  General Provisions - In order to receive credit, preserved vegetation must be in good health and condition. Protective barriers around trees designated to be preserved must be indicated on the landscaping and grading plans. If a preserved tree dies, it must be replaced with the total number of trees, which were credited to the existing tree. 
Existing vegetation in the buffer may be counted toward the required plantings. The specific numbers and types of required plantings for each buffer type may be varied through Alternative Compliance, if the Zoning Administrator determines that the existing vegetation forms an effective buffer. 
2" - 6" caliper tree = 1 tree 7" - 12" caliper tree = 2 trees 13"- 18" caliper tree = 3 trees 19"- 24" caliper tree = 4 trees 25" + caliper tree = 5 trees  
A.  Plant Installation Standards - The following standards shall apply to all new plant material installed as a requirement of this section: 
1.  A variety of different species (including both deciduous and evergreen species) shall be incorporated into the site design to provide visual interest, as well as disease and pest resistance. 
2.  Indigenous and drought resistant plant material should be used wherever possible. If such plant materials are not used, then an irrigation system shall be installed. 
3.  All plant material installed shall be free from disease. 
4.  All plant material shall be installed in a fashion that ensures that availability of sufficient soil and water to sustain healthy growth. 
5.  All plant material shall be planted in a manner that is not intrusive to utilities or pavement. 
6.  Plant materials should be placed intermittently against long expanses of building walls, fences and other barriers to create a softening effect. 
7.  Ground cover plants shall be planted in a number as appropriate by species to provide fifty (50) percent surface coverage. 
8.  Seeding or sodding shall be provided for full coverage within the first growing season. 
9.  Sod shall be used where necessary to provide coverage and soil stabilization. 
10.  Detention/retention basins and ponds should be landscaped. Landscaping should include canopy and understory trees, evergreens, shrubbery, hedges, and/or other live planting materials. 
Detention/Retention Ponds: 
a.  Detention and retention ponds, or other holding areas that are part of a storm/surface water system, should be enhanced as an amenity of the development. 
b.  Unless designed as an integral part of a landscape plan or featured as an amenity (i.e., water features in a wet bottom basin or recreation/open space in a dry bottom basin), all detention ponds, retention ponds, or other similar holding areas shall be screened from view from any existing or future private or public street and from adjoining property. 
c.  The development of any system shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Lexington County Stormwater Management and Sediment Erosion Control Ordinance, to include the requirement of fencing for safety purposes. 
Screening: 
a.  The use of vegetation for screening is strongly encouraged, however, if fencing or a wall is used for screening of service areas, utilities, or ponds, at least 50% of the structure shall be softened with shrubbery or other vegetation. The vegetation must be placed on the outside property line of the structure. Access and room for maintenance must be incorporated into the design and placement of the structure and subsequent vegetation. 
11.  Earthen berms and existing topography should, whenever practical, be incorporated into the landscape treatment of a site. 
12.  Automated irrigation systems, when required, shall be equipped with electronic rain gauges to prevent inadvertent watering during periods of precipitation. 
B.  All new plant material shall be the following minimum sizes: 
1.  Small maturing (understory/ornamental) trees shall be a minimum one and one-half (11/2) inch caliper at installation and multi-stem varieties shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in height, as measured by ANSI Z60.1-1996 American Standard For Nursery Stock. 
2.  Large and medium maturing (canopy) trees shall be a minimum two (2) inches caliper at installation and multi-stem varieties shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in height, as measured by ANSI Z60.1-1996 American Standard For Nursery Stock. 
3.  Evergreen trees shall be a minimum six (6) foot height at installation, as measured by ANSI Z60.1-1996 American Standard For Nursery Stock. 
4.  Shrubs shall be a minimum of 18 inches in height at installation, as measured by ANSI Z60.1-1996 American Standard For Nursery Stock. 
C.  All plant material used must meet the standards set forth in ANSI Z60.1-1996 American Standard for Nursery Stock. The Town Zoning Administrator shall review questions about acceptable plant materials. A list of recommended plantings is located at the end of this Article. 
D.  All landscape islands must be covered with living material including grass, groundcover, and shrubs, except for marked areas directly around the trees, so that no soil is exposed. No stone or synthetic mulch is permitted. All other planting areas not covered by trees or shrubs shall be covered by grass, mulch and ground covers. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005; Ord. of 3-8-2010) 
10-4. - LANDSCAPED YARDS. 
10-4.1.  Street Yards - The minimum average width of all required street yards shall be ten (10) feet. Widths shall be measured perpendicular to the appropriate street right-of-way. Trees for use in street yards shall be of large maturing canopy type. Ornamental and coniferous types shall not be used to meet the requirements of this section unless conflicts with overhead utilities exist. In such case, the building official may authorize the substitution of understory trees. The Zoning Administrator may waive the street yard requirement if the building is built to a zero front setback as permissible by the zoning district, in conjunction with the Town Center plan, and if the development is commercial or mixed-use. Residential developments other than multi-family shall provide street yards as part of the street plan and public right-of-way. Landscaping requirements are shown in Table 1. 
10-4.2.  Perimeter Yards - The minimum width of side yards for lots 200 feet or greater in width shall be ten (10) feet. For lots less than 200 feet in width, the combined width of the side yards shall be a minimum of 10% of the total width of the lot. All rear yards shall be at least 10 feet in width Perimeter yards are only required of commercial, manufacturing and multi-family developments. Landscaping requirements are shown in Table 1. 
10-4.3.  Zoning Setbacks - The required landscaped perimeter yards shall not prohibit the location of buildings, structures or shared drives otherwise specifically allowed by the underlying zoning setbacks, and may be reduced accordingly by the Zoning Administrator. 
10-4.4.  Maximum Requirement - The landscaped yard should not result in requiring more than 35% of the available lot and may be reduced accordingly by the Zoning Administrator. Additionally, the intent of this ordinance shall not be construed as to mean that trees are to be planted in a density that would be unhealthy or damaging. 
Table 1 - Street and Perimeter Yards 
Street Yard Perimeter Yard Minimum width 10 ft. See b. above Trees per 100 linear feet 4 3 Shrubs per 100 linear feet 12 8  
;adv=6;(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
10-5. - PARKING LOTS. 
    The impervious surface of the parking area and access area shall be separated from the street right-of-way and property lines by a landscaped strip at least ten feet in width. Ingress and egress shall be provided through driveway openings only. In the event a parking lot is adjacent to a parking lot or driveway on another parcel, the required landscaped strip along the common property line between the two areas may be waived by the Zoning Administrator, or the Planning Commission, if it will result in less traffic congestion on adjoining streets because of improved traffic circulation between the two parking lots or a reduction in the number of curb cuts. 
10-5.1.  The parking lot shall be constructed so that spaces are grouped into bays. At the end of each bay for 8 or more cars, a landscaped island of at least nine feet in width and 15 feet in length shall be built to separate the bays from each other or from traffic lanes. When the parking bays contain double rows of parking spaces, the landscaped island shall be increased to nine feet in width and 30 feet in length. (Figure 1) A parking bay may not be constructed to a length of more than 180 feet without constructing a landscaped island. The Zoning Administrator may approve islands, which vary from 9' x 15' or 9' x 30' rectangles in order to provide desirable geometric design features such as rounded corners and angles to facilitate maneuvering of automobile traffic. 

10-5.2.  The landscaped areas within the parking lot shall not be less than 4% of the impervious surface area of the parking lot. The perimeter landscaped strip and street yards required shall be excluded from the calculations of the minimum landscaped percentage. 
10-5.3.  A minimum of one tree shall be provided within the landscaped areas in the parking lot for each 10 parking spaces in the lot. No trees identified as large maturing shall be planted within 20 feet of an electrical transmission or distribution line. Existing trees and natural vegetation shall be retained wherever possible, particularly where they border adjacent property. All parking facing street frontage shall plant shrubs to screen the area (not to exceed three feet at mature height at entrances and sight distance triangles) or create berms. No gaps greater than five (5) feet are allowed in a screen. All applications for development review or zoning permits shall be accompanied by a landscaping plan. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
10-6. - LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE. 
    The owner, or his agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement of all landscaping materials and barriers. 
10-6.1.  No plant material over 18 inches in height at maturity or structures of any kind shall be placed within the sight distance triangle or sight visibility triangle. 
10-6.2.  Fences and walls shall be maintained in good repair. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
10-7. - SERVICE/UTILITY AREAS. 
    This section shall apply to all service areas which either present safety hazards or detract from the aesthetics of the community, or both; including but not limited to, loading docks, garbage collection sites, exposed utility fixtures, HVAC equipment, tanks, etc. 
    All service areas affected by this article shall be provided with a visual screen consisting of fences or landscaping, or both, designed and installed to screen the area from view from any public street or adjoining property and shall meet or exceed the minimum standards required below: 
A.  The screening must be at least six (6) feet in height or the height of the object to be screened. 
B.  The screening must extend along the entire perimeter of the service area, except for necessary access. 
C.  Fencing shall be designed to relate well to the principal building as to materials and colors. Fences must be constructed of brick, masonry, or wood and shall require appropriate plantings. 
Garbage collection sites (dumpsters, compactors) shall be shielded from sight by screening as outlined above and shall be eighty percent (80%) opaque. This screening shall also be provided to deter unauthorized access. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
10-8. - BUFFER YARDS. 
    When land is developed and the adjacent property contains an unlike land use, buffer yards shall be provided along all side and rear property lines to insulate adjacent properties from adverse impacts. No structure or parking lot shall be permitted within a required buffer yard; however, driveways and other passive activities may utilize these spaces. All shrubs used for buffer yards shall be evergreen unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator. Shrubs must be 18 inches in height at installation. See Table 2 for specific planting requirements. 
10-8.1.  Buffer yard Types. 
Type A - Shall apply when any use is similar to an adjacent use or has only a slight impact on the adjacent use. This is similar to the standard street yard requirement. See Table 3 for specific zoning uses to which this type of buffer shall apply. 
Type B - Shall apply when any use is somewhat different from an adjacent use or has a moderate impact on adjacent uses. See Table 3 for specific zoning uses to which this type of buffer shall apply. 
Type C - Shall apply when any use is clearly different from an adjacent use or has a definite impact on adjacent uses. See Table 3 for specific zoning uses to which this type of buffer shall apply. 
Type D - Shall apply when any use is incompatible with an adjacent use or has a large impact on adjacent uses. See Table 3 for specific zoning uses to which this type of buffer shall apply. 
Type E - Shall apply when any use is incompatible with or has a severe impact on adjacent uses. See Table 3 for specific zoning uses to which this type of buffer shall apply. 
Table 2 - Bufferyard Types 
Low Impact Medium Impact High Impact Type A Type B Type C Type D Type E Minimum Width 3 ft 10 ft 20 ft 30 ft 50 ft Trees per 100 linear ft. 4 6 8 10 12 Shrubs per 100 linear ft. 12 18 30 40 50 Note: The minimum width may be reduced by 25% if a solid wall or fence, at least six feet in height, is constructed. A 50% width reduction may be granted with the installation of a solid brick wall, masonry wall faced with brick or stucco, or a berm with a minimum height of six (6) feet. 
Maximum Requirement - The bufferyard should not result in using more than 35% of the available lot and may be reduced accordingly by the Zoning Administrator. Fences, walls, and berms shall be maintained in good condition and appearance at all times by the owner.  
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
[ARTICLE] 11. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

11-1. - ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. 
    The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning Administrator who is hereby given the authority to perform these functions. His duties shall include receiving applications, inspecting premises and issuing zoning permits and certificates of occupancy for uses and structures that meet the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
11-2. - ZONING PERMIT REQUIRED. 
    It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation or filling of any lot for the construction of any building, to construct any sign, to commence the moving or alteration of any building or to commence the development of land for a use not requiring a building until the Zoning Administrator has issued a zoning permit for such work. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
11-3. - APPLICATION FOR ZONING PERMIT. 
11-3.1.  In applying to the Zoning Administrator for a zoning permit, the applicant shall submit a dimensioned sketch or scale plan indicating the shape, size and location of the lot to be built upon and the shape, size, height, use and location of the building already on the lot, the number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate, if any, the setback lines of buildings on adjoining lots, off-street parking space, and other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this Ordinance are being observed. 
11-3.2.  If the proposed excavation, filling or construction, as set forth in the application are in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance and other Town, County, State or Federal regulations, then in force, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a zoning permit upon payment of any required fees. If a zoning permit is refused, the Zoning Administrator shall state such refusal in writing with the cause. 
11-3.3.  Before commencing either excavation or construction, the zoning permit (or copy) shall be placed conspicuously on the front property line therein described for the duration of the excavation or construction and in such a way that it is protected from the weather. 
11-3.4.  All DHEC regulations regarding asbestos removal must be met prior to any demolition or renovations. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
11-4. - CONSTRUCTION PROGRESS. 
    Any zoning permit shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it has been commenced within six (6) months of the date of issue of the permit, or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of one (1) year. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
11-5. - CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED. 
11-5.1.  A certificate of occupancy issued by the Zoning Administrator is required in advance of the lawful occupancy or use of: 
(a)  Any building, structure, land or premises; 
(b)  Any building or structure hereafter erected or moved; 
(c)  Any building hereafter altered, so as to effect the front, side or rear yards thereof, or its height; 
(d)  Any building, structure or premises in which there is a change of the type of occupancy or use. 
11-5.2.  Within three (3) days after the application for a certificate of occupancy and payment of any required fees, the Zoning Administrator shall sign and issue a certificate of occupancy if the proposed use of land or building, as stated on the certificate of occupancy and signed by the owner or his appointed agent, is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this Ordinance, and if the building, as finally constructed, complies with the plans submitted for the zoning permit. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
11-6. - DENIAL OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. 
    A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this Ordinance, or unless the building, as finally constructed, complies with the sketch or plan upon which the zoning permit was issued. The Zoning Administrator shall state in writing the reasons for denying such certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
11-7. - RECORDS OF APPLICATIONS AND CERTIFICATE. 
    Records of application for zoning permits, records of plats and plans in connection with said permits, and records of all occupancy certificates and denials shall be kept on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
11-8. - PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION. 
11-8.1.  Any person violating, by act or omission, any provision of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) or thirty (30) days in jail or both, at the discretion of the court. 
11-8.2.  Where such an act or omission is continued in violation of the provisions of these regulations after notice of such violation by the Zoning Administrator, each and every day during which such act or omission continues shall be deemed a separate violation. 
11-8.3.  The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises or part thereof, and any architect, surveyor, builder, engineer, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
11-9. - REMEDIES. 
    In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator or any other appropriate authority, or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be damaged by such violations, in addition to other remedies, may institute an injunction or other appropriate action in proceeding to prevent the violation in the case of such building, structure or land. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
[ARTICLE] 12. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

12-1. - CREATED. 
    In order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and harmonious development of the municipality which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, the Batesburg-Leesville Planning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the commission, is hereby created and established as authorized by Act 487, South Carolina Acts of 1967, as amended. 
(Ord. of xx-xx-xxxx) 
12-2. - MEMBERSHIP. 
    The commission shall consist of nine (9) members to be appointed by Mayor and Town Council. The members shall serve staggered terms of four (4) years and until their successors are appointed and qualified. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Town Council who shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. Members shall receive such compensation as determined by Council and may be reimbursed for actual expense incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Ord. of xx-xx-xxxx) 
12-3. - ORGANIZATION, MEETINGS, RULES, STAFF AND FINANCES. 
    The Commission shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among its members. The term of officers shall be one (1) year with eligibility for re-election. It shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or an employee of the Town Council or of the commission. The Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its recommendations, transactions, findings and determinations; and shall meet at the call of the chairperson and at such times as the chairperson or commission may determine. All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public except as otherwise permitted by state law and all records of the commission shall be a public record. The commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may make expenditures for salaries of any employee and staff, contracts with consultants, and for the purchase of required equipment and supplies. The expenditures of the commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for such purposes by the Town Council. 
(Ord. of xx-xx-xxxx) 
12-4. - POWERS AND DUTIES. 
    The Commission shall have such powers and duties as provided by law. In general, the commission shall have the power and responsibility to: 
(1)  Prepare and revise periodically a comprehensive plan and program for the development of its jurisdiction. 
(2)  Prepare and recommend for adoption to the appropriate governing authority or authorities as a means for implementing the plan and program: 
a.  Zoning ordinances or resolutions, and maps and appropriate revisions thereof for its jurisdiction; 
b.  Regulations for the subdivision of land and appropriate revisions thereof within its jurisdiction, and to administer the regulations that may be adopted; 
c.  An official map and appropriate revision thereof showing the exact location of existing or proposed public building sites, together with regulations to control the erection of buildings or other structures or changes in land use within such rights-of-way, building sites or open spaces within its political jurisdiction or a specified portion thereof; and 
d.  A capital program for its jurisdiction based on the comprehensive plan and the capital improvements necessary to implement the plan. The capital program shall include an annual capital budget based on estimates of the cost of proposed projects and the means of financing them. The Commission shall submit the capital program, including the budget, to the Town Council. 
(3)  Establish principles and policies for guiding action in the development of the area. 
(4)  Prepare and recommend to the Town Council for adoption ordinances promoting orderly development in accordance with the comprehensive plan, other than those previously mentioned. 
(5)  Determine whether specific proposed developments conform to the principles and requirements of the comprehensive plan for the growth and improvement of the area. 
(6)  Review and recommend to the Town Council any needed changes in the Zoning Ordinance and the map of the town, as well as other codes, ordinances, and controls related to the municipality's development. 
(7)  Keeping the Town Council and the general public informed and advised as to these matters. 
(Ord. of xx-xx-xxxx) 
[ARTICLE] 13. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEAL 

13-1. - ESTABLISHMENT, MEMBERSHIP AND PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOARD. 
    A Zoning Board of Appeal is hereby established which shall consist of nine (9) members who are residents of the zoning area and appointed by the Town Council. Each member of Town Council shall appoint one person from his/her district., and one person shall be appointed from the town at-large. The term of office of the members of the Board shall be four (4) years; provided, however, that the initial Board of Appeal established under this Ordinance shall be appointed with terms as follows: 
    Two (2) to serve for one (1) year, two (2) to serve for two (2) years, and one (1) for three (3) years, and their successors shall serve for three (3) years or until their respective successors are appointed. Members may be removed for cause by the governing authority upon written charges and after a public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. Members shall not hold any other public office in Lexington County. 
13-1.1.  Proceedings of the Board of Appeal: The Board shall elect one (1) of its members chairman, who shall serve for one (1) year or until reelected or his successor is elected and qualified. The Board shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer of the governing authority or of the Planning Commission. The Board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of any ordinance or resolution adopted pursuant to this Ordinance. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record. 
13-1.2.  Hearings, Appeals and Notices: 
(a)  Appeals to the Board of Appeal may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the Town or County affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with the Zoning Administrator from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of Appeal a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action is appealed was taken. 
(b)  The Board of Appeal shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal, give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
13-1.3.  Stay of Proceedings: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board of Appeal after notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reasons of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Appeal or by a court of record on application, on notice to the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken and one (1) due cause shown. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
13-2. - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF APPEAL. 
    The Board of Appeal shall have the following powers and duties: 
13-2.1.  Administrative Review: To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of this Ordinance. 
13-2.2.  Variances: The Board of Appeal may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances from the terms of this Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement to the provisions of this Ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance from the terms of this Ordinance shall not be granted by the Board of Appeal unless and until: 
(a)  A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
(2)  The application of the Ordinance to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
(3)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; 
(4)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of the Ordinance or the comprehensive plan; provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited in a given district by this Ordinance; 
(5)  That granting the requested variance will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Ordinance to owners of other lands, structures or buildings in the same district; and 
(6)  No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same district, and not permitted use of lands, structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
(b)  Notice of public hearing shall be posted on the property for which variance is sought and shall be published at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Batesburg-Leesville. 
(c)  The hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or by agent or by attorney. 
(d)  Board Findings: 
(1)  The Board of Appeal shall make findings that the requirements of Section 11-2.2a were met by the applicant for a variance. 
(2)  The Board of Appeal shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance, and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure. 
(3)  The Board of Appeal shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(e)  In granting any variance, the Board of Appeal may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of the Ordinance and punishable. 
(f)  With respect to uses of land, buildings and other structures, this Ordinance is declared to be a definition of the public interest by the Town Council and the spirit of this Ordinance will not be observed by any variance which permits a use not generally permitted in the district involved or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this Ordinance in said district. Therefore, under no circumstances shall the Board of Appeal grant a variance to permit a use not generally permitted in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this Ordinance in said district. 
13-2.3.  Special Exceptions: The Board of Appeals can permit uses by special exception if the terms and conditions described in this Ordinance are met. 
a.  Duties of the Board: 
(1)  To hear and decide only such applications for special exceptions as the Board of Appeals is specifically authorized to pass upon by the terms of this Ordinance. 
(2)  To decide such questions as are involved in determining whether special exceptions should be granted. 
(3)  To prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Ordinance. 
(4)  To deny special exceptions when not in harmony with the intent and purposes of this Ordinance. 
b.  Procedures in Consideration of Special Exception Applications: 
(1)  A written application for a special exception shall be submitted indicating the section of this Ordinance under which the special exception is sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested. 
(2)  Notice of public hearing shall be posted on the property for which special exception is sought and shall be published at least 15 days prior to the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Batesburg-Leesville. The Town shall notify in writing all registered owners of property within two hundred (200) feet of the property lines of the subject parcel. 
(3)  The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or by agent or attorney. 
(4)  The Board of Appeals shall make a finding that it is empowered under the section of this Ordinance described in the application to grant the special exception, and that the granting of the special exception will not adversely affect the public interest. 
(5)  The regulations of this Ordinance setting forth specific standards to be met prior to the establishment of any special exception shall be binding upon the Board of Appeals and no variance to such requirements shall be granted. 
(6)  The Board of Appeals shall grant no special exception for the establishment of any use or structure which necessitates the concomitant granting of a variance. 
(7)  The Board of Appeals may prescribe a time limit within which the action for which the special exception is required shall be begun or completed, or both. 
c.  Effect of Failure to Meet Conditions: 
(1)  Violation of conditions and safeguards prescribed in conformity with this Ordinance, when made a part of the terms under which the special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance, punishable under penalties established herein. 
(2)  Failure to begin or complete, or begin and complete, an action for which a special exception is required, within the time limit specified when such time limit is made a part of the terms under which the special exception is granted, shall void the special exception. Actions of Board Concerning Appeals: In exercising the powers set forth in Sections 11-2.1 and 11-2.2 above, the Board may, in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
13-3. - APPEALS FROM THE BOARD OF APPEAL. 
    Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Appeal, or any taxpayer or any officer, department, board or bureau of the Town may present to the Circuit Court a petition, duly verified, setting forth that a decision of the Board of Appeal is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the Court within thirty (30) days after the filing of the decision. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
13-4. - FUNCTIONS OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL, BOARD OF APPEAL, TOWN COUNCIL AND COURTS IN INTERPRETATION, ADMINISTRATION AND APPEAL. 
13-4.1.  It is the intent of this Ordinance that all questions of administration and enforcement shall first be presented to the Zoning Administrator, and that such questions shall be presented to the Board of Appeal only upon reference by, or appeal from, the Zoning Administrator, and that recourse from the decisions of the Board of Appeal shall be to the courts as provided by law. 
13-4.2.  It is further the intent of this Ordinance that the function of the Town Council under this Ordinance shall not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement which may arise, but that the Town Council shall have only the responsibility for acting on proposals for amendment or repeal of this Ordinance, and for establishing a schedule of fees and charges. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
[ARTICLE] 14. - AMENDMENTS 

14-1. - AMENDMENTS. 
    In amending the text of this Ordinance or in amending the Zoning Map, the procedure shall be as follows. 
14-2. - INITIATION OF PROPOSALS FOR AMENDMENTS. 
    Any individual, corporation or agency - public or private - may initiate a proposal for an amendment. Such request shall be submitted in writing to the Zoning Administrator, along with payment of a zoning amendment fee, which may be established by the Town Council. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
14-3. - MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS FOR CREATION OF NEW ZONING DISTRICTS. 
    No request from any individual, corporation or agency other than Town Council, the Planning Commission or the Zoning Administrator for a change in zoning classification or creation of a separate district shall be considered which involves an area of less than two (2) acres, except for the extension of existing district boundaries or the addition of C-2, Transitional Commercial zoning contiguous to existing commercial or industrial zones. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
14-4. - PLANNING COMMISSION STUDY AND REPORT TO THE TOWN COUNCIL. 
    All proposed amendments shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator, who shall then refer the proposals for amendment to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall have (30) days within which to submit a report and recommendation to the Town Council such recommendation shall be advisory only. If the Planning Commission does not submit its report within the prescribed time the Town Council may proceed to act on the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
14-5. - PUBLIC HEARING ON PROPOSED AMENDMENT. 
    Before enacting an amendment to this zoning ordinance, the Town Council shall hold a public hearing thereon, according to the terms of Section 6-7-730 of the S.C. Code of Laws of 1976. Specifically, prior to the public hearing, at least 15 days' notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Batesburg-Leesville. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
14-6. - POSTING OF PROPERTY. 
    When a proposed amendment affects the district classification of particular pieces of property, the Zoning Administrator shall cause to be conspicuously located on or adjacent to the property affected, one (1) hearing notice for every one hundred (100) feet of street frontage or portion thereof. Such notice shall be posted at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing and shall indicate the nature of the change proposed, identification of the property affected, and time, date and place of the hearing. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
14-7. - RECONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED AMENDMENTS. 
    Action shall not be initiated for a zoning amendment affecting the same parcel of property more often than once every twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
[ARTICLE] 15. - FEES AND CHARGES 

15-1. - SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES. 
    The Town Council hereby establishes a schedule of fees, charges and expenses for zoning permits, certificates of occupancy, appeals, amendments, and other matters pertaining to these regulations. This schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Zoning Administrator and may be altered or amended only by the Town Council. 
Zoning Permit $5.00 Sign Permit $1,000[.00] or less No fee unless inspection is required, then a $10.00 fee for each inspection with be charged $1,001[.00] - 3,000[.00] $25.00 minimum $3,001[.00] - 50,000[.00] $25.00 for the first $3,000.00 plus $3.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof $50,001[.00] -100,000[.00] $166.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $2.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof $100,001[.00] - 500,000[.00] $266.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $1.00 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof $500,001[.00] and above $666.00 for the first $500,000.00 plus .75 for each additional thousand or fraction thereof Amendment $50.00 Variance $50.00 Appeal $50.00 Certificate of Occupancy $2.00 Sale of Zoning Ordinance (a) Text $4.00 (b) Map $1.00  
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
15-2. - NO ACTION UNTIL FEES PAID. 
    No permit, certificate, or variance shall be issued or granted unless and until such costs, charges, fees or expenses have been paid in full, nor shall any action be taken on proposed amendments or on proceedings before the Board of Appeal unless and until applicable charges and fees have been paid in full. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2005) 
Appendix B - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Land Development Regulations ordinance adopted by the town council on April 12, 1999; it repealed the former land development ordinance adopted on March 11, 1996. The original numbering scheme is retained. Sections with no parenthetical history note are as originally adopted in 1999; provisions created or amended after April 12, 1999, do have parenthetical history notes. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

1-1. - Purpose. 
    The public health, safety, economy, good order, appearance, convenience, morals, and general welfare require the harmonious, orderly and progressive development of land within the Town of Batesburg-Leesville. In furtherance of this general intent, the regulation of land development by the Town of Batesburg-Leesville is adopted for the following purposes, among others: 
A.  To encourage the development of an economically sound and stable community; 
B.  To assure the timely provision of required streets, utilities, other facilities and services to new land developments; 
C.  To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in and through new land developments; 
D.  To assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational, transportation and other public purposes; and 
E.  To assure, in general, the wise and timely development of new areas or redevelopment of areas in harmony with the adopted Town of Batesburg-Leesville Comprehensive Plan. 
1-2. - Short Title. 
    This ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as the "Town of Batesburg-Leesville Land Development Regulations." 
1-3. - Authority. 
    These regulations are adopted under authority granted by the General Assembly of South Carolina, pursuant to authority conferred by the 1994 "South Carolina Local Government Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act," S.C. Code Sections 6-29-310 through 6-29-1200. 
1-4. - Jurisdiction. 
    These land development regulations shall apply to all development of land within the incorporated area of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville. 
1-5. - Types of Development. 
    For the purpose of proper regulation, developments have been divided into types and separate regulations developed for each type. These types and the applicable sections of this ordinance are: 
A.  Traditional Subdivisions - specifically articles one through six and ten through fifteen apply to this type of development. 
B.  Group Developments - specifically articles one through seven and eleven through fifteen apply to this type of development. 
C.  Planned Developments. 
D.  Conservation Subdivisions - specifically articles one through six, eight, and ten through fifteen apply. 
E.  Extraordinary Development - Article nine. 
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS 

2-1. - Usage. 
A.  Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the plural number include the singular; the word "herein" means "in these regulations;" [the] word "regulations" means "these regulations." 
B.  Words used in the singular number include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular. 
C.  A "person" includes a corporation, a partnership, and an incorporated association of persons such as a club: [the word] "shall" is always mandatory; [the word] "may" is discretionary. A "building" includes a structure; a "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof. [The word] "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended," "arranged," or "designed to be used or occupied." 
2-2. - Words and Terms Defined. 
    For the purpose of these regulations, the following words and terms are defined as follows: 
2-2.1.  Administrative Official: The Zoning Administrator or other person duly designated to act in his behalf. 
2-2.2.  Applicant: The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or his representative. 
2-2.3.  Application for Exemption: An application to be made with the Administrative Official on which basis a finding of applicability of these regulations is to be made. See the definition of "subdivision" for standards of applicability. 
2-2.4.  Block: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad right-of-ways, shorelines of waterways, or boundary lines of municipalities or counties. 
2-2.5.  Bond: Any form of security, including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property, or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the Government Body. All bonds shall be approved by the Governing Body wherever a bond is required by these regulations. A bond can be a performance bond, surety bond, or an irrevocable letter of credit. The amount must equal at least 150% of the cost of the required improvement as prepared and attested to by a registered S.C. Engineer. 
2-2.6.  Building: Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind, and includes any structure. 
2-2.7.  Building Line: A line beyond which no foundation wall or part of the structure of any building shall project, with the exception of roof overhang and the subsurface projection of footings. 
2-2.8.  Reserved. 
2-2.9.  Reserved. 
2-2.10.  Construction Plan: The maps of drawings accompany[ing] a subdivision plat or plan and showing specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the Planning Commission as a condition of the approval of the plat or plan. 
2-2.11.  Crosswalk: A right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, intended primarily for pedestrian use, designed to provide access to adjacent roads. 
2-2.12.  Developer: The owner or owners (or their representative) of a lot or of any land included in a proposed development. Also, the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or any other person having enforceable proprietary interest in such land. 
2-2.13.  Easement: A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use of private land for a public or quasi-public purpose and within which the owner of the property shall not erect any permanent structures. 
2-2.14.  Extraordinary Developments: Any artificial impoundment, such as a lake, created through the use of dams or other means. 
2-2.15.  Final Plat or Plan: The final map of all or a portion of a subdivision that is presented for final approval. 
2-2.16.  Frontage: That side of a lot abutting on a street or way ordinarily regarded as the front of the lot, but it shall not be considered as the ordinary side of a corner lot. 
2-2.17.  Grade: The slope of a road, street or other public way, specified in percentage (%) terms from the horizontal. 
2-2.18.  Group Development: All development of a tract or parcel of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of building a development. Group developments would include apartment complexes, office parks, shopping centers or other commercial structures or complexes containing two or more business establishments, mobile home parks, industrial parks, or other developments where the site is not subdivided into lots and public streets but is developed into building sites. 
2-2.19.  Health Department: The public health department having jurisdiction over the land area in which the purposed subdivision is located, or the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control. 
2-2.20.  Individual Sewage Disposal System: A septic tank, seepage tile sewage disposal system, or any other approved sewage treatment device. 
2-2.21.  Reserved. 
2-2.22.  Land Development: A change in land characteristics through redevelopment, construction, subdivision into parcels, condominium complexes, apartment complexes, commercial parks, shopping centers, industrial parks, mobile home parks or similar developments for sale, lease or any combination of owner and rental characteristics. 
2-2.23.  Lot: The basic development unit - an area with fixed boundaries, used or intended to be used by one building and its accessory building(s) and not divided by any public highway or alley. 
2-2.24.  Lot Area: The total area of the lot, including easements. 
2-2.25.  Lot, Corner: A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets. (The interior angle of such intersection not exceeding 135 degrees.) 
2-2.26.  Lot Depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
2-2.27.  Lot, Double Frontage: A lot having frontage and access of two or more public streets. A corner lot shall not be considered having double frontage unless it has frontage and access on three or more streets. 
2-2.28.  Lot Improvement: Any building, structure, place, work of art, or other object or improvement of the land on which they are situated constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of such betterment. 
2-2.29.  Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner lot. 
2-2.30.  Lot, Reversed Frontage: A lot having frontage on two or more public streets, the access of which is restricted to one street. 
2-2.31.  Lot Width: The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured at right angles to the depth; or the same distance measured at a point midway between the front lot line and the rear lot line; or at the rear line of the required front yard (building line), especially on irregularly shaped lots. 
2-2.32.  Manufactured Home: A single-family dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying that it is built in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 USC 501), which became effective June 15, 1976. 
2-2.33.  Mobile Home: A movable or portable residential dwelling that was fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility, designed to be a permanent residence, constructed to be towed on its own chassis and designed without a permanent foundation for long-term occupancy, which includes a doublewide or expandable mobile home, as defined below, as well as a portable dwelling composed of a single unit, which is not in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. The term "mobile home" as used in this Ordinance shall not include prefabricated, manufactured, modular or unitized dwellings placed on permanent foundations, nor shall it refer to travel trailers, campers or similar units designed for recreation or other short-term uses. A Mobile Home may or may not be permanently attached to the ground, and its transport features may or may not be removed. Mobile Home activity shall be determined by the Zoning Ordinance. A Mobile Home Park must meet the requirements of the Mobile Home Park Ordinance. 
(a)  Doublewide Mobile Home: A doublewide mobile home is a mobile home with two or more units separately towable, but designed to be joined into one integral unit at the site. 
(b)  Expandable Mobile Home: An expandable mobile home is a mobile home with one or more sections that fold, collapse or telescope into the principal unit when being transported and which can [be] expanded at the site to provide additional living area. 
2-2.34.  Modular Home: A structure intended for residential use and manufactured off-site in accord with the Southern Building Code and BOCA Basic Building Code, as defined within the South Carolina Modular Buildings Construction Act of 1976. Modular residential construction shall be included in the Residential Detached or Residential Attached activity types, as appropriate. 
2-2.35.  Off-Site: Any premises not located within the area of the property to be subdivided whether or not in the same ownership of the applicant for subdivision approval. 
2-2.36.  Ordinance: Any legislative action, however denominated, of a local government, which has the force of law, including any amendment [or] repeal of any ordinance. 
2-2.37.  Owner: Any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided or developed under these regulations. 
2-2.38.  Parking, Off-Street: An area adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly related access to a public street arranged so that no maneuvering incidental to parking shall be on any public street and so that an automobile may be parked or moved therein without moving any other automobiles. 
2-2.39.  Planning Commission: The Town of Batesburg-Leesville Planning Commission. 
2-2.40.  Preliminary Plat or Plan: The preliminary drawing or drawings, described in these regulations, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the Planning Commission for approval. 
2-2.41.  Public Improvement: Any drainage ditch, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established. 
2-2.42.  Registered Engineer: An engineer properly licensed and registered in the State of South Carolina. 
2-2.43.  Registered Land Surveyor: A land surveyor properly licensed and registered in the State of South Carolina. 
2-2.44.  Re-subdivision: A change in a map of any approved or recorded subdivision plat if such change affects any street layout on such map or area reserved there for public use, or any lot line, or if it affects any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions. 
2-2.45.  Right-of-Way: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees or for another special use. The usage of the term "right-of-way," for land platting purposes, shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, shade trees or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is established. 
2-2.46.  Sale or Lease: Any immediate or future transfer of ownership, on any possessory interest in land, including contract of sale, lease, device, intestate succession, or other written instrument. 
2-2.47.  Setback: The required distance between a structure and the lot lines on the lot in which it is located. Lot lines can be the property lines or the edge of a street right-of-way. 
2-2.48.  Reserve Strip: A strip of land adjacent to a public street or similar right-of-way which has been reserved for the purpose of controlling access to the public way. 
2-2.49.  Screening: Either (A) a strip of at least ten (10) feet wide, densely planted (or having equivalent natural growth) with shrubs or trees at least four (4) feet high at the time of planting, of a type that will form a year-round dense screen at least six (6) feet high; or (B) an opaque wall or barrier or uniformly painted fence at least six (6) feet high. Any landscaping or screening requirements herein, contrary to the Landscape Ordinance, shall mean to meet those of the Landscape Ordinance if applicable. 
2-2.50.  Single-Family Dwelling: A permanent structure placed on a permanent foundation, having one or more rooms, with provisions for living, sanitary, and sleeping facilities arranged for the use of one or more individuals of the same family. These dwellings shall include site-built, manufactured and modular homes. 
2-2.51.  Sketch Plan or Site Plan: A sketch plan or plat is a generalized map prepared by the developer that shows the development concept. Its purpose is to serve as a basis for discussion without either the planning commission or the developer making commitments. This phase of the subdivision process precedes the preparation of the preliminary plat or plan (or final plat in the case of minor subdivisions). 
2-2.52.  Streets: Relates to and includes the entire right-of-way of streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, highway, freeways, lanes, alleys, courts, thoroughfares, collectors, minor streets, cul-de-sacs, and other ways. 
2-2.53.  Street Classifications: Streets may be classified as follows: 
Alley: a public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on some other street. 
Arterial (Major Thoroughfare): A freeway, expressway or a street or highway which is used or intended to be used for moving either heavy vehicular traffic volumes or high-speed traffic, or both, or which was designated as a major thoroughfare in the Comprehensive Plan. 
Collector: A street which is used or intended to be used for moving traffic from minor streets to major thoroughfares, including the principal entrance and circulation street or streets of a development. Types of collector streets include: 
1.  Urban residential - collector streets which serve minor urban residential streets; 
2.  Rural residential - collector streets which serve only minor rural residential lots which meet the lot size requirements of a minor residential street; 
3.  Commercial or Industrial - collector streets that serve minor commercial or industrial streets. 
Local (Minor Street): A street that is used or intended to be used to provide access to other streets from individual properties. Types of minor streets include: 
1.  Urban residential - minor streets serving residential lots in incorporated areas; 
2.  Rural residential - minor streets serving residential lots; 
3.  Commercial or Industrial - minor streets serving commercial or industrial uses; 
4.  Marginal access - minor streets located parallel and adjacent to a limited access street or highway which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic; 
5.  Cul-de-sac - minor streets with only one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
Private Streets: Private streets shall not be permitted in the Town of Batesburg-Leesville for the purpose of subdivision. Exception: Streets existing prior to the adoption of this provision shall be grandfathered and shall continue to be maintained by their owners and not by the Town of Batesburg-Leesville. However, in the event that property accessed by a Private Street is to be developed, that street shall be brought up to standard and dedicated as a public street. 
2-2.54.  Street Perimeter: Any existing street to which the parcel of land to be subdivided abuts one (1) side. 
2-2.55.  Subdivider: Any person who (1) having an interest in land, causes it, directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision or who (2) directly or indirectly, sells, leases, or develops or offers to sell, lease, or develop, or advertises for sale, lease, or development, any interest, lot, parcel site, unit or plat in a subdivision, or who (3) engages, directly or through an agent, in the business of selling, leasing, developing or offering for sale, lease or development, a subdivision or any interest, lot, parcel site, unit or plat in a subdivision, and who (4) is, directly or indirectly, controlled by, or under direct or indirect common control with, any of the foregoing. 
2-2.56.  Subdivision: The division of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, building sites, or other divisions. The land is divided for sale, lease or building development, whether immediately or in the future. This includes all land divisions involving a new street or change in existing streets. It includes re-subdivisions involving the further division or relocation of lot lines of any lot or lots within a previously approved or recorded subdivision. This covers the alteration of any streets or the establishment of any new streets within any previously approved or recorded subdivision as well as combinations of lots of record. The following exceptions are included within this definition only for the purpose of requiring that the local planning agency be informed and have a record of the subdivisions: 
A.  Combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the ordinance standards. 
B.  Dividing land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved. The planning commission must receive plats of these exceptions as information and indicate that fact on the plats. 
C.  Combination or recombining entire lots of record where no new street or change in existing streets is involved. 
2-2.57.  Subdivision Types: 
A.  Nonresidential Subdivision: A subdivision whose intended use is other than residential, such as commercial or industrial. Such subdivision shall comply with the applicable provisions of these regulations. 
B.  Traditional Subdivision: All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development, and includes all division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes re-subdivision and, where appropriate, to the process of subdivision or to the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the following exceptions are included within this definition only for the purpose of requiring that an Application for Exemption be filed with the Administrative Official: 
(1)  Minor Subdivision. All subdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions, requiring any new street or extension of supporting governmental or private utilities. 
(2)  Minor Subdivision. Any subdivision with lots fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street or road or the extension of public utilities and not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the comprehensive plan, official zoning map, official zoning ordinance, or this ordinance. 
However, the Planning Commission, as it deems necessary, may require that certain items from this ordinance, Article 6, "Required Improvements," be incorporated into a Minor Subdivision. 
(3)  All exceptions stated in the definition of subdivision. 
C.  Planned Development: The intent of the Planned Development is to better bridge the inherent difference between residential and nonresidential uses; and to better accommodate change within those areas of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville where, due to economics or other factors responsible for change, potentially incompatible development could compromise property values or adversely impact existing land use, transportation facilities, or infrastructure. 
Through the Planned Development advocated by these Regulations, it is possible to ameliorate differences between potentially incompatible uses by exacting concessions and conditions as necessary to achieve land use compatibility. One popular version of a PD is the neo-Traditional Neighborhood Development. 
D.  Conservation Subdivision: A residential development where fifty percent or more of the developable land area is designated as undivided, permanent open space; thereby permanently protecting agriculturally, environmentally, or historically significant areas within the parcel. The remaining developable land is subdivided into buildable lots. 
2-2.58.  Use: The purpose or activity for which a piece of land or its buildings is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2007) 
ARTICLE 3. - PROCEDURE FOR PLAT APPROVAL 

3-1. - General Procedure. 
    Whenever any subdivision of land is proposed, before any deed transfer is made of any part thereof, and before any permit for the erection of a structure in such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the subdividing owner, or his authorized agent, shall apply for and secure approval of such proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedure. They then must proceed through the following four (4) separate steps: 
3-1.1.  Review of Traffic Impact Study Requirement Evaluation form; 
3-1.2.  Review of Traffic Impact Study (if applicable), and Review of Sketch Plan; 
3-1.3.  Review and approval of Preliminary Plat; and 
3-1.4.  Review and approval of Final Plat. 
Steps 3-1.1, 3-1.2 and 3-1.3 shall be completed prior to making any street improvements and installing any utilities. Step 3-1.4 shall be completed prior to [the] sale of any lots recording any portion of the plat of the proposed subdivision, or issuance of a building permit for construction of buildings, except as provided in Section 12.3 of these regulations. 
    Minor Subdivisions which do not involve the construction or opening of new streets, water or sewer facilities, storm drainage systems, or improvement to existing streets, may be accepted for review by the planning commission in the form of a final plat. Sketch Plans and preliminary plats are not required in such cases. However, a service connection plan for utilities and grading plan may be required. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2007) 
3-2. - Procedures. 
    The following procedures shall be followed in the submission, review, and action upon all subdivision plats: 
3-2.1.  Traffic Impact Study Requirement Evaluation: Prior to the submission of any TIS and/or sketch plan, the applicant shall complete and submit a Traffic Impact Study Requirement Evaluation form obtained from the Administrative Official's office. The Town's Transportation Engineer will evaluate the request and determine whether a TIS is required. A written response will be issued to the applicant within seven (7) working days of receipt of the TISRE. 
3-2.2.  Traffic Impact Study (TIS): Refer to the Traffic Impact Study Guidelines adopted by the Town. 
A.  Why a Traffic Impact Study is Needed. A Traffic Impact Study (TIS) is an important tool in the overall development planning process (residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, etc.). It provides information which identifies impacts of proposed developments on the existing, short range and long range roadway/circulation networks. It also identifies mitigation measures for the impacts identified. 
B.  When a Traffic Impact Study [is] Required. Some development applications may require TISs. A threshold should be established to ensure that projects which are anticipated to create traffic impacts will be required to mitigate those impacts, while those smaller projects in less congested areas are not unduly burdened with a requirement to perform a traffic study. 
A TIS shall be required for: 
1.  Projects which produce 50 peak hour (AM, PM, or Midday) two-way trips or more; or 
2.  Projects which produce 500 daily (24 hour) two-way trips or more; or 
3.  Expansion of an existing project may also be subject to a traffic study. When determining whether the project meets the threshold, trips from the existing land use should be included in the trips which are considered produced by the project. 
If it is determined that a TIS is required, a Scoping Meeting will be held with the applicant and the Town's Transportation Engineer and/or Planner prior to initiation of the TIS. At this time: 
1.  Guidelines for the TIS shall be provided and discussed to ensure understanding by both the Town and the Applicant; 
2.  The limits of the study area for the TIS shall be determined (The extent of the study area will be based on the location, size and potential impact of the proposed project); 
3.  The locations for Average Daily Traffic Counts shall be identified; 
4.  All intersections to be evaluated will be identified; 
5.  Background projects and an annual growth rate to be included in No Build Condition will be provided; 
6.  The Land Use Code used for trip generation and any adjustments will be approved; 
7.  Peak-Hour (AM, PM and/or Midday) counts and analysis will be designated; and 
8.  Any additional project specific requirements will be established. 
Revisions to the TIS shall be provided as required by the Town. The need for revisions will be based on the completeness of the traffic study, the thoroughness of the impact evaluation and the compatibility of the study with the proposed access and development plans. 
C.  Traffic Impact Study Area Establishment. The limits of the study area (which include roadways and intersections to be evaluated) for the Traffic Impact Study shall be determined by the Town's Transportation Engineer and Planner. The extent of the study area will be based on the location, size and potential impact of the proposed project. If the applicant does not concur with the study area established by [the] staff, the applicant may request that the Town's Planning Commission determine the study area to be analyzed. 
D.  Traffic Impact Study Review. The Town's Transportation Engineer shall review the Traffic Impact Study for any proposed development which does not require any mitigation or for which mitigation is limited to adjustments to signal timing, signal phasing or intersection re-striping. 
The Planning Commission, at a regularly scheduled or duly called special meeting, shall review the Traffic Impact Study for any proposed development which requires mitigation other than those specified above. These improvements could involve, but not be limited to, the addition of turn lanes at an intersection or signalization of an existing unsignalized intersection. 
E.  Mitigation Measures/Recommendations. If the initial computerized analysis indicates that the Town's adopted traffic service level goal of LOS D or better will be exceeded, mitigation must be included in the study based on at least one additional analysis. This improvement must depict how the Town's adopted traffic service level goals will be addressed. Acceptable roadway mitigation measures include, but are not limited to, the following: 
[1.]  Traffic signal timing adjustments; 
[2.]  Traffic signal phasing adjustments; 
[3.]  Re-striping of the intersection; 
[4.]  Adding additional intersection turn lanes; and 
[5.]  Installation of a signal. 
Applicants will be responsible for the cost and implementation of identified improvement, which mitigates the traffic impact of their proposed development. Because some improvements will not be implemented until the Build year, funding, in current dollars, for the identified improvements will be placed into an escrow account, specific for that improvement 
F.  Traffic Improvement Implementation. If a traffic mitigation is part of an approved Traffic Impact Study, all approved traffic improvements must be implemented prior to receipt of an occupancy or Final Plat approval, whichever is appropriate, unless otherwise provided for as part of the approved Traffic Impact Study. 
The TIS shall be the responsibility of the applicant. The TIS shall be prepared in accordance with the guidelines and format adopted by the Town of Lexington. All traffic studies must be prepared under the supervision of, and signed, stamped and dated by, a professional Civil Engineer registered in South Carolina. The applicant will be required to submit five (5) copies of the TIS and one (1) camera-ready copy. 
G.  Traffic Engineering Firm Selection. The Traffic Impact Study shall be prepared for the applicant by a qualified traffic engineering firm selected from a list of traffic engineering firms maintained by the Town. The list shall be created through the solicitation by the Town, or its representative, of professional traffic engineers qualified to perform this service. The list shall contain the names of at least three traffic-engineering firms, along with statements of qualifications on each. The list shall be updated periodically and approved by the Town's Planning Commission. 
If the applicant desires to use a traffic engineering firm other than one listed on the Town's preferred list, the desired firm must submit a letter (indentifying the applicant/study it would be preparing), a qualifications package (maximum of ten pages) and a sample Traffic Impact Study (without appendices) completed within the last 3 months. The information should be submitted to the Town's Transportation Engineer for approval. Upon approval from the Town's Engineer, the firm may proceed with the study. 
3-2.3.  Sketch Plan: 
A.  Discussion of Requirements. Before preparing the sketch plan for a subdivision, the applicant should discuss with the Administrative Official the procedure for adoption of a subdivision plat and the requirements as to [the] general layout of streets and for reservations of land, street improvements, drainage, sewerage, fire protection, extraordinary development (Article 9) and other similar matters, as well as the availability of existing services. The Administrative Official shall also advise the applicant, where appropriate, to discuss the proposed subdivision with those officials who must eventually approve these aspects of the subdivision plat coming within their jurisdiction. 
B.  Application Procedure and Requirements. Prior to subdividing land, an owner of the land, or his representative, shall file an application for approval of a sketch plan. The application shall: 
1.  Be made on forms available at the office of the Administrative Official. 
2.  Include all contiguous holdings of the owner, including land in the same ownership, as defined herein, with an indication of the portion that is proposed to be subdivided, accompanied by an affidavit of ownership. 
3.  Be accompanied by a minimum of seven (7) copies of the Sketch Plan as described in these regulations and complying in all respects with these regulations. 
C.  Approval of Sketch Plan. After reviewing the Sketch Plan, the Administrative Official will advise the applicant within thirty (30) days after application that the Sketch Plan is approved, disapproved or approved with certain modifications. If approved, said approval shall constitute authorization to prepare and submit a Preliminary Plat. Approval does not authorize the developer to begin the proposed construction or improvements. If the Administrative Official to the Planning Commission fails to act on the Sketch Plan within thirty (30) days after application, the Sketch Plan shall be deemed approved and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the Planning Commission upon demand; provided, however, that the subdivider may waive this requirement and consent in writing to extension of such period. 
D.  Appeals of the Decisions of the Administrative Official. If an applicant disagrees with the disapproval or approval with modifications of his Sketch Plan by the Administrative Official, he may submit the Sketch Plan to the Planning Commission at its next regular meeting. The Planning Commission shall review the Sketch Plan at the meeting, at which it is presented, and act on the appeal with pertinent comments and recommendations noted in the minutes of the Planning Commission meeting. 
E.  Appeals from the Planning Commission. Any appeal from the Planning Commission shall be made to the Circuit Court of Appeals who shall at its discretion hear the appeal and make their decision known to the appellant and the Planning Commission. Any appeal to Circuit Court of Appeals must be in writing and filed with the Circuit Court of Appeals within thirty (30) days after the notice of the decision of the Planning Commission has been delivered to the subdivider. 
F.  Distribution of Sketch Plan. Sketch Plans shall be distributed for purposes of notification to the following agencies and departments when appropriate: 
1.  Administrative Official/Planning Commission (file copy); 
2.  S.C. Department of Health and Environmental Control; 
3.  Director of Engineering and Planning; 
4.  Director of Utilities; 
5.  Director of Parks, Streets, and Sanitation; 
6.  Central Midlands Council of Governments; 
7.  Appropriate soil and erosion control agency. 
In addition, one copy shall be returned to the applicant showing any modifications needed. 
G.  Approval of plat or plan not acceptance of dedication of land. The approval of the land development plan or subdivision plat may not be deemed to automatically constitute or effect an acceptance by the municipality or the county or the public of the dedication of any street, easement, or other ground shown upon the plat. Public acceptance of the lands must be by action of the governing body customary to these transactions. 
3-2.4.  Preliminary Plat. 
A.  Application Procedure and Requirements. Based upon the approval of the Sketch Plan, the applicant should file with the Administrative Official an application for approval of a Preliminary Plat. The application shall: 
1.  Be made on forms available at the office of the Administrative Official to the Planning Commission, together with a fee, as set forth in Article 13 of these regulations. 
2.  Be accompanied by a minimum of eight (8) copies of the Preliminary Plat, as described in these regulations. 
3.  Be accompanied by a minimum of seven (7) copies of Construction Plans, as described in these regulations. 
4.  Conform in all respects with the Sketch Plan as approved. 
B.  Approval of Preliminary Plat. Upon determination by the Administrative Official that the Preliminary Plat conforms with the approved Sketch Plan, the Administrative Official shall submit an appropriate number of copies of the Preliminary Plat and construction plans to the following agencies for review and approval: 
1.  Administrative Official/Planning Commission (file copy); 
2.  Director of Engineering and Planning; 
3.  Director of Utilities; 
4.  Director of Parks, Streets, and Sanitation; 
5.  Appropriate soil and erosion control agency; 
6.  South Carolina Department of Health [and] Environmental Control; 
7.  Central Midlands Council of Governments. 
These reviewing agencies shall report their findings to the Planning Commission within thirty (30) days after receipt of [the] Preliminary Plat. Upon receipt of reports from these reviewing agencies, the Planning Commission shall give approval, approval with certain modifications or disapproval of the Preliminary Plat, but in each case their action shall be taken within sixty (60) days after submission of the Preliminary Plat: otherwise, such plat shall be deemed to have been approved and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the Planning Commission on demand; provided, however, that the applicant for [the] Planning Commission's approval may waive this requirement and consent in writing to an extension of such period. The grounds of disapproval of any Preliminary Plat shall be stated in the records of the Planning Commission. 
It is expressly understood that the Planning Commission shall not act to override the requirements of other agencies or Town Departments. It may, however, seek to bring agreement in case of conflicts between the various reviewing agencies, or a reviewing agency and the subdivider. 
Any plat submitted to the Planning Commission shall contain the name and address of a person to whom notice of hearing may be sent; and no plat shall be acted upon by the Planning Commission without affording a hearing thereon, notice of time and place of which shall be sent by certified mail to said address not less than five (5) days before the date fixed therefor. 
Approval of the Preliminary Plat shall be noted on the plat and certified by the Administrative Official to the Planning Commission on authorization by the Planning Commission. Also noted shall be the date on which the Planning Commission granted approval and the date of written notification to the subdivider or his authorized agent. Approval of a preliminary subdivision plat shall not constitute approval of the final subdivision plat. Application for approval of the final (record) plat will be considered only after the requirements for final plat approval as specified herein have been fulfilled and after all other specified conditions have been met. Upon approval of the preliminary subdivision plat by the Planning Commission, the subdivider may proceed with compliance of the other requirements of these regulations, construction of proposed improvements, and the preparation of the final subdivision plat. 
C.  Effective Period of Preliminary Approval. The approval of [the] Preliminary Plat shall be effective for a period of two (2) years at the end of which time final approval on the subdivision must have been obtained from the Planning Commission although the plat need not yet be signed and filed with the Registrar of Deeds. Any plat not receiving final approval within the period of time set forth therein shall be required to resubmit a new plat for preliminary approval, subject to all new land development regulations. 
Model Homes. For the purpose of allowing the early construction of model homes in a subdivision, the Planning Commission, at its discretion, may permit a portion of a subdivision involving not more than two (2) lots to be created in accordance with this ordinance, provided said portion derives access from an existing city, county or state highway, and provided no future road or other improvement is anticipated where said lots are proposed. Subsequent to approval, the model may be constructed, subject to such additional requirements that the Planning Commission may require. 
A.  Application Procedure and Requirements. Following the approval of the Preliminary Plat and completion of all required improvements, if the improvements are not going to be bonded, the applicant shall file with the Administrative Official as application for final approval of a subdivision plat. The application shall: 
1.  Be made on forms available at the Office of the Administrative Official. 
2.  Be accompanied by a minimum of eight (8) prints and one reproducible copy of the Final Plat, and 
a.  As-built drawing of sanitary sewers (if applicable) with grade, pipe sizes, and points of discharge. 
b.  As-built drawing of [the] storm sewer system with grade, pipe sizes, and location of outlets. 
c.  As-built drawing of [the] water system with pipe sizes and location of hydrants and valves. 
3.  Comply in all respects with the Preliminary Plat as approved. 
4.  Be accompanied by all formal irrevocable offers of dedication to the public of all streets, local government uses, utilities, parks and easements, in [ sic ] approved by the local government attorney; and the Final Plat shall be marked with a notation indicating the formal offers of dedication as follows: 
The owner, or his representative, hereby irrevocably offers for dedication to the local government all the streets, local government uses, easements, parks and required utilities shown in the subdivision plat and construction plans in accordance with an irrevocable offer of dedication dated ____________ , and recorded in the Registrar of Deeds' Office. 
By   (Owner or Representative) Date    
The applicant shall deliver a full covenant and warranty deed to all such lands in proper form for recording. The deed will include provisions that the system will be warranted by the developer for three (3) years from the date of the Town's acceptance of the system. 
5.  Be accompanied by the performance bond, if required, in a form satisfactory to the local government attorney and in an amount established by the Planning Commission upon recommendation of the Town Engineer shall include a provision that the principal of the bond shall comply with all the terms of the resolution of [the] Final Plat approval as determined by the Planning Commission and shall include, but not be limited to, the performance of all required subdivision and off-site improvements, and that all improvements and land included in the irrevocable offer of dedication shall be dedicated to the local government free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the premises. 
6.  Be accompanied by the following certificate signed by a registered South Carolina Engineer covering all required improvements which are not bonded: 
I hereby certify that the streets, drainage system, sewer system, and water system in ____________ ____________ Subdivision as shown on the Record Drawings dated ____________ , prepared by ____________ have been installed in accordance with the Preliminary Plat and Construction Plans approved by the Town of Batesburg-Leesville Planning Commission on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ . 
SEAL   Registered Engineer  
B.  Final Plat Approval. Upon determination by the Administrative Official to the Planning Commission that the Final Plat is in conformity with the Preliminary Plat as approved, the Administrative Official shall submit an appropriate number of copies of the Final Plat and As-Built Drawings to the same agencies and Town departments which reviewed and approved the Preliminary Plat. 
These reviewing agencies shall report their findings to the Planning Commission within thirty (30) days after receipt of the Final Plat. 
Upon Receipt of: 
1.  A report from the S.C. Department of Health and Environmental Control that all lots are acceptable for installation of wells (if not accessible to the Town's water system), or a report from the City Engineer/Public Service District and the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control Water Division that the water system is acceptable for operation; 
2.  A report from the S.C. Department of Health and Environmental Control that all lots are acceptable for installation of an individual sewage disposal system (if not accessible to the Town's sewer system), or a report from the Town Engineer/Public Service. 
[3-3-3-5. - Reserved.] 
3-6. - Wetlands. 
    No portion of subdivision or development shall be approved for construction, which is in a designated wetland without prior approval from, and subject to the restrictions of, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
3-7. - Prohibition. 
    No public official shall accept, file or record any subdivision plat, plat of a group development, planned development or any other type development unless such plat has been duly approved by the Town of Batesburg-Leesville Planning Commission. Should any public official violate the provisions of this section he shall, in each instance, be subject to the penalties stated in Article 13 of these regulations. 
3-8. - Street Naming. 
    The Town of Batesburg-Leesville Planning Commission shall be responsible for approving and authorizing the name of any street or road laid out within the Town of Batesburg-Leesville on any subdivision plat or group development subject to review and approval by said Planning Commission. Streets that are extensions of, or obviously in alignment with, existing streets, shall bear that name. The name of new streets shall not duplicate or be similar in sound to existing names in Batesburg-Leesville, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, circle, way, boulevard, drive, place, court, or the like. It shall be unlawful for any person, in laying out any new street or road, to name such street or road on any plat, by any marking, or in any deed or instrument without first getting the approval of the Planning Commission. Any person laying out a street is guilty of a misdemeanor if he shows an unapproved street name on a plat, street marker, or deed. If convicted, the court shall decide the punishment. 
    After reasonable notice (15 days) in a general circulation newspaper in the community, the planning commission may change the name of an existing street or road within the town limits. The commission can make the change when one of the following occurs: 
1.  There is duplication of names, which tends to confuse the public or persons delivering mail, orders or messages. 
2.  A change may simplify markings or giving directions to persons looking for an address. 
3.  Any other good and just reason that may appear to the commission. 
After reasonable opportunity for a public hearing, the Planning Commission issues its certificate designating the change. It is recorded in the office of the Registrar of Deeds or clerk of court. The change and certified name becomes the legal name of the street. 
ARTICLE 4. - PLAT REQUIREMENTS 

4-1. - Sketch Plan. 
    The Sketch Plan shall be prepared in accordance with the following requirements: 
A.  Sketch Plans submitted to the Planning Commission, prepared in pen or pencil, shall be drawn to a convenient scale of not less than 200 feet to one inch (depending upon the lot sizes and total acreage to be subdivided) and shall show the following information: 
1.  Name. 
a.  Name of subdivision if property is within an existing subdivision. 
b.  Proposed name if not within a previously platted subdivision. The proposed name shall not duplicate the name of any plat previously recorded. 
c.  Name of property if no subdivision name has been chosen. (This is commonly the name by which the property is locally known.) 
2.  Ownership. 
a.  Name and address, including telephone number, of [the] legal owner or agent of the property involved in the subdivision. 
b.  Name and address, including telephone number, of the professional person(s), if any, responsible for the subdivision's design, or for the design of any public improvements, and for the surveys. 
3.  Location. 
A vicinity map at a scale of not less than one inch equals one mile showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to [the] surrounding development. The scale of the vicinity map should be shown, as well as a north arrow. 
4.  Features. 
a.  Total acreage in the tract to be subdivided. 
b.  Location of property lines, existing easements, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses and existing buildings. 
c.  Location of all existing or platted streets or other public ways within or adjacent to the tract. 
d.  Names of any adjoining subdivision. 
e.  Approximate location, widths and classification of proposed streets, including width of rights-of-way. 
f.  Approximate location, dimensions and area of all proposed or existing lots. 
g.  Existing and proposed uses of land throughout the subdivision. 
h.  Existing uses of land surrounding the subdivision. 
i.  The approximate location and dimensions of any parcel of land proposed to be set aside for a park, playground, or other public use, or for the common use of property owners in the proposed subdivision with designation of the purpose thereof. 
j.  Location of lakes, swamps and land subject to flood, based on a [100-]year frequency flood. 
k.  Topography in terms of mean sea level by contours at vertical intervals of not more than five (5) feet (The Planning Commission's Administrative Official may accept vertical intervals of not more than ten (10) feet or waive the requirement where existing topographic mapping is not available at five (5) feet contours and the terrain of the proposed subdivision is not of major significance), and extending at least one hundred (100) feet outside the subdivision. 
l.  Location of city limit lines and county lines, if applicable. 
m.  Zoning district classification of the property and adjacent properties. 
B.  The subdivider may, and is encouraged to, submit a sketch plan of the entire tract he plans to ultimately develop, although his present plans call for the actual development of only a part of the property. 
C.  A site evaluation of the development, including a soil survey and interpretations conducted or approved by the County Soil and Water Conservation District, as described herein, shall be submitted as an integral component of the Sketch Plan. 
The developer of the subdivision shall apply to the Soil and Water Conservation District to do the required site evaluation and soil survey and interpretations. If the staff of the Conservation District determines that it cannot perform the site evaluation within 30 days of the application, then the developer may contract with a registered engineer, landscape architect or professional soil conservationist to perform the site evaluation. This site evaluation must then be submitted to the staff of the Conservation District for approval. The staff shall review the site evaluation within 15 days of its submission. 
    It is suggested that the subdivider obtain a site evaluation, including a soil survey and interpretations, and use it as an aid in the development of his Sketch Plan. 
4-2. - Preliminary Plat. 
    The Preliminary Plat shall meet the minimum standards of design set forth in these regulations and shall include the following information: 
A.  The Preliminary Plat shall be prepared by a South Carolina Registered Land Surveyor at a convenient scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet; adjustable depending upon lot sizes and total acreage. 
B.  The Preliminary Plat shall include the following: 
1.  Name. 
a.  Name of subdivision if property is within an existing subdivision. 
b.  Proposed name if not within a previously platted subdivision. The proposed name shall not duplicate the name of any plat previously recorded. 
2.  Ownership. 
a.  Name and address, including telephone number, of [the] legal owner or agent of the property involved in the subdivision. 
b.  Name and address, including telephone number of the professional person(s) responsible for the subdivision's design, or for the design of any public improvements, and for the surveys. 
3.  Location. A vicinity map at a scale of not less than one inch equals two miles showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to surrounding development. The scale of the vicinity map should be shown, as well as a north arrow. 
4.  Features. 
a.  Total acreage in the tract to be subdivided. 
b.  Graphic scale, north point and date. The north point shall be identified as magnetic, true or grid north. 
c.  Boundaries of the tract to be subdivided with all bearings and distances indicated. The boundary survey shall be to such a degree of accuracy that the error of closure is no greater than 1:2,500. 
d.  The following conditions: 
1.  Topography by contours at vertical intervals of not more than five (5) feet and extending at least one hundred (100) feet outside the subdivision. 
2.  Deed record names of adjoining property owners. 
3.  Names of any adjoining subdivision. 
4.  Property lines within and adjoining the subdivision. 
5.  Location and right-of-way of all existing or platted streets or other public ways, railroads, easements, water courses and buildings either on or adjacent to the property to be subdivided. Specify whether utility lines are in easements or rights-of-way and show location of poles or towers. 
6.  Location of town limits. 
7.  Location of streams, lakes, swamps and land subject to flood, based on a [100]-year frequency flood. Those lots so affected shall be identified and noted on the plat. 
8.  Location of existing adjoining property lines. 
9.  In case of re-subdivisions, a copy of [the] existing plat with proposed re-subdivisions superimposed thereon. 
10.  Size and location of existing sewers, water mains, drains, culverts or other underground facilities within the street or within the right-of-way of streets or roads adjoining the tract. Grades and invert elevations of sewers shall be shown. 
11.  The acreage of each drainage area affecting the proposed subdivision. 
12.  All elevations shall refer to Mean Sea Level Datum (if available) where public water and/or public sewers are to be installed. 
13.  Zoning district classifications of the property and adjacent properties. 
e.  The following proposed conditions: 
1.  The location, width, classification and proposed name of all proposed streets, alleys, and other public ways. This should include the width of both the paved surface and the right-of-way. 
2.  The location and width of all utility and other types of easements. 
3.  The location, dimensions and building setback lines of all proposed lots. 
4.  The location and dimensions of all property proposed to be set aside for a park, playground, or other public use, or for the common use of property owners in the proposed subdivision with designation of the purpose thereof and conditions, if any, of the dedication or reservation. 
5.  Sufficient date acceptable to the Town Engineer to determine readily the location, bearing and length of all lines, and to reproduce such lines upon the ground; the location of all proposed monuments. 
6.  Indication of the use of all lots (single-family, two-family, multifamily, townhouse, offices, commercial, warehousing, industrial, etc.). 
7.  Blocks shall be consecutively numbered or lettered in alphabetical order. The blocks in numbered additions to subdivisions bearing the same name shall be numbered or lettered consecutively throughout the several additions. 
8.  All lots in each block shall be consecutively numbered. 
9.  Total number of lots and total length of new streets. 
10.  Sidewalk locations. 
C.  The Preliminary Plat shall be presented in a similar format to the one on the accompanying sheet. All dimensions shall be shown to the nearest one-tenth of a foot and angles to the nearest minute. 
4-3. - Construction Plans. 
A.  General - Construction plans shall be prepared for all required improvements by a registered South Carolina Engineer at a convenient scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. 
B.  The Construction Plans shall include the following if such an improvement is proposed in the subdivision: 
1.  Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along the centerlines of all new roads. The elevation along the centerlines of existing roads shall be shown within one hundred (100) feet of their intersection with new roads. Approximate radii of all curves, lengths of tangents, and central angles on all streets. 
2.  Where steep slopes exist, the Town Engineer may require that cross-sections of all proposed streets at one-hundred foot stations shall be shown at five (5) points as follows: On a line at right angles to the centerline of the street, and said evaluation points shall be at the center of the street, each property line, and points twenty-five (25) feet inside each property line. 
3.  Plans and profiles showing the locations and typical cross-section of street pavements, including curbs and gutters, sidewalks, drainage easements, rights-of-ways, manholes and catch basins; the locations of street trees, street lighting standards, and street signs; the location, size and invert elevations of existing and proposed sanitary sewers, stormwater drains, and fire hydrants, showing connection to any exact location and size of all water, gas, or other underground utilities or structures. 
4.  Location, size, elevation and other appropriate description of any existing facilities or utilities, including, but not limited to, existing streets, sewers, drains, water mains, easements, water bodies, streams, and other pertinent features such as swamps, railroads, buildings, at the point of connection to proposed facilities and utilities within the subdivision. The water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of the survey and the approximate 100-year flood elevations of such lakes or streams. All elevations shall be referred to the Mean Sea Level Datum where public water and/or public sewers are to be installed. 
5.  The acreage of each drainage area affecting the proposed subdivision. 
6.  Topography at a contour interval of two (2) feet, referred to sea level datum when public water and/or public sewers are to be installed or portions(s) of the subdivision would be inundated by a 100-year frequency flood. 
7.  All specifications and references required by the construction standards and specifications of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, any other local government providing any utility, and the Department of Health and Environmental Control or the County Health Department. 
8.  A site grading plan showing proposed finished contours when any major contour changes or filling for flood protection is proposed in the subdivision. 
9.  Title, name and address, telephone and signature of the South Carolina Registered Engineer and Surveyor responsible for the plans and date, including revision dates. 
4-4. - Final Plat: General. 
    The Final Plat shall be prepared by a South Carolina Registered Land Surveyor at the same scale and containing the same information, except for any changes or additions required by the Planning Commission, as shown on the Preliminary Plat, except that final finished contours and the resultant areas subject to inundation by a 100-year flood shall be shown. The Preliminary Plat may be used as the Final Plat if it meets these requirements and is revised in accordance with the requirements of the Planning Commission. 
4-4.1.  Scale of Plat - The Final Plat shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet. 
4-4.2.  Plat Information - All revision dates must be shown as well as the following: 
1.  Name of owner of record. 
2.  Name of subdivision, date, north point, and graphic scale. The north point shall be identified as magnetic, true or grid north. 
3.  Name, registration number and seal of registered surveyor or civil engineer. 
4.  Name of municipality and/or county in which the subdivision is located and location map. 
5.  Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce accurately on the ground the location, bearing and length of every street centerline, lot line, easement, boundary line, and building line whether curved or straight. This shall include the radius, point of tangent, and other data for curved property lines and curved streets, to an appropriate accuracy and in conformance with good surveying practice. 
6.  Names of owners of record of all adjoining land and all property boundaries, water courses, streets, easements, utilities and other such improvements, which cross or form any boundary line of the tract being subdivided. 
7.  Exact boundaries of the tract of land being subdivided shown with bearing and distances. 
8.  Streets, alleys, rights-of-way, percent of grades and street names. 
9.  Rights-of-way or easement: location, widths and purposes. 
10.  Lot lines, minimum building setback lines and lot and block numbers. 
11.  Parks, school sites or other public open spaces, if any. 
12.  All dimensions shall be to the nearest one-tenth (0.1) of a foot and angles to the nearest minute or as required by "Minimum Standards for the Practice of Land Surveying in South Carolina," whichever is stricter. 
13.  Accurate description of the location of all monuments and markers. 
14.  The proposed uses of all parcels and areas, including single-family residential and public, if any, with the purpose, location and dimensions of each indicated. 
15.  One copy of the final plat, which shall be retained by the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, shall include an overlay showing the type, number and location of all streetlights. 
4-4.3.  Certification - The following signed certificates shall appear on the Final Plat that is submitted to the Planning Commission by the subdivider: 
A.  Certificate of Accuracy. 
I hereby certify that the plan shown and described hereon is true, correct and accurate survey required by the Land Development Regulations of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville and that the monuments shown were placed to the specifications set forth in said regulations. 
    Date Registered Land Surveyor or Engineer SEAL S. C. Registration Number  ____________  
B.  Certification of Ownership and Dedication. 
It is hereby certified that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown and described hereon and that I (we) hereby dedicate all streets, alleys, walks, parks, and other sites to public or private use as noted. 
    Date Owner  
C.  Information to Accompany Final Plat when not using a Bond. 
1.  As-built drawings of [the] sanitary sewer system with grade, pipe sizes, points of discharge, and pipe invert elevation. 
2.  As-built drawings of [the] stormwater sewer system with grade, pipe size and location of outlets, and pipe invert elevations. 
3.  As-built drawings of [the] water system with pipe sizes and location of hydrants and valves. 
4.  The following signed certificate: 
I hereby certify that the streets, drainage system, sewer system and water system in ____________ subdivision as shown on the Plat dated ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , prepared by ____________ has been installed in accordance with the Preliminary Plat (construction drawings) approved ____________ . 
    Date Registered Engineer SEAL S. C. Registration Number  ____________  
ARTICLE 5. - MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS 

5-1. - General. 
    In considering any Preliminary Plat, the Planning Commission shall give consideration to any Comprehensive Plan, or segments thereof, affecting the area in which the subdivision is located. 
5-2. - Streets. 
    All streets, which shall hereafter be established in connection with the development of a subdivision, shall comply with the following design standards: 
    The layout of the streets as to arrangement, character, width, grade and location may be required to conform to the Town's Master Plan, Official Map, Comprehensive Plan, to adjoining street systems or adjoining properties, and to the topography, natural features and drainage systems provided. 
    Minor streets shall be so laid out so that their use by through traffic will be discouraged, but to encourage use by local traffic. 
    Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed collector or through street, the Planning Commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting, deep lots, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
    Roads of an existing subdivision shall not be used as the sole means of ingress and egress in developing a new subdivision or extending an existing one unless granted by the Planning Commission. If, in judgment of the Planning Commission, the increased traffic and noise would create a safety hazard or otherwise be detrimental to residents of the existing subdivision, additional access shall be provided. 
5-2.1.  Continuation of Existing Street Pattern - Whenever topography will permit, the arrangements of streets in a subdivision shall provide for the alignment and continuation or projection of existing streets in adjoining areas. This is to mean the interconnectivity of subdivision developments. 
5-2.2.  Cul-de-sacs - Cul-de-sacs shall terminate in a circular turnaround having a minimum right-of-way of at least one hundred (100) feet in a diameter and a paved turnaround with a minimum outside diameter [of] eighty (80) feet or other approved type of turnaround. Maximum length shall not exceed eight hundred (800) feet unless unusual circumstances require a greater length. 
5-2.3.  Temporary Dead-End Streets - Temporary dead-end streets, which extend for a greater distance than the depth of one abutting lot, shall be provided with a temporary turnaround having a diameter of eighty (80) feet, or other suitable turnaround. 
5-2.4.  Half Streets - Half streets are prohibited along property lines. Whenever a street is planned adjacent to the proposed subdivision tract boundary, the entire street right-of-way shall be platted within the proposed subdivision. 
5-2.5.  Intersections - The centerline of no more than two (2) streets shall intersect at any one point. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and no street shall intersect any other street at an angle of less than sixty (60) degrees (angles of intersection to be measured at the intersection of street centerline). Curved streets shall have a minimum tangent of one hundred (100) feet at intersections. 
5-2.6.  Reverse Curves - Where practical, a tangent of at least two hundred (200) feet on minor streets and three hundred (300) feet on collector streets shall be provided between reverse curves. On major thoroughfares, tangent distances shall be determined by the State Highway Department. 
5-2.7.  Street Access - Where it is essential to the development of a logical street pattern, street rights-of-way shall be extended to the boundary of adjoining property. Incompatible characteristics of adjoining property shall be given due consideration in making a determination of what shall constitute a logical street pattern. Each residential collector road shall have either (a) two (2) or more access points to roads of equal or higher classification, or (b) substantial improvement, satisfactory to the Town Engineer, to accommodate projected traffic flow, i.e., acceleration/deceleration lanes, stop lights, etc. 
5-2.8.  Street Jogs - Street jogs should be avoided. Where unavoidable, street jogs at intersections shall have a centerline offset of not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
5-2.9.  Street Names - Streets that are extensions of, or obviously in alignment with existing named streets, shall bear that name. The name of new streets shall be subject to the approval of the Town Planning Commission and shall not duplicate or be similar in sound to existing names in Lexington County, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, circle, way, boulevard, drive, place, or court or the like. 
5-2.10.  Additional right-of-way - Subdivisions which include an existing platted street that does not conform to the minimum right-of-way requirements of these regulations shall provide additional width along one or both sides of such street so that the minimum right-of-way required by these regulations is established. Subdivisions abutting only one side of such street shall provide a minimum of one-half, measured from the centerline of the existing right-of-way, of the right-of-way required by these regulations. 
5-2.11.  Right-of-Way and Pavement Widths - Minimum right-of way and pavement widths shall be as follows: 
Street Classifications **ROW (feet) *Pavement (feet) Arterial 85 50 Collector - direct acs. 66 33 - Roll Back Curbs 30 - Valley Gutter [Collector] - no direct acs. 50 27 - Barrier Curbs Local (Minor) 50 25 - Roll Back Curbs 22 - Valley Gutter *Measured from (1) back-to-back of curbs or (2) low point of the valley to low point of the valley. 
**As shown on the Major Thoroughfare Plan. Right-of-Way usually reserved or dedicated by subdivider and improved by others.  
Road design and construction shall meet all requirements of the Lexington County Road Design Policy unless otherwise directed here. 
5-2.12.  Street Grades - Grades on major thoroughfares shall be established by the State Highway Department. Grades on collector streets shall not exceed eight (8%) percent unless topographic conditions make this impractical. Grades on minor residential streets shall not exceed fifteen (15%) percent. All streets shall have a minimum grade of not less than one-half (0.5%) percent. 
5-2.13.  Horizontal Curves - Where a deflection angle of more than ten (10) degrees occurs in the alignment of a minor street, a curve of reasonable radius shall be introduced. A curve shall be introduced at any change in direction of a Collector Street or major thoroughfare. On major thoroughfares, the centerline radius of a curvature shall be determined by the State Highway Department. On collector streets, the centerline radius of curvature shall not be less than three hundred and fifty (350) feet. On minor streets, the centerline radius of a curvature shall not be less than one hundred and fifty (150) feet. 
5-2.14.  Vertical Curves - Minimum stopping sight distance on major thoroughfares shall be determined by the State Highway Department. On collector streets, minimum stopping sight distance shall be two hundred and seventy-five (275) feet (40 mph), and on minor streets one hundred and sixty (160) feet (25 mph). Stopping sight distances shall be measured from height of eye of three (3) feet nine (9) inches to an object with a height of six (6) inches. Both distances measured above the centerline of the street. Stopping sight distances shall conform to the standards of the American Association of State Highway Officials. 
5-2.15.  Split Level Streets - Streets which are constructed so as to have two traffic ways, each at different levels within the same right-of-way, shall provide a paved traffic surface of at least twenty (20) feet on each level and a slope between the two traffic ways of three to one (3:1) or flatter. 
5-3. - Blocks. 
    The Planning Commission shall examine every proposed subdivision as to its compliance with the following provisions: 
5-3.1.  Nonresidential Blocks - Nonresidential blocks shall be of such length and width as may be suitable for their prospective use, including adequate provision for off-street parking and service. 
5-3.2.  Residential Block Length - In order to ensure convenient access between various parts of a subdivision and between the subdivision and surrounding areas, and in order to help prevent traffic congestion and undue inconvenience, the length of residential blocks hereafter shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet or be less than two hundred (200) feet from corner to corner. Provided, however, such length requirements may be modified when such shall be appropriate due to the topography or physical shape of the property being subdivided. The width of any residential block shall be sufficient to permit two (2) tiers of lots, where topography and land ownership permits, except as otherwise provided in these regulations. 
5-3.3.  Crosswalks - Where a subdivision design involves unusually long blocks, public right-of-way for pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided where such are necessary for the convenience of pedestrians. Such right-of-way shall not be less than ten (10) feet wide and improved to include a concrete, asphalt or other approved surface sidewalks four (4) feet wide and four (4) inches thick. 
5-4. - Lots. 
    All lots, which shall hereafter be established in connection with the development of a subdivision, shall comply with the requirements set forth in the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, South Carolina, or as shown below, whichever are more restrictive. 
5-4.1.  Authority of Health Department - Nothing contained in these regulations shall be construed as preventing the Health Department, after study of the conditions existing in a proposed subdivision, from requiring that all or any portion of the area of such subdivision shall not be built upon or that the minimum lot sizes set forth in these regulations are inadequate and must be increased to ensure the protection of the public health. 
5-4.2.  Setback Lines - Residential - Building setback lines shall be in accordance with the zoning ordinance. Minimum side and rear setback lines shall also be in accordance with the zoning ordinance. Driveways shall be at least 4 feet from the property line except at the point of entry and exit. 
5-4.3.  Lot Lines and Town Limit or County Lines - Insofar as practical, lots should not be divided by Town Limit or County boundary lines. 
5-4.4.  Lot Lines - Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines. 
5-4.5.  Minimum Lot Dimensions and Area - The minimum lot width at the front building line and minimum lot area shall be designed in the Town of Batesburg-Leesville zoning ordinance. 
5-4.6.  Corner Lots. 
(1)  Corner lots shall be at least five (5) feet wider than interior lots; provided, however, the maximum required width of corner lots shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
(2)  The minimum side building setback distances shall be at least the minimum front building setback distance for the side adjacent to the street. 
5-4.7.  Double Frontage - Double frontage lots (i.e., lots having street frontage both in front and rear) shall be avoided except in commercial zones, where essential to provide separation of residential development from railroad or major street right-of-way or from nonresidential uses or where necessary due to topography. Where a railroad or major thoroughfare right-of-way, as shown on the major thoroughfare plan, abuts or runs through any portion of the subdivision, the subdivision plat shall provide for either a minor street or lots backing onto said right-of-way having a minimum depth of two hundred (200) feet. 
5-4.8.  Street Access - Every lot hereafter established shall front or abut on a street which conforms to the requirements of these regulations. 
5-4.9.  Flag Lots - The use of flag lots in residential subdivisions shall be permitted only if dictated by the terrain. Flat lots shall not be permitted to solely allow an increase in the number of lots. The access drive to a flag lot shall have a minimum width of 30 feet and shall be a deeded part of the lot so accessed. No two flag lots may abut or converge at the (poles) street right-of-way. 
5-5. - Easements. 
    Easements shall be required in subdivisions for the following purposes: 
5-5.1.  Utility Easements - When it is found to be necessary and desirable to locate public utility lines in other than street rights-of-way, easements shall be shown on the plat for such purposes. All above ground utilities shall be provided along rear property lines except where site conditions make this impractical. Such easements shall be not less than twenty (20) feet along rear property lines and ten (10) feet alongside property line and, where possible, shall be centered on rear and side lot lines. 
5-5.2.  Water Course and Drainage Easements - Where a proposed subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way or stream, appropriate provisions shall be made to accommodate stormwater and drainage through and from the proposed subdivision. The area so improved shall conform substantially with the lines of said water course and be of a sufficient width for construction, or both, as to be adequate for the purpose; provided, however, such public easement shall be not less than twelve (12) feet in width. 
5-6. - Reservation of Public Sites. 
    To ensure the orderly development of the community, the subdivider shall be required to reserve and negotiate to sell needed spaces for parks, schools, fire stations and playgrounds, as required by local governmental units, for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date of submission of the Sketch Plan. The reservation period may be extended for one (1) additional thirty (30) day period if a governmental unit files with the Planning Commission a written statement indicating a desire to negotiate. 
5-7. - Flood Protection. 
    No portion of a subdivision shall be approved for construction which is subject to inundation by a flood of one hundred-year frequency or less unless such portion of the subdivision is filled or otherwise protected to raise the elevation to at least one foot above the [100]-year frequency flood elevation. Such fill or other protection shall not encroach on the required floodway or street. The elevation of the fill or adequacy of other protection shall be certified by a registered engineer or land surveyor before approval of the Final Plat. 
5-8. - Manufactured Homes. 
    Where permissible for use by the Zoning Ordinance, manufactured homes shall meet all building setbacks, parking, lot coverage, height, width and sign requirements of the zoning district. Unless otherwise specified, the design of the structure shall be similar in character and appearance to other dwellings in the area with regard to unit size, roof overhangs, roof materials, roof pitch, and exterior materials. 
5-8.1.  Mobile Home Parks - Manufactured Homes in a certified and licensed Mobile Park shall be exempt from the requirements of Section 5-9 [of this ordinance], but shall meet all other regulations, including the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, Town of Batesburg-Leesville Mobile Home Park Ordinance, and any other applicable federal, state or local regulations. 
5-8.2.  Manufactured Home Subdivision - Manufactured Home Subdivisions are defined as single-family residential neighborhoods in which permanent dwelling units on individually platted lots are manufactured homes meeting the 1974 Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act (42 USC 5401), commonly known as the HUD (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development) code, not previously lived in prior to date of installation, meeting the Foundations, Skirting and Additions standards in paragraph 5-9.2 [of this ordinance], and the Appearance Standards in paragraph 5-9.3 [of this ordinance]. 
A.  Lots - There shall be a minimum of 20 lots and 3.4 acres per development, lots shall be a minimum of 7,350 square feet, and shall be individually platted and deeded. 
B.  Requirements - Manufactured Home Subdivisions shall meet all other applicable requirements of these regulations and of the zoning ordinance. 
5.8.3.  Foundations, Skirting and Additions - All manufactured homes shall be placed on a permanent foundation that meets applicable building code requirements of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville where the crawl space beneath each unit and perimeter wall are enclosed with brick and mortar from the ground to the home itself, such that the floor elevation of the proposed dwelling is reasonably compatible with those of surrounding dwelling units. All additions, including, but not limited to, steps, porches and decks, must meet the requirements of the Southern Building Code and CABO. 
5.8.4.  Appearance Standards - The design of the structure shall be similar in characteristic and appearance to other dwelling units in the area with regard to unit size, roof overhangs, roof materials, roof pitch and exterior materials. All Manufactured Homes shall meet the following standards of Acceptable Similarity and Design of Structure: 
(1)  Minimum Width of Structure: Minimum width of the manufactured home as assembled on the site shall not be less than 20 feet, as measured across the narrowest portion. 
(2)  Minimum Roof Pitch, Minimum Eave Overhang, Roofing Materials: The pitch of the main roof shall not be less than 3:12. Minimum over hang of eaves shall be twelve (12) inches. Roofing materials shall consist of one of the following categories: wood, shingle, wood shake, synthetic composite shingle, concrete tile or any other material may be used that is generally acceptable for site-built housing, if applied in such a manner as to be similar in appearance. Metallic roofing surfaces shall not be permitted on the residential structure or on any garage or carport unless approved by the Town's Building Official/Engineer. 
(3)  Exterior Siding: Exterior siding shall be made of non-reflective, nonglossy, and nonmetallic materials unless approved by the Town's Building Official/Engineer. Acceptable siding materials include: vinyl, brick, wood, stucco, stone, or other masonry materials or any combination of these materials, or any material that the Town's Building Official/Engineer deems to meet the intent of this regulation, and which is compatible with [the] surrounding development shall be used. 
5-8.5.  Unless specifically noted above, Manufactured Homes shall meet all other provisions of these Land Development Regulations and the Zoning Ordinance. 
5-9. - Size Homes to Be Built. 
    Any person, developer or corporation desiring to create and develop any residential subdivision within the Town of Batesburg-Leesville or which is to be annexed into the Town of Batesburg-Leesville shall declare in writing at the time of submitting the sketch plan to the Town, the minimum heated square foot size homes to be built in the subdivision. 
ARTICLE 6. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 
    The subdivider shall install and/or pay for the improvements required by these regulations necessary to serve his subdivision prior to the approval of the Final Plat. 

6-1. - Monuments. 
    All lot corners, street corners, and points of change of direction in exterior boundaries of the subdivision shall be marked with an iron pipe at least twenty four (24) inches long and driven to within four (4) inches of the finishing grade or flush as conditions may require. 
6-2. - Natural Gas. 
    When gas lines are located in a street right-of-way, where possible, such lines shall be located outside the portion of the street to be surfaced to prevent cutting into the paved surface to serve abutting properties. 
6-3. - Water Supply. 
    A public water system shall be installed in all subdivisions. When a water system is installed in a subdivision, water mains, valves and fire hydrants shall be installed according to plans and specifications approved by the town engineer and the Health Department. When the water main is located in the street right-of-way and it will be necessary to cut into the street surface to serve abutting lots, a connection shall be stubbed out to the property line to serve each lot before the street is surfaced. 
6-4. - Sanitary Sewerage. 
    Sanitary sewer systems are to be installed in all subdivisions, and shall be installed to the plans and specifications approved by the appropriate Town Engineer and the Health Department. When the sewer main is located in the street right-of-way, and it will be necessary to cut into the street surface to serve abutting lots, a connection shall be stubbed out to the property line to serve each lot before the street is surfaced. 
6-5. - Curbs and Gutters. 
    Concrete curbs or paved valley-type gutters shall be installed and shall be in accordance with plans and specifications of the State Highway Department and the Town Engineer. 
6-6. - Street Grading and Surfacing. 
    Street grading, base preparation, and surfacing shall be carried out by the subdivider according to plans and specifications of the State Highway Department, and the Town Engineer. 
6-7. - Storm Drainage. 
    An adequate drainage system, including necessary improved open channels, pipes, culverts, storm sewers, intersection drains, drop inlet, bridges and other necessary appurtenances, shall be installed by the subdivider and shall be according to plans and specifications approved by the Town Engineer. 
6-8. - Street Name Signs. 
    Street name signs shall be installed at all intersections within a subdivision. The location and design of such signs shall be approved by the proper town authority. 
6-9. - Sidewalks. 
    Sidewalks shall be installed and shall be constructed within the street right-of-way at the time of street construction, and approved by the Town Engineer. A five (5) foot sidewalk shall be provided on at least one side of all minor streets. Five (5) foot sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of collector streets and major thoroughfares. The installation of sidewalks may be waived, in whole or in part, if the proposed sidewalk would be unsafe or inaccessible due to topography, or any other good and just reason as determined by the Planning Commission. In lieu of the installation of sidewalks, as waived by the Planning Commission, the developer must pay to the Town the cost of said sidewalk as determined by a registered S.C. engineer and the Town's Engineer, prior to the transfer of any deed. This money shall be placed in an escrow account for the sole purpose of installing and repairing sidewalks elsewhere in the Town. 
6-10. - Trees. 
    It is the intent of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville to preserve trees within its corporate limits. Existing trees should be preserved whenever possible, and the plans and specifications for tree planting and tree preservation should meet the approval Town of Batesburg-Leesville Landscaping and Tree Ordinance. 
6[-11.] - Open Space Recreation Requirements. 
    The Planning Commission shall require that open space be reserved for active or passive recreation where such reservations would be appropriate. Each reservation shall be of suitable size, dimension, topography and general access for the particular purposes envisioned by the Planning Commission. These areas shall be shown on the Plat and marked "reserved for recreation open space." The number of acres to be reserved shall be determined in accordance with the following table, which has been prepared on the basis of providing three (3) acres for every one-hundred (100) dwelling units. 
SINGLE FAMILY LOTS SIZE OF LOTS MINIMUM PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL LAND IN SUBDIVISION TO BE RESERVED FOR RECREATION PURPOSES 80,000 SF & GREATER 1.5 PERCENT 50,000 SF 2.5 PERCENT 40,000 SF 3.0 PERCENT 25,000 SF 5.0 PERCENT 10,000 SF & SMALLER 13.0 PERCENT  
6[-11.5.] - Multifamily and High-Density Residential. 
    The Planning Commission shall determine the acreage for reservation based on the number of dwelling units per acre to occupy the site as permitted by the Ordinance. 
6-12. - Traffic Control Devices. 
    Traffic Control devices, whether signs or signals, shall be installed by the Developer as deemed appropriate by the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, its agencies and/or the South Carolina Department of Highways and Public Transportation. The authority to require traffic control devices may be exercised by the Town at anytime during the approval process. 
6-13. - Street Lights. 
    Residential Standard 15,000 lumen H.P.S street lights shall be installed at a rate of not less than one street light per six (6) lots. The developer shall be responsible for the operating cost of said lights at the standard rate subject to the rate and class of service approved by the South Carolina Public Service Commission until the Town accepts title to the effected subdivisions road infrastructure, at which time the Town will assume responsibility for said operating costs. If the developer elects to install more than one street light per six (6) lots, then the operating costs for all such additional street lights shall be borne by the developer or the residents of the effected subdivision. 
6-14. - Traffic Impact Study (TIS). 
    Refer to the Traffic Impact Study Guidelines adopted by the Town. 
6-14.1.  Why a Traffic Impact Study is Needed. A Traffic Impact Study (TIS) is an important tool in the overall development planning process (residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, etc.). It provides information which identifies impacts of proposed developments on the existing, short-range and long-range roadway/circulation networks. It also identifies mitigation measures for the impacts identified. 
6-14.2.  When a Traffic Impact Study is Required. Some development applications may require TISs. A threshold should be established to ensure that projects which are anticipated to create traffic impacts will be required to mitigate those impacts, while those smaller projects in less congested areas are not unduly burdened with a requirement to perform a traffic study. A TIS shall be required for: 
1.  Projects which produce 50 peak hour (AM, PM, or Midday) two-way trips or more; or 
2.  Projects which produce 500 daily (24 hour) two-way trips or more; or 
3.  Expansion of an existing project may also be subject to a traffic study. When determining whether the project meets the threshold, trips from the existing land use should be included in the trips that are considered "produced" by the project. 
If it is determined that a TIS is required, a Scoping Meeting will be held with the applicant and the Town's Transportation Engineer and/or Planner prior to initiation of the TIS. At this time: 
1.  Guidelines for the TIS shall be provided and discussed to ensure understanding by both the Town and the Applicant; 
2.  The limits of the study area for the TIS shall be determined (The extent of the study area will be based on the location, size and potential impact of the proposed project); 
3.  The locations for Average Daily Traffic Counts shall be identified; 
4.  All intersections to be evaluated will be identified; 
5.  Background projects and an annual growth rate to be included in No Build Condition will be provided; 
6.  The Land Use Code used for trip generation and any adjustments will be approved; 
7.  Peak-Hour (AM, PM and/or Midday) counts and analysis will be designated; and 
8.  Any additional project-specific requirements will be established. 
Revisions to the TIS shall be provided as required by the Town. The need for revisions will be based on the completeness of the traffic study, the thoroughness of the impact evaluation and the compatibility of the study with the proposed access and development plans. 
6-14.3.  Traffic Impact Study Area Establishment. The limits of the study area (which include roadways and intersections to be evaluated) for the Traffic Impact Study shall be determined by the Town's Transportation Engineer and Planner. The extent of the study area will be based on the location, size and potential impact of the proposed project. If the applicant does not concur with the study area established by staff, the applicant may request that the Town's Planning Commission determine the study area to be analyzed. 
6-14.4.  Traffic Impact Study Review. The Town's Transportation Engineer shall review the Traffic Impact Study for any proposed development which does not require any mitigation or for which mitigation is limited to adjustments to signal timing, signal phasing or intersection restriping. 
The Planning Commission, at a regularly scheduled or duly called special meeting, shall review the Traffic Impact Study for any proposed development which requires mitigation other than those specified above. These improvements could involve, but not be limited to, the addition of turn lanes at an intersection or signalization of an existing unsignalized intersection. 
6-14.5.  Mitigation Measures/Recommendations. If the initial computerized analysis indicates that the Town's adopted traffic service level goal of LOS D or better will be exceeded, mitigation must be included in the study based on at least one additional analysis. This improvement must depict how the Town's adopted traffic service level goals will be addressed. Acceptable roadway mitigation measures include, but are not limited to, the following: 
[1.]  Traffic signal timing adjustments; 
[2.]  Traffic signal phasing adjustments; 
[3.]  Re-striping of the intersection; 
[4.]  Adding additional intersection turn lanes; and 
[5.]  Installation of a signal. 
Applicants will be responsible for the cost and implementation of identified improvement, which mitigates the traffic impact of their proposed development. Because some improvements will not be implemented until the build year, funding, in current dollars, for the identified improvements will be placed into an escrow account, specific for that improvement. 
6-14.6.  Traffic Improvement Implementation. If a traffic mitigation is part of an approved Traffic Impact Study, all approved traffic improvements must be implemented prior to receipt of an occupancy or Final Plat approval, whichever is appropriate, unless otherwise provided for as part of the approved Traffic Impact Study. The TIS shall be the responsibility of the applicant. The TIS shall be prepared in accordance with the Guidelines and format adopted by the Town of Lexington. All traffic studies must be prepared under the supervision of, and signed, stamped and dated by, a professional Civil Engineer registered in South Carolina. The applicant will be required to submit five (5) copies of the TIS and one (1) camera-ready copy. 
6-14.7.  Traffic Engineering Firm Selection. The Traffic Impact Study shall be prepared for the applicant by a qualified traffic engineering firm selected from a list of traffic engineering firms maintained by the Town. The list shall be created through the solicitation by the Town, or its representative, of professional traffic engineers qualified to perform this service. The list shall contain the names of at least three traffic engineering firms, along with statements of qualifications on each. The list shall be updated periodically and approved by the Town's Planning Commission. If the applicant desires to use a traffic engineering firm other than one listed on the Town's preferred list, the desired firm must submit a letter (indentifying the applicant/study it would be preparing), a qualifications package (maximum of ten pages) and a sample Traffic Impact Study (without appendices) completed within the last 3 months. The information should be submitted to the Town's Transportation Engineer for approval. Upon approval from the Town's Engineer, the firm may proceed with the study. 
ARTICLE 7. - GROUP DEVELOPMENT 

7-1. - General. 
7-1.1.  In order to prevent creation of traffic hazards, ensure the provision of off-street parking and provision of necessary utilities, plans for group developments such as shopping centers, office parks, industrial parks, mobile home parks, apartment complexes, and motels where the site is not subdivided into lots and public streets, but is retained in one ownership, the site plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and approval. 
7-1.2.  These regulations are considered minimum and may be superseded by more restrictive regulations such as the zoning ordinance. 
7-1.3.  Types of Group Developments. 
(1)  Group commercial developments consist of more than one business or structure on a single lot. 
(2)  Group housing developments consist of more than one dwelling unit on [a] single lot, and one or more structures on a single lot which each contain more than one dwelling unit. 
(3)  Group industrial developments consist of more than one industry or structure on a single lot. 
7-2. - Procedures for Group Development Approval. 
    The following procedures shall be followed in the submission, review and action upon all group development plats: 
7-2.1.  Traffic Impact Study Requirement Evaluation: Prior to the submission of any TIS and/or site plan, the applicant shall complete and submit a Traffic Impact Study Requirement Evaluation form obtained from the Administrative Official's office. The Town's Transportation Engineer will evaluate the request and determine whether a TIS is required. A written response will be issued to the applicant within seven working (7) days of receipt of the TISRE. 
7-2.2.  Traffic Impact Study (TIS): Refer to Section 6-14 and the Traffic Impact Study Guidelines adopted by the Town. 
7-2.3.  Site Plan. 
a.  The developer shall submit along with the TIS at least seven (7) copies of a Site Plan to the staff of the Planning Commission for review. The staff shall recommend approval, disapproval, or approval with modification the Site Plan within thirty (30) days to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall approve, disapprove, or approve with modification the site plan at its next regularly scheduled meeting. Pertinent comments and recommendations shall be noted in the minutes of the Planning Commission meeting. 
b.  If the Site Plan is disapproved by the Planning Commission or if the Planning Commission requires changes with which the developer does not concur, the developer may appeal to the Circuit Court of Appeals within thirty (30) days of being notified of the Planning Commission's decision. 
c.  If the Planning Commission fails to act within thirty (30) days after submission of the Site Plan, the Planning Commission must inform the developer of the date on which action shall be taken but such extension of time shall not exceed thirty (30) days. Failure of the Planning Commission to act within these time limits shall be deemed to constitute Site Plan approval and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the Planning Commission upon demand. 
7-2.4.  Construction Drawings. 
a.  The developer shall submit at least six (6) copies of the Construction Drawings along with the necessary supporting data to the staff of the Planning Commission. 
b.  Upon determination that the Construction Drawings conform to the approved Site Plan, the staff shall submit these plans to the following agencies (as appropriate) for review and approval. 
(1)  Building Department. 
(2)  Director of Utilities. 
(3)  Director of Planning and Engineering. 
(4)  Director of Parks, Streets and Sanitation. 
c.  Upon receipt of the reports from the above agencies, the staff of the Planning Commission shall approve, disapprove or approve with modifications the Construction Drawings within thirty (30) days after submission of the plans. 
d.  The developer shall obtain all required DHEC approvals. 
e.  If the Construction Drawings are disapproved by the staff or if the staff requires changes with which the developer does not concur, the developer may submit the Construction Drawings to the Planning Commission at its next regular meeting. The Planning Commission shall review and approve, disapprove or approve with modifications the Construction Drawings at the next regular meeting at which it is presented. Pertinent comments and recommendations shall be noted in the minutes of the Planning Commission. 
f.  If the staff of the Planning Commission fails to act within thirty (30) days after submission of the Construction Drawings, the plans shall be automatically approved and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the Planning Commission upon demand. 
g.  The Planning Commission shall not act to override the requirements of other agencies. The Commission may seek to bring agreement in cases of conflict between the various reviewing agencies and the developer. 
7-2.5.  Final Approval: Upon completion of all construction, no final approvals are required by the Planning Commission, but approvals may be required by other agencies. 
7-3. - General Plat Information. 
7-3.1.  Site Plan. [The site plan shall include the following information:] 
1.  Total acreage in the tract proposed for Group Development and a statement of total contiguous acreage owned by the developer. 
2.  Tentative access and/or street layout. 
3.  Approximate rights-of-way of existing and proposed buildings and structures. 
4.  Typical arrangement of existing and proposed buildings and structures. 
5.  Existing and proposed uses of land throughout the tract. 
6.  Existing uses of land and all existing street intersections surrounding the tract. 
7.  The location and size of all proposed utilities and storm drainage easements. 
8.  Topography in terms of mean sea level by contours at vertical intervals of not more than five (5) feet and extending at least one hundred (100) feet outside the tract (if access to adjoining land can be obtained). 
9.  Name, date, north point, and graphic scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. 
10.  A vicinity map at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one (1) mile showing the relationship of the proposed Group Development to surrounding development, especially schools, parks and shopping areas. The scale of the vicinity map should be shown on the Site Plan Drawing. 
11.  A site evaluation shall be submitted with the Site Plan. For developments exceeding five (5) acres in size, the elevation data for a one hundred (100) year flood shall be included. 
12.  Certification (see Section 4-3.3 [of this ordinance]). 
13.  Such other information as the Planning Commission may deem necessary because of the physical characteristics peculiar to the particular development. 
7-3.2.  Construction Drawings. [Construction drawings shall include the following:] 
1.  A plat of the property drawn to a scale of at least one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch, and shall include the name of the development, north point, graphic scale and date. 
2.  A location map at a scale of one (1) inch to one thousand (1,000) feet showing the parcel of land, the location of all buildings, parking areas, and roadways and all adjacent road rights-of-way. The scale of the location map should be shown on the construction drawings. 
3.  The shape, dimensions and location of all buildings and property lines, existing and proposed, on said parcel. 
4.  The nature (commercial, industrial, etc.) of the proposed uses of the buildings and/or land. 
5.  Topography in terms of mean sea level by contours at vertical intervals of not more than five (5) feet. 
6.  The location and dimensions of off-street parking and loading spaces and the means of ingress and egress to and from such space. 
7.  The location and size of all proposed utilities and storm drainage facilities. 
8.  A statement of variances requested from any section or subsection of [Section] 7-4 of these regulations. 
9.  Such other information as the Planning Commission may deem necessary because of the physical characteristics peculiar to the particular development. 
10.  Construction Drawing should be presented in a similar format to the accompanying sheet. 
7-4. - Standards. 
7-4.1.  Requirements - Standards and requirements for parking, signage, setbacks, spacing between buildings, residential area requirements, screening, buffers and landscaping for group developments shall be as specified in the Town of Batesburg-Leesville Zoning Ordinance, Sign Ordinance and Landscape Ordinance. 
7-4.2.  Water, Sewerage and Drainage - Adequate provisions for water supply, sanitary sewerage, and storm drainage shall be installed by the developer according to the plans and specifications approved by the proper authorities. 
7-4.3.  Access and Egress - [Access and egress] shall conform to the Driveway Regulation of the South Carolina Department of Transportation, the Zoning Ordinance, the Landscape Ordinance and the Traffic Impact Study findings. 
7-4.4.  Mobile Home Parks - [Mobile home parks] shall conform to the minimum standards set forth in the regulations: "Mobile Home Park Ordinance of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, S.C." and the Town of Batesburg-Leesville Zoning Ordinance. 
7-4.5.  Enforcement No building permits shall be issued and no connection to a public water system or public sewer system shall be made until the construction drawings for the group development are approved by the Planning Commission staff and so noted on prints of the development plan. 
ARTICLE 8. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS 

8-1. - Intent. 
    The intent of the Planned Development is to better bridge the inherent difference between residential and nonresidential uses; and to better accommodate change within those areas of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville where, due to economics or other factors responsible for change, potentially incompatible development could compromise property values or adversely impact existing land use, transportation facilities or infrastructure. 
    Through the Planned Development advocated by this Article, it is possible to ameliorate differences between potentially incompatible uses by exacting concessions and conditions as necessary to achieve land use compatibility. 
8-2. - Procedure. 
    The Planning Commission shall ensure that all subdivision plats and other land development plans are in conformity with the Zoning Map and regulations for the Planned Development District. 
8-3. - Process. 
    The review and approval of subdivision plats and other land development plans shall follow the same process as other such plans in other zoning districts within the Town, unless otherwise noted in this Article. 
8-4. - Minimum Site Requirements. 
    Minimum area requirements for a Planned Development shall be 2 acres. 
8-5. - Procedures for Planned Development Approval. 
    The following procedures shall be followed in the submission, review and action upon all Planned Development plats, otherwise the requirements for Group Developments and Traditional Subdivisions shall apply: 
8-5.1.  Traffic Impact Study Requirement Evaluation: Prior to the submission of any TIS and/or sketch plan, the applicant shall complete and submit a Traffic Impact Study Requirement Evaluation form obtained from the Administrative Official's office. The Town's Transportation Engineer will evaluate the request and determine whether a TIS is required. A written response will be issued to the applicant within seven working (7) days of receipt of the TISRE. 
8-5.2.  Traffic Impact Study (TIS): Refer to Section 6-14 and the Traffic Impact Study Guidelines adopted by the Town. 
8-5.3.  General Development Plan Requirements: A general development plan shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The proposed title of the project and the name of the engineer, architect, designer, or a landscape architect, and the developer; 
(2)  The north point scale and date. The scale of the site plan shall be not more than 50 feet to 1 inch for projects less than 100 acres or 100 feet to 1 inch for those over 100 acres; 
(3)  Existing zoning and zoning district boundaries and proposed changes in zoning, if any; 
(4)  The boundaries of the property involved, the location of all existing easements, property lines, existing streets, buildings and other existing physical features on and immediately adjacent to the project; 
(5)  The location and dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, driveways, curb cuts, entrances and exits, parking and loading areas (including number of parking spaces); 
(6)  The location of proposed lots, setback lines, easements and land use; 
(7)  The proposed location and approximate heights of all multifamily and nonresidential buildings and dimensions of structures drawn to scale; 
(8)  The proposed location and description of all fences, walls, screens, buffers, plantings and landscaping; 
(9)  The proposed location and number of dwelling units (by bedroom type) for multifamily project; 
(10)  The proposed location, character, size and height of all signs; 
(11)  A location map showing the position of the proposed development in relation to the community; 
(12)  A tabulation of total number of acres in the project to be devoted to public and/or private reservation; 
(13)  The planning commission may establish additional requirements for site plan approval, and, in cases, may waive a particular requirement if, in its opinion, the inclusion of that requirement is not essential to a proper assessment of the project. 
8-6. - Actions by Planning Commission and Town Council. 
    Actions by the Planning Commission and Town Council shall be as provided for zoning amendments, generally. Said bodies may approve the application, may include specific modifications of the proposal or other applicable regulations or may deny the application. 
    If the amendment is granted, [the] Town Council shall, in its amending action, approve the application as it may have been changed during earlier procedures, or indicate required modifications, and be binding on the applicant. If modifications are required, [the] council shall officially state its reasons for the record. 
    If the amendment is granted, the developer shall be required to proceed in accordance with the approved planned development, as supplemental or modified by council in the particular case, and shall conform to any time or prior limitations established by council for initiation and/or completing the development in whole or in specific stages. 
    In taking action to amend the zoning map to establish the approved Planned Development, [the] council shall pass upon the adequacy of the application, in form and substance relative to any agreements, contract, sureties or other instruments involved, and before development may proceed, such instruments shall be approved by appropriate officers and agencies. 
8-7. - Preliminary Plats, Construction Plans, and Final Plats. 
    The developer of a Planned Development is required to submit seven (7) copies of a Preliminary Plat, Construction Plans, and Final Plat for each phase to be approved by the Planning Commission staff. Preliminary Plats, Construction Plans and Final Plats shall meet all requirements as defined in Article 4 [of this ordinance]. 
8-8. - Administrative Action on Approved Planned Development. 
    Once a Planned Development is established on the official zoning map, no zoning or building permit shall be issued therein, unless in compliance with the general development plan and other documents approved by [the] council and approval of preliminary plat and construction drawings by the Planning Commission staff. Except as provided below, all plans and reports approved by [the] council shall be binding on the applicant and any successors in title so long as the planned development district zoning is applicable. 
8-9. - Changes in Approved Plans. 
    Changes in approved final plans and reports may be approved by the planning commission only upon findings that such changes will not increase the density of the project, amount of traffic generated, reduce screening or off-street parking requirements, or substantially alter the composition of the project. Any such change to the contrary shall be approved subject to further study by the planning commission and amendatory action by [the] Town Council in regards to zoning. 
ARTICLE 9. - CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION DESIGN 

9-1. - Purpose. 
    It is the intent of this article to allow development that will meet future growth projections while preserving and protecting agriculturally, environmentally and historically significant features of the Town and County. In seeking to achieve this and the goals defined in the Town of Batesburg-Leesville Comprehensive Plan, the purpose of this article shall be to: 
A.  Complement the environmental, agricultural and historical preservation goals outlined in the Town's comprehensive plan and Historic Preservation Ordinance. 
B.  Preserve the unique agricultural character of the Town and County. 
C.  Permit reasonable development that is in accordance with the principles of open space conservation. 
D.  Accommodate the development of sustainable communities while protecting and preserving areas of agricultural, environmental and historic significance. 
E.  Maintain separation of non-compatible land uses. 
F.  Preserve the scenic and natural character of the Town and County. 
G.  Create an interconnected network of open space that promotes livable, sustainable subdivision development and wildlife habitat and corridors. 
H.  Economize in the installation of infrastructure and the provision of public services. 
9-2. - Definition of Terms. 
    For the purpose of this article, certain terms and words are hereby defined. 
    Agriculturally Significant: Generally, any land with an average Corn Suitability Rating (CSR) of 65 or higher is considered prime agricultural land, and, therefore, deemed to be agriculturally significant for the purpose of this article. 
    Clustering: A subdivision design method that concentrates development in specific areas on the proposed site. The purpose of clustering is to allow increased density on a portion of the parcel, while preserving the rest as permanent open space. The density of the entire parcel will not exceed the original density of the parcel, the houses will just be grouped together in one or more areas on the parcel, unless a density bonus is granted by the Planning Commission, which will allow increased building density on the parcel. The concept of clustering provides for a flexibility in subdivision design that fits the natural characteristics of the land and permits more useable open space and the preservation of prime agricultural land and land containing one or more sensitive areas. 
    Conservation Subdivision Design: A residential development where fifty percent or more of the developable land area is designated as undivided, permanent open space; thereby permanently protecting agriculturally, environmentally or historically significant areas within the parcel. The remaining developable land is subdivided into buildable lots. 
    Corn Suitability Rating: The suitability of a soil is determined by a number of characteristics including: soil quality, growing season and moisture. A ranking is then assigned to the area. 
    Developer/Applicant: One proposing to undertake the action. 
    Environmentally Significant: Any tract of land that contains one or more of the following sensitive areas, as defined by the S.C. Department of Natural Resources: critical wildlife habitats, erodible land, flood hazard areas, natural prairies, stream corridors, wetlands or woodlands, or that contains a scenic natural area. 
    Historically Significant: Any tract of land that contains an archaeological or historical resource as defined by the Historic Preservation Ordinance of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, the Office of State Archaeologist of South Carolina and/or the S.C. Department of Archives and History, or that is considered by the State Historic Preservation Officer to be eligible for the National Register of Historic Places is defined as historically significant. In addition, any contiguous pieces of property of no greater area than one hundred sixty acres under diverse ownership which: 
a.  Are significant in American history, architecture, archaeology and culture; and 
b.  Possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, skill, feeling and association; and 
c.  Are associated with events that have been a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history; or 
d.  Are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or 
e.  Embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, method of construction, represent the work of a master, possess high artistic values, represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or 
f.  Have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important to prehistory or history. 
    Hydric Soils: Soils susceptible to saturation by water, as defined by the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
    Scenic Natural Areas: Any tract of land which contains a unique feature of the rural landscape, including, but not limited to, large rock formations, hill crests, mature tree stands, and/or any other feature deemed to be significant by the Town of Batesburg-Leesville Planning Commission. 
    Sensitive Areas: Areas containing one or more of the following unique or locally significant resources: archaeological resources, critical wildlife habitats, erodible land, flood hazard areas, natural prairies, stream corridors, wetlands, or woodlands. 
    Site Map: A document identifying [the following]: location of the parcel, legal description of the parcel, proposed area of development, potential sensitive areas, septic provisions, and topography of the parcel. 
9-3. - Areas. 
    Those areas deemed to be of agricultural, environmental or historical significance, as defined above, shall, for the purposes of this ordinance, be referred to as "significant." The specific characteristics of these areas are defined as follows: 
A.  Agricultural Land: Any land used to produce food and/or fiber, including, but not limited to, the production of row crops, small grains, forages, animals and timber. Land not devoted to urban uses, wildlife sanctuaries, or a native ecosystem is considered agricultural land. 
1.  Prime agricultural land: Land with the best combination of physical and chemical characteristics for producing food, feed, forage, fiber, and oilseed crops, and which is available for these uses. These characteristics include soil quality, growing season, and moisture sufficient to sustain high yield crops when managed according to acceptable farming methods. The key indicator for prime agricultural land is an average Corn Suitability Rating (CSR) of 65 or higher. 
B.  Agriculturally Significant Area: Any tract of land which is considered prime agricultural land with a CSR of 65 or higher. 
C.  Archaeological or Historic Resource (known): Areas containing important information regarding the history or prehistory of the United States of America, the State of South Carolina, Lexington County, and/or the Town of Batesburg-Leesville. Areas containing suspected archaeologically or historically significant resources will be subject to review by the Office of the State Archaeologist of South Carolina, the South Carolina Historical Society, and/or the Lexington County Historic Preservation Society. 
1.  Object - Distinguished from buildings and structures, constructions that are primarily artistic in nature or are relatively small in scale. These items also must bear an association with a specific location, setting or environment. Objects include, but are not limited to, fountains, boundary markers, sculptures, monuments and statuary. 
2.  Site - The location of a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, standing, ruined or vanished, where the location possesses historic, cultural or archaeological value. Sites include, but are not limited to, battlefields, campsites, cemeteries, ceremonial sites, habitation sites, petroglyphs, rock carvings, trails and village sites. 
3.  District - An area containing a significant concentration, linkage or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united historically or aesthetically by plan or physical development. 
D.  Critical Wildlife Habitat: Areas containing elements vital to the survival of endangered or threatened species, including, but not limited to, food sources and cover. 
E.  Erodible Lands: Areas of incline, whether natural or manmade, lacking sufficient vegetation to prevent instability, erosion or downstream siltation. The key indicator for erodible lands is a slope of five percent (5%) or greater. Areas with a 5% slope or greater are subject to review by the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS). The NRCS will make the final determination regarding the area's erodibility. 
F.  Environmentally Significant Area. 
G.  Flood Hazard Area: Areas at high risk of inundation by water as a result of a flood. Known areas of flood hazard are indicated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map. 
H.  Historically Significant Area: Any tract of land that contains an archaeological or historical resource, as defined by the Town of Batesburg-Leesville Historic Preservation Ordinance, the Office of the State Archaeologist of South Carolina and/or the South Carolina Department of Archives and History, or that is considered by the State Historic Preservation Officer to be eligible for the National Register of Historic Places. In addition, historical significance is defined as: contiguous pieces of property of no greater area than one hundred sixty acres under diverse ownership which: 
a.  Are significant in American history, architecture, archaeology and culture; and 
b.  Possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, skill, feeling and association; and 
c.  Are associated with events that have been a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history; or 
d.  Are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or 
e.  Embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, method of construction, represent the work of a master, possess high artistic values, represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or 
f.  Have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important to prehistory or history. 
The certified local government or state government preservation program will review all proposed subdivisions that include or have a potential to include an area of historical significance. 
I.  Natural Prairies (including, but not limited to, roadside prairies, restored prairies, and prairie remnants): An area of significant size, containing a rich diversity of native flora species in associations typical of pre-settlement ecosystems, or areas with rare, threatened, endangered or special species. 
J.  Scenic Natural Areas: Any area which contains a unique feature of the rural landscape, including, but not limited to, large rock formations, hill crests, mature tree stands and/or any other feature deemed to be significant by the Batesburg-Leesville Town Planning Commission. 
K.  Stream Corridors: The primary channel of a river or stream and any portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel that are reasonably required to carry and discharge its water. 
L.  Wetlands: An area saturated by surface water or ground water such that is supports the growth and existence of vegetation suited to such areas. The key indicator for wetlands is the presence of hydric soils. Areas containing hydric soils will be subject to review by the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service. The United States Army Corps of Engineers will make the final determination regarding the existence of a wetland. 
M.  Woodlands: An area containing contiguous wooded parcels of significant size, containing a rich diversity of native flora species in associations typical of pre-settlement ecosystems, areas with rare, threatened, endangered or special species, or with ancient individuals, when in combination with understory species typical of pre-settlement ecosystems. 
9-4. - Process. 
    The use of conservation subdivision design seeks to optimize land use in and around the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, while maintaining a balance between the preservation of agriculturally, environmentally and historically significant areas and allowing reasonable and sustainable growth to continue in the Town. New development shall avoid disturbance of areas or elements defined as "sensitive" or "significant." The use of [a] conservation subdivision design may be required of all residential subdivisions: 
[1.]  Of 20 or more lots; 
[2.]  Of 15 or more acres; 
[3.]  Located in certain identified areas of conservation (sensitive area overlay zones/districts); 
[4.]  With fifty percent (50%) or more of the parcel identified as agriculturally, environmentally or historically significant; and 
[5.]  Of all commercial subdivisions if an area of agricultural, environmental or historical significance is deemed to be located on the site proposed for development. 
The town encourages the use of conservation subdivision design on all suitable land in and around the town. All landowners and developers are encouraged to work closely with the Town of Batesburg-Leesville Planning and Zoning staff in the design and platting process. 
    Density of conservation subdivisions shall be determined by dividing the total land area of the development by the total number of family dwelling units, which provides an average land area per family dwelling unit. Total land area of the development shall include all open space, including agricultural land, common ground, recreation areas, and land set aside for ponds and lakes, but shall not include the traffic surface area of subdivision roads. The density allowed by the parcel's zoning unless a density bonus is awarded to the developer by the Town of Batesburg-Leesville Planning Commission. 
    Density bonuses may, at the discretion of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville Planning Commission, be rewarded to developers who: 
[1.]  Dedicate land for public use. Any land dedicated for public use, including, but not limited to, trails, parks and other active recreation facilities, shall, at the discretion of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville Planning Commission, be eligible for a density bonus. 
[2.]  Build affordable housing. A density increase shall be permitted for developments/subdivisions who provide affordable housing opportunities for low and moderate income families. 
A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the parcel must be designated as permanent open space. The portion of the parcel designated as permanent open space shall not be further subdivided and must be protected by a conservation easement held by the homeowners' association, local conservation commission, land trust, or Town of Batesburg-Leesville that is recorded in the office of the County Registrar of Deeds. At least half of the land that is to be conserved must be shaped in a manner to be useable for agricultural or recreational purposes. 
    The homeowners' association, local conservation commission, land trust, or Town of Batesburg-Leesville shall administer the permanent open space and is responsible for the payment of any taxes, upkeep, insurance, and any other responsibilities associated with ownership of the land. 
    The developer/applicant shall supply a completed application to the Town of Batesburg-Leesville Department of Building and Zoning which includes a draft of the conservation easement for the portion of the property that will remain as permanent open space or agricultural land and a fully dimensioned site plan, drawn to scale, which shall demonstrate, delineate and label all of the following: 
1.  Topography, including areas to be graded, earth movements, drainage provisions, existing contour lines and any proposed new contour lines and any other significant topographical features. 
2.  The location and type of sensitive areas deemed to be of agricultural, environmental or historical significance, as defined in Section 9-2 of this ordinance. 
3.  The location and type of all proposed areas to be preserved as open space or agricultural land, including areas of mitigation and preservation. 
4.  Existing zoning, land use(s), and approximate density of residential uses. 
5.  Septic or waste water provisions as provided by SCDHEC. 
6.  For areas of agricultural preservation, a buffer strip of at least seventy-five (75) feet must be delineated. When possible, existing woodlands should be used, if not, a variety of rapidly growing indigenous trees and shrubs should be planted thickly in the buffer strip. 
7.  Any other provisions not specifically required or excluded herein, as required by the Town of Batesburg-Leesville Land Development Regulations. 
In addition, the applicant must abide by all applicable provisions of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville's Zoning Ordinance, not specifically excluded in this ordinance. The applicant must also ensure that: 
1.  All elements of the Site Plan shall be readily evident upon site inspection. 
2.  Elements not readily evident shall be marked for identification upon site inspection. 
3.  Areas designated to remain as open space or agricultural land, or areas of conservation shall be marked for identification upon site inspection. 
4.  All construction contracts shall include language protecting sensitive areas, agricultural land, areas of conservation, and areas containing sensitive elements. 
Upon receipt of the application, the review process for the conservation subdivisions shall be the same as outlined in Article 3, Procedure for Plat Approval, of this ordinance. Included with the final plat, the subdivider shall submit a subdivider's agreement regarding the liability for and maintenance of the open space. In addition, the subdivider must include a conservation easement/open space covenant protecting the open space from any further development. 
9-5. - Exemptions. 
    The use of conservation subdivision design shall not be required, but is encouraged for use on residential subdivisions: 
[1.]  Of less than 20 lots; 
[2.]  Of less than 15 acres; 
[3.]  Not located in certain identified areas of conservation (i.e., sensitive area overlay zones/districts); 
[4.]  With less than fifty percent (50%) of the parcel identified as agriculturally, environmentally or historically significant. 
9-6. - Compliance. 
    Failure to comply with the requirements of the Conservation Subdivision Design shall be cause for a stop work order on applicable permits. New permits or resume work orders shall not be issued until all requirements of this ordinance are met and the required fines are paid to the town. 
9-7. - Appeals. 
    Appeal of the requirements of this ordinance shall be processed in accordance with State Law. 
ARTICLE 10. - EXTRAORDINARY DEVELOPMENT 

10-1. - Purpose. 
    With certain types of development, extraordinary safeguards may be necessary to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville. Developers are encouraged to work with the Planning Commission to avoid delays in project approvals. 
10-2. - Artificial Impoundments. 
    Although aesthetically pleasing, the creation of artificial lakes or impoundments can result in significant water quality problems and dam safety issues. 
10-2.1.  Water Quality. 
1.  Framework. Altering the natural flow of water can lead to eutrophication - a process by which a standing body of water becomes enriched with excess plant nutrients such as phosphorus and nitrogen, which results in excess algal production. This condition leads to lower dissolved oxygen (DO) levels which can have a detrimental effect on fish species and water quality. Artificial impoundments also lead to higher water temperatures and excess sedimentation, also harmful to aquatic species. Artificial lakes in the Town of Batesburg-Leesville should be planned carefully with a view towards ecological consequences. 
2.  Recommendation. Developers should take appropriate steps to maintain good water quality in artificial lakes. Developing a long-term strategy for maintaining water quality is recommended. This strategy may include the use of greater setbacks for principal structures and associated buildings with impermeable surfaces from the normal high water mark of the water body, vegetative buffers along the edge of the water body, or the installation of an aeration system to maintain a healthy level of DO in the water body. 
10-2.2.  Dams. 
1.  Framework. A dam breach can be a significant threat to the safety of homeowners, and motorists (in the event that a road is constructed on a dam). For this reason, all dams must meet either requirements of the South Carolina Department of Dam Safety, the U.S. Corps of Engineers or Section 9-2.B.2 of this ordinance, whichever is applicable. 
2.  Requirements. Any dam construction not covered under the requirements of the South Carolina Department of Dam Safety and for the purpose of creating an artificial impoundment for the benefit of a residential subdivision, including subdivisions not yet proposed, shall conform with the following requirements: 
a.  The developer must provide dam construction drawings and plans certified by a Professional Engineer to the Planning Commission prior to beginning any site work. 
b.  Upon concurrence by the Planning Commission and the Town Engineer that the proposed dam construction will not cause unreasonable harm to the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the Town, the developer may proceed with construction. 
c.  Dam construction shall be periodically inspected by the developer's engineer to ensure conformance with the approved drawings and plans. The developer shall be responsible for notifying the Planning Commission and the Town Engineer during a minimum of three (3) phases of dam construction (see below). The Town Engineer may inspect the construction at their discretion. 
Phase 1 - Coring, backfilling and setting of invert. 
Phase 2 - Mid-construction of fill. 
Phase 3 - Top fill and grading. 
d.  Dams existing prior to the adoption of this ordinance must meet the requirements of this ordinance before a road is constructed on the dam. 
10-3. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE 11. - LAND SURVEYING STANDARDS: CONNECTING SURVEYS TO STATE PLANE COORDINATE SYSTEM 
    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to require certain land parcels, located within reasonable distance from monumented control points, to be referenced by field survey to geodetic control points that are defined by state plane coordinates. In cases where monumented control points are not within a reasonable distance, as defined in this document, the requirement will be to reference the survey to points which are identifiable on the county orthophoto maps. Property surveys affected by this section will be referenced to its accurate geographical locations, and therefore can be plotted in their correct position on the state plane coordinate-based county mapping system. These positions can be reproduced to the same accuracy as the original determination, even if all physically platted corners or supporting evidence or both have been destroyed. 
    This will improve greatly county land records by allowing ground surveys to be easily and accurately translated to county maps - hard copy or electronic. In addition, land owners will benefit in that property corners tied directly to monumented geodetic control by field surveys are defined by mathematical references which cannot be destroyed; therefore, in the future, missing or destroyed property corners can be more easily re-established with a high level of confidence. 
    This concept has existed for many years, but it has not been practical to apply on the county level until recent developments in technology allowed the cost-effective production of accurate mapping systems and the placement of closely spaced geodetic control monuments defined by very accurate coordinates. In addition the recent development of the satellite based Global Positioning System (GPS) is revolutionizing control surveys. 
Surveys Requiring Tie to Geodetic Control Monument 
    The following surveys require ties to geodetic control monuments: 
Any subdivision of five (5) or more lots within a one-mile traverse distance of geodetic control. 
Any tract of five (5) or more acres within a one-mile traverse distance of geodetic control. 
Any subdivision of 25 or more lots or non-agricultural industrial/commercial development of 25 or more acres regardless of distance from geodetic control. 
Surveys Exempt from Geodetic Control Monument Tie 
    It is considered very desirable for surveyors to tie all surveys, whenever possible, to the state plane coordinate system. Nothing in these exemptions is intended to discourage surveyors from tying surveys to the state plane coordinate system. The following surveys are exempted from geodetic control monument tie: 
Mortgage surveys of residential property in existing subdivisions. 
Any survey not specified in Section 11-2. 
Surveys Requiring Orthophoto Locator Tie. 
    With the exception of mortgage surveys, all surveys not tied to geodetic control shall have a locator tie. A locator tie is defined as a bearing and distance tie from a property corner to a point identifiable on the orthophoto map such as a building corner, a road intersection with a driveway or other point that can be accurately spotted on the orthophoto. 
    To support this requirement, the county will make copies of the county orthophoto maps available to licensed surveyors at a reasonable cost. Special pricing to surveyors will be contingent upon these maps being for the surveyors use only. 
    Survey Requirements. Survey requirements specified in this document are only for control survey connections between geodetic survey monuments and land parcels. Boundary surveys shall be performed in accordance with the State Minimum Standards published by the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors unless requirements that are more stringent are specified herein. In so far as possible, control surveys between geodetic monuments and property boundaries shall be extended from the nearest geodetic control monuments. County specifications for horizontal control are as follows: 
    Terrestrial Surveys: 
    If control is extended no more than1/2 mile from control monument to property boundary third-order, class I ( 1/10,000 ) specifications shall be followed. 
    If control is extended more that1/2 mile from the control monument to the property boundary second-order class II specifications shall be followed. 
    Global Positioning System (GPS) Surveys: 
1.  If GPS is used, procedures shall be followed to ensure compatibility with the nearest geodetic control monuments to an accuracy of at least 5 cm + 2 ppm. Only survey grade GPS receivers shall be used for boundary control. 
    Plat Requirements: 
    State plane coordinates shall be shown on the plat for at least two property corners. The geodetic monument(s) used for control will be noted on the plat with the grid distance and azimuth shown to at least one of the coordinated property corners. 
    Horizontal ground distances (not grid distance) will be shown on the plat for all segments of the boundary survey. A combined state plane coordinate - sea level reduction factor will be noted on the plat. Area will be based on horizontal ground distances. 
    All bearings will be referenced to state plane coordinate grid north. 
    Survey caps identifying the surveyor shall be placed on all new corners set on surveys covered by this ordinance. 
    Electronic Data Files: 
    If the parcel or subdivision is generated with computer-aided drafting procedures, the town may request a copy of the electronic file to be copied on town-supplied medium. 
ARTICLE 12. - INTENT, AUTHORITY TO MODIFY, APPEALS AND MAINTENANCE 

12-1. - Intent. 
    These regulations do not intend to freeze new developments into any single type of design, but to ensure that all new developments shall contribute to the building of economically sound and desirable living areas within the community with all necessary services and facilities. 
12-2. - Authority to Modify Standards. 
    In order to provide the subdivider with maximum flexibility in the design and character of new residential developments, the Planning Commission is hereby authorized to modify the standards and requirements of these regulations in the case of a plan for an experimental subdivision or planned development, which in the judgment of the Planning Commission provides adequate public spaces for the circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated, and which also provides such covenants or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to and achievement of the plan. 
12-3. - Maintenance of Spirit of Regulations. 
    Any Development or Subdivision approved under this section shall maintain the objectives, purposes and intent of these regulations and the comprehensive plan. 
12-4. - Appeals Process. 
A.  Appeals of the Decisions of the Administrative Official. If an applicant disagrees with the disapproval or approval with modifications of his Sketch Plan by the Administrative Official, he may submit the Sketch Plan to the Planning Commission at its next regular meeting. The Planning Commission shall review the Sketch Plan at the meeting, at which it is presented, and act on the appeal with pertinent comments and recommendations noted in the minutes of the Planning Commission meeting. 
B.  Appeals from the Planning Commission. Any appeal from the Planning Commission shall be made to the Circuit Court of Appeals who shall, at its discretion, hear the appeal and make their decision known to the appellant and the Planning Commission. Any appeal to Circuit Court of Appeals must be in writing and filed with the Circuit Court of Appeals within thirty (30) days after the notice of the decision of the Planning Commission has been delivered to the subdivider. 
ARTICLE 13. - SURETY IN LIEU OF COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS 

13-1. - General. 
    In lieu of completion of the physical development and installation of the required improvements previous to the approval of a Final Plat, the Batesburg-Leesville Town Council may accept a bond, in an amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to it, providing for and securing to the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, the actual construction and installation of such improvements and utilities within a period specified and expressed in the bond. 
13-2. - Information. 
    Necessary information to accompany the posing of a bond. 
13-2.1.  Bond to equal one and a half (11/2) times construction cost of all improvements, as attested to by a registered S.C. civil engineer and the Town's Engineer. 
13-2.2.  Improvements to be determined by the total cost of the following improvements where applicable: 
a.  Water. 
b.  Sewer. 
c.  Paving of roads. 
d.  Storm drainage. 
e.  Sidewalks. 
13-2.3.  Reserved. 
13-3. - Procedures. 
13-3.1.  The required information shall be submitted to the staff of the Planning Commission. 
13-3.2.  The staff shall submit these materials to the Town Attorney for review and comment. 
13-3.3.  The Town Attorney shall submit the materials to the Town Council for approval. 
13-3.4.  If the Town Council approves the bond, then the Preliminary Plat shall be given "BONDED PLAT APPROVAL" which authorizes the plat to be recorded by the Registrar of Deeds of Lexington County, S.C. 
13-3.5.  Upon completion of all requirements of these Land Development Regulations the subdivider shall submit the Final Plat (as-built drawings) as provided in Section 4-4 [of this ordinance]. 
13-3.6.  After the subdivider fulfills his obligations as required by the Subdivision Regulations and bond, the Planning Commission shall approve the Final Plat and the Town Council shall release the bond. 
ARTICLE 14. - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 
    From and after the adoption of these regulations and notification of the County Registrar of Deeds. 

14-1. - Recording of Final Plat. 
    No subdivision plat shall be filed with or recorded by the County Registrar of Deeds until such Final Plat has received Final Approval or Final Approval under bond. 
14-2. - Streets. 
    No streets right-of-way shall be accepted, opened, or maintained in any subdivision established hereafter which does not meet the requirements of these regulations. 
14-3. - Permits. 
    No building or zoning permit shall be issued for any subdivision established hereafter unless a Final Plat of such subdivision is approved by the Planning Commission and/or a bond of improvements is accepted by Town Council. 
ARTICLE 15. - VIOLATION AND PENALTY 

15-1. - Violation by Developer. 
    Whoever, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located within a development, transfers title to any land before such plat has been approved by the Planning Commission and recorded in the office of the County Registrar of Deeds, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, forfeit and pay a minimum penalty of $500.00 to the Town, for each lot so transferred. The description of any such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring such lot or parcel shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided. The Town Council may enjoin such transfer, sale or agreement by action for injunction brought in any court competent jurisdiction and may also recover such penalty by civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
15-2. - Violation by Recording Official. 
    The Lexington County official whose duty it is to accept and record plats of real estate shall not accept, file or record any subdivision plat in such office without the approval of the Planning Commission. If the recording official violates the provisions of this section, he shall, in each instance, be subject to the same penalty as provided in the above section and the Town Council shall have the same rights and remedies as to enforcement or collection as therein provided and may enjoin any violations thereof. 
15-3. - Enforcement. 
    Whenever it shall come to the attention of the Town Council that any provision of these regulations have been or is being violated, the Town Council may immediately institute suit and prosecute the same to final judgment. 
ARTICLE 16. - FEES 

16-1. - Traditional Subdivision Processing Fee Schedule. 
    Submittal of a Sketch Plan for review by the Planning Commission must be accompanied by a $50.00 nonrefundable fee. 
    The following nonrefundable fee shall be paid by the owner or agent of the owner of a proposed subdivision when a Preliminary Plat is submitted to the Administrative Official of the Planning Commission: 
Number of Lots Fees 2 - 5 $50.00 6 + $50.00 + $10.00 per lot above 5 lots (MAX=$2,000)  
Each phase of a phased project will require a separate payment based on the above fee schedule. When the Sketch, Preliminary, and Final Plats are submitted concurrently, all applicable fees are due at that time. All fees must be paid prior to recording the final plat. 
16-2. - Group Development Processing Fee Schedule. 
    The following fee shall be paid by the Developer of a group development or his agent when the Preliminary Plat is submitted to the Administrative Official to the Planning Commission: 
A.  Residential Group Development: 
Number of 
Dwelling Units Fees All developments $50.00 + $10.00 per unit (MAX=$2,000[.00]).  
B.  Commercial or Industrial Group Developments: 
$50[.00] for the first 5,000 square feet +$10[.00] per thousand square feet or fraction thereof, not to exceed $2,000[.00]. 
16-3. - Planned Development Processing Fee Schedule. 
A.  General Development Plan - $300[.00] for the first 20 acres, + $10[.00] each additional acre not to exceed $2,500[.00]. 
B.  Plats - Review charge per Sections 16-1 and 16-2A and B above. 
16-4. - Traffic Impact Study Review Fee Schedule. 
    Submittal of a TIS for review shall be accompanied by the following fees, to be paid by the applicant/developer: 
A.  Initial Administrative Review (Mitigation limited to signal timing, signal phasing or intersection re-striping.) $200[.00]. 
B.  Planning Commission Review (Mitigation involving additional intersection turn lanes or signalization.) $250[.00] (in addition to the administrative review fee). 
ARTICLE 17. - LEGAL STATUS 

17-1. - Conflict with Other Laws. 
    Whenever the provisions of these regulations impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other ordinance, the regulations herein contained shall prevail. Whenever the provisions of any other ordinance require more restrictive standards than are required herein the requirements of such regulations shall prevail. 
17-2. - Repeal of Conflicting Regulations. 
    All ordinances and resolutions regulating the subdivision and development of land adopted prior to these regulations are hereby repealed. 
17-3. - Separability Clause. 
    If any section, clause or portion of these regulations shall be held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such finding shall not affect any other section, clause or portion of these regulations. 
17-4. - Effective Date. 
    These regulations shall become effective and enforced after the adoption date. 
17-5. - Amendment. 
    These regulations may be amended after notice and public hearing in the same manner or prescribed by law for their original adoption. 
17-6. - Adoption Clause. 
    The Town Council of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, South Carolina, hereby adopts the foregoing regulations governing the subdivision and development of land within the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, South Carolina, as the "Land Development Regulations for the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, South Carolina," and directs that a copy of this action be transmitted to the Lexington County Registrar of Deeds. 
Appendix C - COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL PROVISIONS[1] 
CHAPTER 10. ANIMALS 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Published herein are the animal control provisions of the Code of Ordinances of Lexington County, South Carolina (Chapter 10, Art. II), which were adopted by reference by the Town of Batesburg-Leesville on June 9, 2003. All information printed below is republished from the Lexington County Code of Ordinances as it existed on June 9, 2003. No corrections or revisions have been made. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1-10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandonment means a situation in which the owner/caretaker of a pet does not provide for humane disposal of the pet, or transfer ownership to a responsible person or who does not provide or arrange for adequate food, water, shelter and care. 
    Animal control officer means the person employed by the county as the enforcement officer of the provisions of this article. 
    Animal shelter means any premises so designated by the county council for the purpose of impounding and caring for all pets found in violation of this article or which the owner/custodian or citizen surrenders. 
    Attack dog means a dog that has been trained to attack persons independently or upon verbal command or hand signal. 
    At large means any pet that is not under restraint. Any pet not so restrained will be deemed unlawfully running at large. 
    Cattery means any person engaging in the business of breeding, buying, selling or boarding of cats. 
    Commercial boarding kennel/cattery means any establishment for the commercial boarding, grooming, sale or training of dogs/cats for which a fee is charged. An animal hospital maintained by a licensed veterinarian as part of the practice of veterinary medicine for the treatment of animals shall not be considered a "Commercial Boarding Kennel/Cattery." 
    Commercial breeding kennel/cattery means any person, partnership or corporation or other legal entity that owns, keeps, harbors or is custodian of pets kept or used for stud for which a fee is charged and/or for breeding purposes for which a fee is charged for the offspring. Commercial breeding kennel/cattery shall not include: 
a)  Livestock and other farm animals used in customary and normal agricultural husbandry practices. 
b)  A fancier's kennel/cattery. 
    Community cat program means the terms of an agreement with a pet facility that maintains measures to reduce the number of stray cats within the county by trapping, neutering/spaying, ear tipping and returning the cat to the area in which it was trapped. 
    Community cat means a cat that is domesticated which lives indoors and outdoors (sometimes called free roaming) and/or a feral cat, which means a cat that is unsocialized or unaccustomed to human interaction. Domesticated cats referred to in this section may or may not be owned by a custodial party. 
    Custodian means any person having custody or custodial power. 
    Dangerous pet means any pet evidencing characteristics usually associated with an abnormal inclination to attack other pets or persons without provocation. 
    Exposure to rabies means any person or pet that has been bitten by or exposed to any pet known to have been infected with rabies. The county health department or a licensed veterinarian shall make this determination. 
    Fancier means a person who owns or keeps three or more dogs or cats for noncommercial hunting or for breeding purposes in order to regularly participate in tracking, exhibition in shows, or field or obedience or performance trials at AKC (American Kennel Club), UKC (United Kennel Club) or CFA (Cat fancier Association) licensed shows. 
    Fancier's kennel means a private kennel maintained by a fancier to keep or train dogs or cats. 
    Guard dog means any dog that is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of its owner/custodian and/or the property upon and within which the dog is located and is owned by a licensed security service or commercial establishment. 
    Hybrid means the offspring of wild animals crossbred with domesticated dogs and cats. 
    Kennel means any person engaging in the business of breeding, buying, selling or the boarding of dogs. 
    Maltreatment means the act of any person who deprives any pet of necessary sustenance or shelter, or inflicts unnecessary pain or suffering upon any pet, or causes these things to be done. 
    Owner means any person who: 
(1)  Has a right of property in a pet. 
(2)  Keeps or harbors a pet or who has it in his care or acts as its custodian. 
(3)  Permits a pet to remain on or about any premises occupied by said person for a period of five or more days. 
    Pet means dog or cat. 
    Pet shop means any person, partnership, or corporation, whether operated separately or in connection with another business enterprise or other legal entity that buys or brokers any species of animal for resale as pets. 
    Public nuisance means any pet found at large or making loud or objectionable sounds. 
    Restraint means a situation in which a pet is: 
(a)  Controlled by a leash when outside the property limits of its owner/custodian. 
(b)  Under the control and obedient to the owner/custodian's commands within the property limits of the owner/custodian. 
(c)  Confined in a secure enclosure. 
    Shelter means a structure appropriately sized for the dog to stand or lie in a normal manner. The structure must have a roof, three sides, appropriate sized opening for ingress and egress and a dry floor so as to protect the dog from the elements of weather. 
    Sterilized pet means any pet that has had surgery to remove the reproductive organs. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1, 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 10-32. - Commercial breeding kennels/catteries. 
    No person shall own or operate a commercial breeding kennel/cattery within the county without first obtaining a certificate of inspection from the animal services division, issued pursuant to this section for which a fee of $200.00 shall be paid for a two-year period. The fees shall be collected by animal services and turned over to the county treasurer. Such fees shall go toward the cost of defraying the expense of operating the animal shelter. 
Sec. 10-33. - Pet identification. 
    Every owner/custodian is required to see that an identification tag is securely fastened to his or her pet's collar or harness. The tag will clearly indicate the name and phone number of the owner and must be worn by the pet at all times, unless the pet, accompanied by the owner/custodian, is engaged in hunting or other activity where a collar might endanger the pet's safety. 
Sec. 10-34. - Restraint and confinement. 
(a)  The owner/custodian shall keep his pet under restraint at all times. 
(b)  Invisible fencing must be clearly marked and labeled (i.e. sign on mailbox post, tree). 
(c)  No pet shall be permitted to be on school grounds or in a shopping area or similar public place unless on a leash at all times. 
(d)  No person owning or harboring or having the care or the custody of a dangerous animal may permit the animal to go unconfined on his premises. A dangerous animal is unconfined if the animal is not confined securely indoors or confined in a securely enclosed fence or securely enclosed and locked pen or run area upon the person's premises. The pen or run area must be clearly marked as containing a dangerous animal and must be designed to prevent the entry of the general public, including children, and to prevent the escape or release of the animal. The animal must not be removed from such building or enclosure unless the pet is securely muzzled and under restraint. 
(e)  Every female pet in heat shall be kept confined in a building or secure enclosure or in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel in such a manner so as not to create a nuisance by attracting other pets. 
(f)  Any person reporting a violation of this section must identify himself to the animal control officer and must sign a nuisance violation. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep upon his premises any pet that is deemed a public nuisance. 
(h)  If an animal control officer observes an animal at large, they may pursue the animal onto private property. 
(i)  The owner of every pet shall be responsible for the removal of any excreta deposited by the pet on public walks and ways, recreation areas, or private property. 
(j)  No pet shall be kept on a property that the owner/custodian does not occupy on a permanent basis. 
Sec. 10-35. - Abandonment and maltreatment 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner/custodian of any pet in the county to abandon it. This section does not prohibit the responsible release of cats participating in the community cat program. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for anyone in the county to treat any pet in a cruel and/or inhumane manner. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1, 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 10-36. - Impoundment. 
(a)  Immediately after impounding any pet, the animal control officer shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner/custodian of its impoundment and to inform the owner/custodian of the conditions whereby he can regain custody of the pet. 
(b)  Any pet impounded under the provisions of this article and not claimed by its owner within five business days becomes the property of Lexington County Animal Services and may be humanely destroyed by animal services. 
Sec. 10-37. - Dangerous dogs. 
(a)  The animal services director in conjunction with the animal services coordinator shall have the authority to determine if a dog is a dangerous dog. Animal services must notify the owner/custodian of the dog in writing that the animal must be registered with animal services as dangerous. 
(b)  The owner shall notify animal services if any changes occur with the following: 
(1)  Ownership of the dog. 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of a new owner/custodian. 
(3)  Address change of the owner/custodian or any change in the location in which the dog is housed. 
(4)  Any change in the health status of the dog. 
(5)  Death of the animal. 
(c)  If the dog is outdoors and attended, the dog shall be muzzled, on a leash and under the control of the owner/custodian. 
(d)  If the dog is outdoors and unattended, the dog must be locked in an escape-proof kennel. Minimum standards shall include the following: 
(1)  Fencing materials shall not have openings with a diameter of more than two inches; in the case of a wooden fence, the gaps shall not be more than two inches. 
(2)  Any gates within such pen or structure shall be padlocked and of such design to prevent the entry of children or the escape of the dog. 
(3)  The required pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides shall be imbedded into the ground or concrete. 
(4)  The pen or structure shall protect the animal from the elements. 
(5)  A universal sign denoting a dangerous animal shall be displayed on all four sides of the pen or structure. 
(e)  It shall be illegal for anyone to own or be the custodian of a hybrid. 
Sec. 10-38. - Redemption. 
(a)  The owner shall be entitled to resume possession of an impounded pet, except as provided in this section in the cases of certain pets, upon providing proof of a valid rabies inoculation for the year in which the pet is being held and proper identification requirements and the payment of redemption fees set forth in this section. 
(b)  In the case of a dangerous dog that the owner has failed to control properly and which has been impounded, redemption may be made only with the consent of the animal services director. 
(c)  The owner of an impounded pet must apply for the redemption of his pet. The pet may not be released unless authorized by the animal control officer with assurance from the owner that proper care and custody will be maintained. 
(d)  The fees in this subsection shall be collected from the owner by animal services and turned over to the county treasurer, who shall make a monthly accounting of such funds. Such fees, when collected, shall go toward defraying the expense of operating the animal shelter. An initial fee of $15.00 will be charged for impoundment for a period of one to five days. The additional sum of $5.00 will be charged for each day the animal is kept beyond five days. Upon a second offense, a fee of $30.00 will be charged. Upon a third offense, if the animal services director allows the pet to be reclaimed, a fee of $50.00 will be charged. 
(e)  If an owner redeeming a pet cannot show proof of inoculation against rabies for the year in which the pet is being held, the owner shall be required to pay $10.00 for the rabies inoculation. 
Sec. 10-39. - Adoption. 
(a)  Any pet impounded under the provisions of this article may, at the end of the legal-detention period, be adopted by a person deemed to be a responsible and suitable owner, who will agree to comply with the provisions of this article. All required fees must be paid at the time of adoption in addition to an adoption fee. Those individuals adopting puppies or kittens too young to receive rabies inoculation will pay the cost for this procedure at the time of adoption and be given an appointment for a later time to have this procedure accomplished. 
(b)  No unsterilized pet, which has been impounded by animal services, shall be allowed to be adopted unless it has been sterilized. 
Sec. 10-40. - Injured, diseased and dead animals. 
(a)  Anyone who strikes a pet with a motor vehicle or bicycle and injures or kills the pet must notify animal services or the sheriff's department immediately. The animal control officer or the sheriff's department will then take the necessary steps to provide for the proper treatment or disposal of the pet. 
(b)  Any pet received by animal services in critical condition from wounds, injuries or disease may be destroyed at the discretion of the animal services director and/or the animal services coordinator if the owner/custodian cannot be contacted. If the pet is suffering great pain, it may be destroyed immediately. 
(c)  The owner/custodian of any pet, which dies, shall immediately provide for its burial or cremation if he knows of its death and the location of its remains. If he fails to do so within three hours, the animal control officer shall arrange for the disposal and the owner/custodian shall be required to pay the cost thereof, not to exceed $50.00. 
(d)  The animal control officer shall cause to be collected all dead domestic animals found on public grounds or roadways of the county. If the animal is identifiable, the animal control officer will notify the owner/custodian of the animal as soon as practical. Citizens may call 359-8364 if the animal is on a county road or 359-4103 if the animal is on a state road. 
Sec. 10-41. - Pet regulations-Commercial purposes. 
(a)  No person shall sell, trade, barter, auction, lease, rent, give away, or display for commercial purpose, any pet, on a roadside, public right-of-way, public property, commercial parking lot or sidewalk, fair or carnival. 
(b)  No person shall offer a pet as an inducement to purchase a product, commodity or service. 
(c)  A flea market pet sale vendor must: 
(1)  Possess a valid registration with Lexington County Animal Services. 
(2)  Display, at all times, the Lexington County Animal Services' registration certificate at the booth. 
(3)  Permit kennel and booth inspections by Lexington County Animal Services upon request. 
(d)  Licensed pet shops, commercial kennels, county animal shelters, and licensed pet rescue organizations may be exempt from the requirements of this section with prior written approval from the animal services director or designee. The written approval document must be kept on site and produced upon request to law enforcement and code enforcement personnel. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1, 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 10-42. - Enforcement of article. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be enforced by animal services under the supervision of the Director in all unincorporated areas of the county except wherein the governing body of any municipality, by resolution filed with the clerk, so indicates that it desires the provisions of this article be enforced within the jurisdictional limits of the respective municipality. 
(b)  The animal service's staff shall be appointed as county code enforcement officers. 
(c)  If the animal control officers are unable to respond to complaints due to other commitments, the county sheriff's department or other authorized law enforcement agency may respond to complaints. 
(d)  Persons empowered to enforce this article shall have the authority to destroy any pet, which appears to be dangerous, and may endanger their safety or the safety of other persons or animals. Further, after reasonable attempts to capture and/or restrain unsuccessfully a dog in violation of section 10-34, restraint and confinement (by physical means and/or trapping), as a last resort, petition the magistrate to have the dog destroyed. 
(e)  The animal control officers will, if necessary, obtain a search warrant to enter any premises upon which it is suspected a violation of this article exists. The officer may demand to examine such pet and take possession of the pet when, in his opinion, it requires removal from the premises. 
(f)  No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest the animal service's staff in the execution of their duties, or seek to release any pet in the custody of animal services. 
(g)  When a pet is found in violation of any provision of this article, animal control officers, at their discretion, may: 
a.  Impound the pet. 
b.  Issue notice of violation. 
c.  Issue court summons. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1, 9-18-2017; Ord. No. 17-01, § 1, 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 10-43. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    The violation of any section of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable under Magistrate's Court jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1, 9-18-2017; Ord. No. 17-01, § 1, 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 10-44-10-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RABIES CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Rabies Control Act, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-5-10 et seq. 

Sec. 10-61. - Inoculation; certificate; tags. 
(a)  No person shall own, keep or harbor any pet within the county for longer than 60 days unless such pet has been inoculated against rabies as provided in this section. 
(b)  Every owner/custodian of a pet will have his pet inoculated against rabies in such a manner as to provide continual protection. 
(c)  A state board of health certificate of pet rabies vaccination will be issued by a licensed graduate veterinarian for each pet stating the name and address of the owner, the name, breed, color and markings, age, sex of the animal and the veterinary or pharmaceutical control number of the vaccination. 
(d)  Coincident with the issuance of the certificate, the licensed graduate veterinarian shall also furnish a serially numbered metal license tag bearing the same number and year as the certificate. The metal license tag shall bear the name of the veterinarian who administered the vaccination and shall at all times be attached to a collar or harness worn by the pet for which the certificate and tag has been issued. 
(e)  The owner/custodian shall have a valid certificate of rabies immunization readily available for inspection by competent authority at all times. 
(f)  If a rabies tag is lost, the owner will obtain a duplicate tag without delay. 
(g)  If there is a change in ownership of a pet during the valid period of immunization, the new owner may have the current certificate of immunization transferred to his name. 
(h)  A certificate of rabies immunization issued by a licensed veterinarian from another state will be accepted as valid evidence. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for any owner/custodian of any pet, which has not been inoculated as required by this division to allow it to run at large. 
(Code 1983, 4-33) 
Sec. 10-62. - Owners required to notify authorities of suspected rabid animals. 
    Whenever a pet or other animal is affected by rabies or suspected of being affected by rabies or has been bitten by an animal known or suspected to be affected by rabies, the owner of the animal or any person having knowledge thereof shall forthwith notify the animal control officer and the county health department stating precisely where the animal may be found. 
(Code 1983, 4-33) 
Sec. 10-63. - Animal control officer to arrange for confinement of animal that has bitten a person. 
    The animal control officer, in conjunction with the county health department, shall arrange for the supervised confinement of any pet or other animal, which has bitten a person. Such confinement may be on the premises of the owner/custodian if the owner/custodian will sign an agreement assuming total responsibility for the safe confinement of the pet or other animal. Confinement shall be at the county animal shelter, a private animal shelter, veterinary hospital or humane society shelter at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1983, 4-34) 
Sec. 10-64. - Required period of confinement of animal that has bitten a person; examination during confinement. 
    Any pet or other animal, which has bitten a person, must be confined for a period of at least ten days. The county health department or the animal control officer will be permitted by the owner/custodian of such pet or animal to examine the animal at any time, and daily if desired, within the ten-day period of confinement to determine whether such animal shows symptoms of rabies. No person shall obstruct or interfere with the animal control Officer or the county health department in making such examination. 
(Code 1983, 4-35) 
Sec. 10-65. - Notice to owner of animal, other than dog or cat that has attacked or bitten a person. 
    In the case of a pet other than a dog or cat which has attacked or bitten a person, the county health department shall serve notice upon the owner/custodian of such pet that the owner/custodian shall have the animal euthanized immediately and have the brain submitted for rabies examination. 
(Code 1983, 4-36) 
Sec. 10-66. - Confinement of animals bitten by known or suspected rabid animals. 
    The county health department shall serve notice in writing upon the owner/custodian of a pet or other animal known to have been bitten by an animal known or suspected of being affected by rabies requiring the owner/custodian to confine such animal for a period of not less than six months; except that, animals properly treated with antirabic vaccine shall be confined for a period of not less than three months. 
(Code 1983, 4-37) 
Sec. 10-67. - Killing or removing from jurisdiction suspected rabid animals prohibited; exception. 
    No person shall kill, or cause to be killed, any rabid pet or other animal, or one suspected of having been exposed to rabies or which has bitten a person, nor remove such pet or animal from the jurisdiction of the county without written permission of the county health department. An exception to the preceding requirement is in the event of the possibility of the animal's escape or additional biting in which case the animal is to be killed and the county health department notified immediately. 
(Code 1983, 4-38) 
Secs. 10-68-10-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EXOTIC ANIMALS 

Sec. 10-91. - Definition of exotic animals. 
    Exotic animal means those species of animals that are exotic to humans. Exotic animals include: 
(1)  Class Mammalia. 
a.  Order Artiodactyla (only hippopotamuses and giraffes). 
b.  Order Carnivora (only those specified below). 
1.  Family Felidae [(all species except domestic cats) this includes lions, tigers, cougars, leopards, ocelots, servals]. 
2.  Family Canidac (only wolves, coyotes and jackals). 
3.  Family Ursidac (all bears). 
4.  Family Hyaenidac (hyenas). 
c.  Order Perissodactyla (only rhinoceroses). 
d.  Order Primates (only gorillas). 
e.  Order Probosoidae (elephants). 
(2)  Class Reptilia. 
a.  Order Squamata (only varanidac family animals specified below). 
b.  Family Varanidae (only water monitors and crocodile monitors). 
c.  Order Crocodilia (such as crocodiles, alligators, caimans, gavials, etc.) all species. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1, 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 10-92. - Prohibition. 
    It shall be unlawful to keep, maintain, or have in his or her possession or control within the unincorporated portion of Lexington County any exotic animal as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1, 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 10-93. - Provisions. 
    The provisions of section 10-92 shall not apply to Riverbanks Zoo and Lexington County approved circuses that are within the unincorporated area of the county. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1, 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 10-94. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of section 10-92 shall be subject to the maximum penalty as authorized by the magistrate's court and as further set forth in the general penalty, section 1-8 of the Lexington County Code of Ordinances. Lexington County Animal Services may take immediate possession of an exotic animal and transfer the exotic animal to a rescue group outside of Lexington County. 
(Ord. No. 17-01, § 1, 9-18-2017) 
Appendix D - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL STANDARDS 

A. - Statutory authorization. 
    Municipality. The Legislature of the State of South Carolina has in SC Code of Laws, Title 5 and Title 6, and amendments thereto, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Town Council of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, South Carolina does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
B. - Findings of fact. 
    The Special Flood Hazard Areas of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
    Furthermore, these flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
C. - Statement of purpose and objectives. 
    It is the purpose of this ordinance to protect human life and health, minimize property damage, and encourage appropriate construction practices to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions by requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. Uses of the floodplain which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion are restricted or prohibited. These provisions attempt to control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters, and control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion. Additionally, the ordinance prevents or regulates the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
    The objectives of this ordinance are to protect human life and health, to help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, and to insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. The provisions of the ordinance are intended to minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in the floodplain, and prolonged business interruptions. Also, an important floodplain management objective of this ordinance is to minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects and rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding. 
    Floodplains are an important asset to the community. They perform vital natural functions such as temporary storage of floodwaters, moderation of peak flood flows, maintenance of water quality, groundwater recharge, prevention of erosion, habitat for diverse natural wildlife populations, recreational opportunities, and aesthetic quality. These functions are best served if floodplains are kept in their natural state. Wherever possible, the natural characteristics of floodplains and their associated wetlands and water bodies should be preserved and enhanced. Decisions to alter floodplains, especially floodways and stream channels, should be the result of careful planning processes that evaluate resource conditions and human needs. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
D. - Lands to which this ordinance applies. 
    This ordinance shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study, dated February 9, 2000 with accompanying maps and other supporting data that are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. 
    Upon annexation any special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study for the unincorporated areas of County, with accompanying map and other data are adopted by reference and declared part of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
E. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
F. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
G. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this ordinance all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements, liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State law. This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions, shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
H. - Partial invalidity and severability. 
    If any part of this ordinance is declared invalid, the remainder of the ordinance shall not be affected and shall remain in force. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
I. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
J. - Penalties for violation. 
    Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of Batesburg-Leesville from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

A. - General. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance it's most reasonable application. 
1.  Accessory structure (appurtenant structure): Structures that are located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Accessory Structures should constitute a minimal investment, may not be used for human habitation, and be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of accessory structures are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds. 
2.  Addition (to an existing building): An extension or increase in the floor area or height of a building or structure. Additions to existing buildings shall comply with the requirements for new construction regardless as to whether the addition is a substantial improvement or not. Where a firewall or load-bearing wall is provided between the addition and the existing building, the addition(s) shall be considered a separate building and must comply with the standards for new construction. 
3.  Agricultural structure: A structure used solely for agricultural purposes in which the use is exclusively in connection with the production, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of agricultural commodities, including the raising of livestock. Agricultural structures are not exempt from the provisions of this ordinance. 
4.  Appeal: A request for a review of the local floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance. 
5.  Area of shallow flooding: A designated AO or VO Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
6.  Area of special flood hazard: The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
7.  Base flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
8.  Basement: Any enclosed area of a building that is below grade on all sides. 
9.  Building: See structure. 
10.  Coastal high hazard area: An area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of the primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. 
11.  Critical development: Development that is critical to the community's public health and safety, is essential to the orderly functioning of a community, store or produce highly volatile, toxic or water-reactive materials, or house occupants that may be insufficiently mobile to avoid loss of life or injury. Examples of critical development include jails, hospitals, schools, fire stations, nursing homes, wastewater treatment facilities, water plants, and gas/oil/propane storage facilities. 
12.  Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
13.  Elevated building: A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls parallel to the flow of water. 
14.  Executive Order 11988 (Floodplain Management): Issued by President Carter in 1977, this order requires that no federally assisted activities be conducted in or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard areas, unless there is no practicable alternative. 
15.  Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective FIRM, or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. 
16.  Existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before June 9, 1997. 
17.  Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete slabs). 
18.  Flood: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
19.  Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM): An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
20.  Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
21.  Flood Insurance Study: The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency which contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
22.  Flood-resistant material: Any building material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact (minimum 72 hours) with floodwaters without sustaining damage that requires more than low-cost cosmetic repair. Any material that is water-soluble or is not resistant to alkali or acid in water, including normal adhesives for above-grade use, is not flood-resistant. Pressure-treated lumber or naturally decay-resistant lumbers are acceptable flooring materials. Sheet-type flooring coverings that restrict evaporation from below and materials that are impervious, but dimensionally unstable are not acceptable. Materials that absorb or retain water excessively after submergence are not flood-resistant. Please refer to Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, dated 8/08, and available from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Class 4 and 5 materials, referenced therein, are acceptable flood-resistant materials. 
23.  Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
24.  Freeboard: A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
25.  Functionally dependent use: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
26.  Highest adjacent grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of the structure. 
27.  Historic structure: Any structure that is: 
(a)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior (DOI)) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(b)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(c)  Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places; 
(d)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified: 
(1)  By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of Interior, or 
(2)  Directly by the Secretary of Interior in states without approved programs. Some structures or districts listed on the State or local inventories MAY NOT be "Historic" as cited above, but have been included on the inventories because it was believed that the structures or districts have the potential for meeting the "Historic" structure criteria of the DOI. In order for these structures to meet NFIP historic structure criteria, it must be demonstrated and evidenced that the South Carolina Department of Archives and History has individually determined that the structure or district meets DOI historic structure criteria. 
28.  Increased Cost of Compliance (ICC): Applies to all new and renewed flood insurance policies effective on and after June 1, 1997. The NFIP shall enable the purchase of insurance to cover the cost of compliance with land use and control measures established under Section 1361. It provides coverage for the payment of a claim to help pay for the cost to comply with State or community floodplain management laws or ordinances after a flood event in which a building has been declared substantially or repetitively damaged. 
29.  Limited storage: An area used for storage and intended to be limited to incidental items that can withstand exposure to the elements and have low flood damage potential. Such an area must be of flood-resistant or breakaway material, void of utilities except for essential lighting and cannot be temperature controlled. If the area is located below the base flood elevation in an A, AE and A1-A30 zone it must meet the requirements of Article IV, § A.4 of this ordinance. If the area is located below the base flood elevation in a V, VE and V1-V30 zone it must meet the requirements of Article IV, § F of this ordinance. 
30.  Lowest Adjacent Grade (LAG): Is an elevation of the lowest ground surface that touches any deck support, exterior walls of a building or proposed building walls. 
31.  Lowest floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance. 
32.  Manufactured home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
33.  Manufactured home park or subdivision: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
34.  Mean sea level means, for the purpose of this ordinance, the Nations Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which the base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) are shown. 
35.  National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929: As corrected in 1929, elevation reference points set by National Geodetic Survey based on mean sea level. 
36.  North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988: Vertical control, as corrected in 1988, used as the reference datum on Flood Insurance Rate Maps. 
37.  New construction: Structure for which the start of construction commenced on or after (initial ordinance date). The term also includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
38.  New manufactured home park or subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete slabs) is completed on or after June 9, 2007. 
39.  Primary frontal dune: A continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and subject to erosion and overtopping from high tides and waves during coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct change from a relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope. 
40.  Recreational vehicle: A vehicle which is: 
(a)  Built on a single chassis; 
(b)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(c)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(d)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
41.  Repetitive loss: A building covered by a contract for flood insurance that has incurred flood-related damages on 2 occasions during a 10-year period ending on the date of the event for which a second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25% of the market value of the building at the time of each such flood event. 
42.  Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968: The Act provides that no new flood insurance shall be provided for any property found by the Federal Emergency Management Agency to have been declared by a state or local authority to be in violation of state or local ordinances. 
43.  Stable Natural Vegetation: The first place on the oceanfront where plants such as sea oats hold sand in place. 
44.  Start of construction: For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97348), includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for footings, piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
45.  Structure: A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. 
46.  Substantial damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. Such repairs may be undertaken successively and their costs counted cumulatively. Please refer to the definition of "substantial improvement". 
47.  Substantial improvement: Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
a)  Any project of improvement to a structure to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or 
b)  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Permits shall be cumulative for a period of five years. If the improvement project is conducted in phases, the total of all costs associated with each phase, beginning with the issuance of the first permit, shall be utilized to determine whether "substantial improvement" will occur. 
48.  Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision: Where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction, or improvement commenced. 
49.  Variance: A grant of relief from a term or terms of this ordinance. 
50.  Violation: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with these regulations. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 

A. - Designation of local floodplain administrator. 
    The Town of Batesburg-Leesville Zoning Administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
B. - Adoption of letter of map revisions (LOMR). 
    All LOMRs that are issued in the areas identified in Article I, § D of this ordinance are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
C. - Development permit and certification requirements. 
1.  Development permit: Application for a development permit shall be made to the local floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to any development activities. The development permit may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing: the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures; and the location of fill materials, storage areas, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
a)  A plot plan that shows the 100-year floodplain contour or a statement that the entire lot is within the floodplain must be provided by the development permit applicant when the lot is within or appears to be within the floodplain as mapped by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the floodplain identified pursuant to either the Duties and Responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator of Article III, § D.11, or the Standards for Subdivision Proposals of Article IV, § B and the Standards for streams without Estimated Base Flood Elevations and Floodways of Article IV, § C. The plot plan must be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by it. The plot plan must show the floodway, if any, as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the floodway identified pursuant to either the duties or responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator of Article III, § D.11 or the standards for subdivision proposals of Article IV, § B.12 and the standards for streams without estimated base flood elevations and floodways of Article IV, § C. 
b)  Where base flood elevation data is provided as set forth in Article I, § D or the duties and responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator of Article III, § D.11 the application for a development permit within the flood hazard area shall show: 
(1)  The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor of all new and substantially improved structures, and 
(2)  If the structure will be floodproofed in accordance with the Non-Residential Construction requirements of Article IV, § B.2 the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure will be floodproofed. 
c)  Where base flood elevation data is not provided as set forth in Article I, § D or the duties and responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator of Article III, § D.11, then the provisions in the standards for streams without estimated base flood elevations and floodways of Article IV, § C must be met. 
d)  Alteration of Watercourse: Where any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development, the application for a development permit shall include a description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation, an engineering study to demonstrate that the flood- carrying capacity of the altered or relocated watercourse is maintained and a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation. 
2.  Certifications. 
a)  Floodproofing certification: When a structure is floodproofed, the applicant shall provide certification from a registered, professional engineer or architect that the non-residential, floodproofed structure meets the floodproofing criteria in the non-residential construction requirements of Article IV, § B.2 and Article IV, § E.2(b). 
b)  Certification during construction: A lowest floor elevation or floodproofing certification is required after the lowest floor is completed. As soon as possible after completion of the lowest floor and before any further vertical construction commences, or floodproofing by whatever construction means, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the local floodplain administrator a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, or floodproofed elevation, whichever is applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea level. Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by it. Any work done prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local floodplain administrator shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. The permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed shall correct deficiencies detected by such review. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
c)  As-built certification: Upon completion of the development a registered professional engineer, land surveyor or architect, in accordance with SC law, shall certify according to the requirements of Article III, §§ C.2a, 2b, and 2c that the development is built in accordance with the submitted plans and previous pre-development certifications. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
D. - Duties and responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Permit review: Review all development permits to assure that the requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied. 
2.  Requirement of federal and/or state permits: Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C 1334. 
3.  Watercourse alterations: 
a)  Notify adjacent communities and the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources, Land, Water, and Conservation Division, State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
b)  In addition to the notifications required watercourse alterations per Article III, § D.3.a, written reports of maintenance records must be maintained to show that maintenance has been provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained. This maintenance must consist of a comprehensive program of periodic inspections, and routine channel clearing and dredging, or other related functions. The assurance shall consist of a description of maintenance activities, frequency of performance, and the local official responsible for maintenance performance. Records shall be kept on file for FEMA inspection. 
c)  If the proposed project will modify the configuration of the watercourse, floodway, or base flood elevation for which a detailed Flood Insurance Study has been developed, the applicant shall apply for and must receive approval for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision with the Federal Emergency Management Agency prior to the start of construction. 
d)  Within 60 days of completion of an alteration of a watercourse, referenced in the certification requirements of Article III, § C.2.c, the applicant shall submit as-built certification, by a registered professional engineer, to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
4.  Floodway encroachments: Prevent encroachments within floodways unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of Article IV, § B.5 are met. 
5.  Adjoining floodplains: Cooperate with neighboring communities with respect to the management of adjoining floodplains and/or flood-related erosion areas in order to prevent aggravation of existing hazards. 
6.  Notifying adjacent communities: Notify adjacent communities prior to permitting substantial commercial developments and large subdivisions to be undertaken in areas of special flood hazard and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
7.  Certification requirements: 
a)  Obtain and review actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor of all new or substantially improved structures, in accordance with administrative procedures outlined in Article III, § C.2.b. 
b)  Obtain the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with the floodproofing certification outlined in Article III, § C.2.a. 
c)  When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with the non-residential construction requirements outlined in Article IV, § B.2. 
8.  Map interpretation: Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
9.  Prevailing authority: Where a map boundary showing an area of special flood hazard and field elevations disagree, the base flood elevations for flood protection elevations (as found on an elevation profile, floodway data table, etc.) shall prevail. The correct information should be submitted to FEMA as per the map maintenance activity requirements outlined in Article IV, § B.7.b. 
10.  Use of best available data: When base flood elevation data and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with Article I, § D, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize best available base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, including data developed pursuant to the standards for subdivision proposals outlined in Article IV, § B.12, in order to administer the provisions of this ordinance. Data from preliminary, draft, and final Flood Insurance Studies constitutes best available data from a federal, state, or other source. Data must be developed using hydraulic models meeting the minimum requirement of NFIP approved model. If an appeal is pending on the study in accordance with 44 CFR Ch. 1, Parts 67.5 and 67.6, the data does not have to be used. 
11.  Special flood hazard area/topographic boundaries conflict: When the exact location of boundaries of the areas special flood hazards conflict with the current, natural topography information at the site; the site information takes precedence when the lowest adjacent grade is at or above the BFE, the property owner may apply and be approved for a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) by FEMA. The local floodplain administrator in the permit file will maintain a copy of the Letter of Map Amendment issued from FEMA. 
12.  On-site inspections: Make on-site inspections of projects in accordance with the administrative procedures outlined in Article III, § E.1. 
13.  Administrative notices: Serve notices of violations, issue stop-work orders, revoke permits and take corrective actions in accordance with the administrative procedures in Article III, § E. 
14.  Records maintenance: Maintain all records pertaining to the administration of this ordinance and make these records available for public inspection. 
15.  Annexations and detachments: Notify the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Land, Water and Conservation Division, State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program within six (6) months, of any annexations or detachments that include special flood hazard areas. 
16.  Federally funded development: The President issued Executive Order 11988, Floodplain Management May 1977. E.O. 11988 directs federal agencies to assert a leadership role in reducing flood losses and losses to environmental values served by floodplains. Proposed developments must go through an eight-step review process. Evidence of compliance with the executive order must be submitted as part of the permit review process. 
17.  Substantial damage determination: Perform an assessment of damage from any origin to the structure using FEMA's Residential Substantial Damage Estimator (RSDE) software to determine if the damage equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
18.  Substantial improvement determination: Perform an assessment of permit applications for improvements or repairs to be made to a building or structure that equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction. Cost of work counted for determining if and when substantial improvement to a structure occurs shall be cumulative for a period of five years. If the improvement project is conducted in phases, the total of all costs associated with each phase, beginning with the issuance of the first permit, shall be utilized to determine whether "substantial improvement" will occur. 
The market values shall be determined by one of the following methods: 
a)  The current assessed building value as determined by the county's assessor's office or the value of an appraisal performed by a licensed appraiser at the expense of the owner within the past 6 months. 
b)  One or more certified appraisals from a registered professional licensed appraiser in accordance with the laws of South Carolina. The appraisal shall indicate actual replacement value of the building or structure in its pre-improvement condition, less the cost of site improvements and depreciation for functionality and obsolescence. 
c)  Real estate purchase contract within 6 months prior to the date of the application for a permit. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
E. - Administrative procedures. 
1.  Inspections of work in progress: As the work pursuant to a permit progresses, the local floodplain administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the floodplain administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial jurisdiction at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action. 
2.  Stop-work orders: Whenever a building or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation of this ordinance, the floodplain administrator may order the work to be immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to the person doing the work. The stop-work order shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reasons for the stoppage, and the conditions under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor. 
3.  Revocation of permits: The local floodplain administrator may revoke and require the return of the development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing, stating the reason for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the approved application, plans, or specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may also be revoked. 
4.  Periodic inspections: The local floodplain administrator and each member of his/her inspections department shall have a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action. 
5.  Violations to be corrected: When the local floodplain administrator finds violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his/her duty to notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law on the property he owns. 
6.  Actions in event of failure to take corrective action: If the owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the floodplain administrator shall give him written notice, by certified or registered mail to his last known address or by personal service, that: 
a)  The building or property is in violation of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance; 
b)  A hearing will be held before the local floodplain administrator at a designated place and time, not later than 10 days after the date of the notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and 
c)  Following the hearing, the local floodplain administrator may issue such order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as appears appropriate. 
7.  Order to take corrective action: If, upon a hearing held pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the floodplain administrator shall find that the building or development is in violation of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, he/she shall make an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation within such period, not less than 60 days, the floodplain administrator may prescribe; provided that where the floodplain administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may be feasible. 
8.  Appeal: Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action may appeal from the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of appeal in writing to the floodplain administrator and the clerk within 10 days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order of the floodplain administrator shall be final. The local governing body shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke the order. 
9.  Failure to comply with order: If the owner of a building or property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action from which no appeal has been taken, or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an appeal, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in the discretion of the court. 
10.  Denial of flood insurance under the NFIP: If a structure is declared in violation of this ordinance and after all other penalties are exhausted to achieve compliance with this ordinance then the local floodplain administrator shall notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to initiate a Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 action against the structure upon the finding that the violator refuses to bring the violation into compliance with the ordinance. Once a violation has been remedied the local floodplain administrator shall notify FEMA of the remedy and ask that the Section 1316 be rescinded. 
11.  The following documents are incorporated by reference and may be used by the local floodplain administrator to provide further guidance and interpretation of this ordinance as found on FEMA's website at www.fema.gov : 
a)  FEMA 55 Coastal Construction Manual. 
b)  All FEMA Technical Bulletins. 
c)  All FEMA Floodplain Management Bulletins. 
d)  FEMA 348 Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damage. 
e)  FEMA 499 Home Builder's Guide to Coastal Construction Technical Fact Sheets. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
ARTICLE IV. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

A. - General standards. 
    Development may not occur in the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) where alternative locations exist due to the inherent hazards and risks involved. Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall demonstrate that new structures cannot be located out of the SFHA and that encroachments onto the SFHA are minimized. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
1.  Anchoring: All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure. 
2.  Flood-resistant materials and equipment: All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with flood-resistant materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage in accordance with Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, dated 8/08, and available from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
3.  Minimize flood damage: All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages. 
4.  Critical development: Shall be elevated to the 500-year flood elevation or be elevated to the highest known historical flood elevation (where records are available), whichever is greater. If no data exists establishing the 500-year flood elevation or the highest known historical flood elevation, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis that generates 500-year flood elevation data. 
5.  Utilities: Electrical, ventilation, plumbing, heating and air conditioning equipment (including ductwork), and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of the base flood plus zero feet. 
6.  Water supply systems: All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
7.  Sanitary sewage systems: New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters, on-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
8.  Gas or liquid storage tanks: All gas or liquid storage tanks, either located above ground or buried, shall be anchored to prevent flotation and lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads. 
9.  Alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements: Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement to a structure that is in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this ordinance. This includes post-FIRM development and structures. 
10.  Non-conforming buildings or uses: Non-conforming buildings or uses may not be enlarged, replaced, or rebuilt unless such enlargement or reconstruction is accomplished in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance. Provided, however, nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or replacement of an existing building or structure located totally or partially within the floodway, provided that the bulk of the building or structure below base flood elevation in the floodway is not increased and provided that such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other requirements of this ordinance. 
11.  American with Disabilities Act (ADA): A building must meet the specific standards for floodplain construction outlined in Article IV, § B, as well as any applicable ADA requirements. The ADA is not justification for issuing a variance or otherwise waiving these requirements. Also, the cost of improvements required to meet the ADA provisions shall be included in the costs of the improvements for calculating substantial improvement. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
B. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard (Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, V, and VE) where base flood elevation data has been provided, as set forth in Article I, § D, or outlined in the Duties and Responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator Article III, § D, the following provisions are required: 
1.  Residential construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the lowest floor elevated no lower than two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. No basements are permitted. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, flood openings sufficient to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces, shall be provided in accordance with the elevated buildings requirements in Article IV, § B.4. 
2.  Non-residential construction: 
a)  New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the lowest floor elevated no lower than two (2) feet above the level of the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, flood openings sufficient to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces, shall be provided in accordance with the elevated buildings requirements in Article IV, § B.4. No basements are permitted. Structures located in A-zones may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation provided that all areas of the structure below the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. 
b)  A registered, professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in the floodproofing certification requirements in Article III, § C.2.a. A variance may be considered for wet-floodproofing agricultural structures in accordance with the criteria outlined in Article V, § E of this ordinance. Agricultural structures not meeting the criteria of Article V, § E must meet the non-residential construction standards and all other applicable provisions of this ordinance. Structures that are floodproofed are required to have an approved maintenance plan with an annual exercise. The local floodplain administrator must approve the maintenance plan and notification of the annual exercise shall be provided to it. 
3.  Manufactured homes: 
a)  Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites outside a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than two (2) feet above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
b)  Manufactured homes that are to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that are not subject to the provisions for residential construction in Article IV, § B.1 of this ordinance must be elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower two (2) feet than above the base flood elevation, and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement in accordance with Section 40-29-10 of the South Carolina Manufactured Housing Board Regulations, as amended. Additionally, when the elevation requirement would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36 inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in height an engineering certification is required. 
d)  An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood-prone areas. This plan shall be filed with and approved by the local floodplain administrator and the local Emergency Preparedness Coordinator. 
4.  Elevated buildings: New construction and substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other than a basement, and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to preclude finished space and be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. 
a)  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed all of the following minimum criteria: 
(1)  Provide a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. 
(2)  The bottom of each opening must be no more than 1 foot above the higher of the interior or exterior grade immediately under the opening, 
(3)  Only the portions of openings that are below the base flood elevation (BFE) can be counted towards the required net open area. 
(4)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
(5)  Fill placed around foundation walls must be graded so that the grade inside the enclosed area is equal to or higher than the adjacent grade outside the building on at least one side of the building. 
b)  Hazardous velocities: Hydrodynamic pressure must be considered in the design of any foundation system where velocity waters or the potential for debris flow exists. If flood velocities are excessive (greater than 5 feet per second), foundation systems other than solid foundation walls should be considered so that obstructions to damaging flood flows are minimized. 
c)  Enclosures below lowest floor: 
(1)  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
(2)  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms, must be void of utilities except for essential lighting as required for safety, and cannot be temperature controlled. 
(3)  One wet location switch and/or outlet connected to a ground fault interrupt breaker may be installed below the required lowest floor elevation specified in the specific standards outlined in Article IV, §§ B.1, 2 and 3. 
(4)  All construction materials below the required lowest floor elevation specified in the specific standards outlined in Article IV, §§ B.1, 2, 3 and 4 should be of flood-resistant materials. 
5.  Floodways: Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Article I, § D, are areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris and potential projectiles and has erosion potential. The following provisions shall apply within such areas: 
a)  No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, additions, and other developments shall be permitted unless: 
(1)  It has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood. Such certification and technical data shall be presented to the local floodplain administrator. 
(2)  A Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) has been approved by FEMA. A Letter of Map Revision must be obtained upon completion of the proposed development. 
b)  If Article IV, § B.5.a is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article IV. 
c)  No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring and the elevation standards of Article IV, § B.3 and the encroachment standards of Article IV, § B.5(a) are met. 
d)  Permissible uses within floodways may include: general farming, pasture, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, forestry, wildlife sanctuary, game farm, and other similar agricultural, wildlife, and related uses. Also, lawns, gardens, play areas, picnic grounds, and hiking and horseback riding trails are acceptable uses, provided that they do not employ structures or fill. Substantial development of a permissible use may require a no-impact certification. The uses listed in this subsection are permissible only if and to the extent that they do not cause any increase in base flood elevations or changes to the floodway configuration. 
6.  Recreational vehicles: 
a)  A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is: 
(1)  On wheels or jacking system; 
(2)  Attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices; and 
(3)  Has no permanently attached additions. 
b)  Recreational vehicles placed on sites shall either be: 
(1)  On site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or meet the development permit and certification requirements of Article III, § D, general standards outlined in Article IV, § A, and manufactured homes standards in Article IV, §§ B.3 and B. 4. 
7.  Map maintenance activities: The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) requires flood data to be reviewed and approved by FEMA. This ensures that flood maps, studies and other data identified in Article I, § D accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain management criteria are based on current data. The following map maintenance activities are identified: 
a)  Requirement to submit new technical data: 
(1)  For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical or scientific data reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA as soon as practicable, but no later than six months of the date such information becomes available. These development proposals include; but not limited to: 
(a)  Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood elevations or alter floodway boundaries; 
(b)  Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard area; 
(c)  Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of culverts; and 
(d)  Subdivision or large scale development proposals requiring the establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with Article IV, § C.1. 
(2)  It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data, required in accordance with Article IV, § B.7, prepared in a format required for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map Revision, and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions shall also be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(3)  The local floodplain administrator shall require a Conditional Letter of Map Revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for: 
(a)  Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood elevation; and 
(b)  Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation by more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations but no floodway. 
(4)  Floodplain development permits issued by the local floodplain administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a Letter of Map Revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to Article IV, § B.7. 
b)  Right to submit new technical data: The floodplain administrator may request changes to any of the information shown on an effective map that does not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or base flood elevations, such as labeling or planimetric details. Such a submission shall include appropriate supporting documentation made in writing by the local jurisdiction and may be submitted at any time. 
8.  Accessory structures: 
a)  A detached accessory structure or garage, the cost of which is greater than $3,000.00, must comply with the requirements as outlined in FEMA's Technical Bulletin 7-93 Wet Floodproofing Requirements or be elevated in accordance with Article IV, §§ B(1) and B(4) or dry floodproofed in accordance with Article IV, § B(2). 
b)  If accessory structures of $3,000.00 or less are to be placed in the floodplain, the following criteria shall be met: 
(1)  Accessory structures shall not be used for any uses other than the parking of vehicles and storage; 
(2)  Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential; 
(3)  Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters; 
(4)  Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure; 
(5)  Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be installed in accordance with Article IV, § A.5; 
(6)  Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be provided below base flood elevation in conformance with Article IV, § B.4.a; and 
(7)  Accessory structures shall be built with flood resistance materials in accordance with Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, dated 8/08, and available from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Class 4 and 5 materials, referenced therein, are acceptable flood-resistant materials. 
9.  Swimming pool utility equipment rooms: If the building cannot be built at or above the BFE, because of functionality of the equipment then a structure to house the utilities for the pool may be built below the BFE with the following provisions: 
a)  Meet the requirements for accessory structures in Article IV, § B.8; and 
b)  The utilities must be anchored to prevent flotation and shall be designed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of the base flood. 
10.  Elevators: 
a)  Install a float switch system or another system that provides the same level of safety necessary for all elevators where there is a potential for the elevator cab to descend below the BFE during a flood per FEMA's Technical Bulletin 4-93 Elevator Installation for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas. 
b)  All equipment that may have to be installed below the BFE such as counter weight roller guides, compensation cable and pulleys, and oil buffers for traction elevators and the jack assembly for a hydraulic elevator must be constructed using flood-resistant materials where possible per FEMA's Technical Bulletin 4-93 Elevator Installation for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas. 
11.  Fill: An applicant shall demonstrate that fill is the only alternative to raising the building to meet the residential and non-residential construction requirements of Article IV, §§ B(1) or B(2), and that the amount of fill used will not affect the flood storage capacity or adversely affect adjacent properties. The following provisions shall apply to all fill placed in the special flood hazard area: 
a)  Fill may not be placed in the floodway unless it is in accordance with the requirements in Article IV, § B.5.a. 
b)  Fill may not be placed in tidal or non-tidal wetlands without the required state and federal permits. 
c)  Fill must consist of soil and rock materials only. A registered professional geotechnical engineer may use dredged material as fill only upon certification of suitability. Landfills, rubble fills, dumps, and sanitary fills are not permitted in the floodplain. 
d)  Fill used to support structures must comply with ASTM Standard D-698, and its suitability to support structures certified by a registered, professional engineer. 
e)  Fill slopes shall be no greater than two horizontal to one vertical. Flatter slopes may be required where velocities may result in erosion. 
f)  The use of fill shall not increase flooding or cause drainage problems on neighboring properties. 
g)  Will meet the requirements of FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01, Ensuring That Structures Built On Fill in or Near Special Flood Hazard Areas Are Reasonably Safe from Flooding. 
12.  Standards for subdivision proposals and other development: 
a)  All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in these regulations. 
b)  All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
c)  All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. 
d)  The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical data to FEMA in Article IV, § B.7 when a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis is completed that generates base flood elevations. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
C. - Standards for streams without established base flood elevations and floodways. 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard (Zones A and V) established in Article I, § D, are small streams where no base flood data has been provided and where no floodways have been identified. The following provisions apply within such areas: 
1.  In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for all subdivision proposals and other proposed developments containing at least 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is less. 
2.  No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and new development shall be permitted within 100 feet of the stream bank unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
3.  If Article IV, § C. 1 is satisfied and base flood elevation data is available from other sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas shall comply with all applicable flood hazard ordinance provisions of Article IV and shall be elevated or floodproofed in accordance with elevations established in accordance with Article III, § E.11. 
4.  Data from preliminary, draft, and final Flood Insurance Studies constitutes best available data. Refer to FEMA Floodplain Management Technical Bulletin 1-98 Use of Flood Insurance Study (FIS) Data as Available Data. If an appeal is pending on the study in accordance with 44 CFR Ch. 1, Parts 67.5 and 67.6, the data does not have to be used. 
5.  When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available from a federal, state, or other source one of the following methods may be used to determine a BFE For further information regarding the methods for determining BFEs listed below, refer to FEMA's manual Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas: 
a)  Contour interpolation: 
(1)  Superimpose approximate Zone A boundaries onto a topographic map and estimate a BFE. 
(2)  Add one-half of the contour interval of the topographic map that is used to the BFE. 
b)  Data extrapolation: A BFE can be determined if a site within 500 feet upstream of a reach of a stream reach for which a 100-year profile has been computed by detailed methods, and the floodplain and channel bottom slope characteristics are relatively similar to the downstream reaches. No hydraulic structures shall be present. 
c)  Hydrologic and hydraulic calculations: Perform hydrologic and hydraulic calculations to determine BFEs using FEMA approved methods and software. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
D. - Standards for streams with established base flood elevations but without floodways. 
    Along rivers and streams where Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway is identified for a Special Flood Hazard Area on the FIRM or in the FIS. 
1.  No encroachments including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
E. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Article I, § D, are areas designated as shallow flooding. The following provisions shall apply within such areas: 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor elevated to at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
2.  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall: 
a)  Have the lowest floor elevated to at least as high as the depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade; or 
b)  Be completely flood-proofed together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is required as stated in Article III, § D. 
3.  All structures on slopes must have drainage paths around them to guide water away from the structures. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
ARTICLE V. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

A. - Establishment of appeal board. 
    The Zoning Board of Adjustment as established by the Town of Batesburg-Leesville, shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
B. - Right to appeal. 
    Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the Court. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
C. - Historic structures. 
    Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
D. - Functionally dependent uses. 
    Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this Article are met, no reasonable alternative exist, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage and create no additional threat to public safety. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
E. - Agricultural structures. 
    Variances may be issued to wet floodproof an agricultural structure provided it is used solely for agricultural purposes. In order to minimize flood damages during the base flood and the threat to public health and safety, the structure must meet all of the conditions and considerations of Article V, § H, this section, and the following standards: 
1.  Use of the structure must be limited to agricultural purposes as listed below: 
a)  Pole frame buildings with open or closed sides used exclusively for the storage of farm machinery and equipment; 
b)  Steel grain bins and steel frame corncribs; 
c)  General-purpose barns for the temporary feeding of livestock that are open on at least one side; and 
d)  For livestock confinement buildings, poultry houses, dairy operations, and similar livestock operations, variances may not be issued for structures that were substantially damaged. New construction or substantial improvement of such structures must meet the elevation requirements of Article IV, § B.2 of this ordinance. 
2.  The agricultural structure must be built or rebuilt, in the case of an existing building that is substantially damaged, with flood-resistant materials for the exterior and interior building components and elements below the base flood elevation. 
3.  The agricultural structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. All of the structure's components must be capable of resisting specific flood-related forces including hydrostatic, buoyancy, hydrodynamic, and debris impact forces. Where flood velocities exceed 5 feet per second, fast-flowing floodwaters can exert considerable pressure on the building's enclosure walls or foundation walls. 
4.  The agricultural structure must meet the venting requirement of Article IV, § B.4 of this ordinance. 
5.  Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be located above the base flood elevation (BFE), plus any required freeboard, or be contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with Article IV, § A.5 of this ordinance. 
6.  The agricultural structure must comply with the floodway encroachment provisions of Article IV, § B.5 of this ordinance. 
7.  Major equipment, machinery, or other contents must be protected. Such protection may include protective watertight floodproofed areas within the building, the use of equipment hoists for readily elevating contents, permanently elevating contents on pedestals or shelves above the base flood elevation, or determining that property owners can safely remove contents without risk to lives and that the contents will be located to a specified site out of the floodplain. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
F. - Considerations. 
    In passing upon such applications, the appeal board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and: 
1.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage, and the safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
3.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
4.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
6.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
7.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development, and the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
8.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
9.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges; and 
10.  Agricultural structures must be located in wide, expansive floodplain areas, where no other alternative location for the agricultural structure exists. The applicant must demonstrate that the entire farm acreage, consisting of a contiguous parcel of land on which the structure is to be located, must be in the Special Flood Hazard Area and no other alternative locations for the structure are available. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
G. - Findings. 
    Findings listed above shall be submitted to the appeal board, in writing, and included in the application for a variance. Additionally, comments from the Department of Natural Resources, Land, Water and Conservation Division, State Coordinator's Office, must be taken into account and included in the permit file. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
H. - Floodways. 
    Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result unless a CLOMR is obtained prior to issuance of the variance. In order to ensure the project is built in compliance with the CLOMR for which the variance is granted the applicant must provide a bond for 100% of the cost to perform the development. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
I. - Conditions. 
    Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this ordinance, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance. The following conditions shall apply to all variances: 
1.  Variances may not be issued when the variance will make the structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or ordinances. 
2.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
3.  Variances shall only be issued upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
4.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and a written statement that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. 
5.  The local floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) upon request. 
6.  Variances shall not be issued for unpermitted development or other development that is not in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. Violations must be corrected in accordance with Article III, § E.5 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
ARTICLE VI. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

A. - Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing flood damage prevention ordinance. 
    This ordinance in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of the provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance enacted June 9, 2007 and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be enforced. The enactment of this ordinance shall not affect any action, suit or proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance of the Town of Batesburg-Leesville enacted on June 9, 2007, as amended, which are not re-enacted herein, are repealed. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
B. - Effect upon outstanding building permits. 
    Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size or designated use of any building, structure or part thereof for which a building permit has been granted by the Chief Building Inspector or his authorized agents before the time of passage of this ordinance; provided, however, that when start of construction has not occurred under such outstanding permit within a period of sixty (60) days subsequent to passage of this ordinance, construction or use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 2-8-2016) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1976 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1976 Code which are included herein. Sections of the 1976 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. 
1976 Code 
Section Section 
this Code 2-23 1-3-46 11-60 6-2-10 21-21 1-5-13  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1978 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1978 Code which are included herein. Sections of the 1978 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. 
1978 Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1-1 1-3-61 2-71 1-4-10 21-1 1-5-4  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1996 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1996 Code which are included herein. Sections of the 1996 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1996 Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1-1-1 1-1-1 1-2-1 1-2-1 1-2-2 1-2-2 1-2-3 1-2-3 1-2-4 1-2-4 1-2-5 1-2-5 1-2-6 1-2-6 1-2-7 1-2-7 1-3-9 1-3-21 1-3-10 1-3-22 1-3-11 1-3-23 1-3-12 1-3-24 1-3-21 1-3-41 1-3-22 1-3-42 1-3-23 1-3-43 1-3-24 1-3-44 1-3-25 1-3-45 1-3-26 1-3-46 1-3-27 1-3-47 1-3-41 1-3-61 1-3-42 1-3-62 1-3-43 1-3-63 1-3-44 1-3-64 1-3-45 1-3-65 1-3-46 1-3-66 1-3-47 1-3-67 1-3-48 1-3-68 1-3-49 1-3-69 1-3-50 1-3-70 1-4-1 1-4-1 1-4-2 1-4-2 1-4-3 1-4-3 1-4-4 1-4-4 1-4-5 1-4-5 1-4-6 1-4-6 1-4-7 1-4-7 1-4-8 1-4-8 1-4-9 1-4-9 1-4-10 1-4-10 1-4-11 1-4-11 1-4-12 1-4-12 1-4-13 1-4-13 1-4-14 1-4-14 1-4-15 1-4-15 1-4-16 1-4-16 1-5-1 1-5-1 1-5-2 1-5-2 1-5-3 1-5-3 1-5-4 1-5-4 1-5-5 1-5-5 1-5-11 1-5-11 1-5-12 1-5-12 1-5-13 1-5-13 1-6-1 1-6-1 1-6-2 1-6-2 1-6-3 1-6-3 1-6-4 1-6-4 1-6-5 1-6-5 1-6-6 1-6-6 1-6-7 1-6-7 1-6-8 1-6-8 1-6-9 1-6-9 1-6-10 1-6-10 1-6-11 1-6-11 1-6-12 1-6-12 1-6-13 1-6-13 1-6-14 1-6-14 1-6-15 1-6-15 1-7-1 1-7-1 1-7-2 1-7-2 1-7-3 1-7-3 1-7-4 1-7-4 1-7-5 1-7-5 1-7-6 1-7-6 1-7-7 1-7-7 2-1-1 2-1-1 2-1-2 2-1-2 2-1-3 2-1-3 2-1-4 2-1-4 2-1-5 2-1-5 2-1-6 2-1-6 2-1-7 2-1-7 2-1-9 2-1-9 2-1-10 2-1-10 2-1-11 2-1-11 2-1-12 2-1-12 2-1-13 2-1-13 2-1-14 2-1-14 2-2-1 2-2-1 2-2-2 2-2-2 2-2-3 2-2-3 2-2-4 2-2-4 2-2-6 2-2-6 2-2-7 2-2-7 2-2-21 2-2-21 2-2-31 2-2-31 2-2-32 2-2-32 2-2-33 2-2-33 2-2-34 2-2-34 2-3-1 2-3-1 2-3-2 2-3-2 2-3-3 2-3-3 2-3-4 2-3-4 3-1-1 3-1-1 3-1-2 3-1-2 3-1-3 3-1-3 3-1-4 3-1-4 3-1-11 3-1-11 3-1-12 3-1-12 3-1-13 3-1-13 3-1-14 3-1-14 3-1-15 3-1-15 3-1-21 3-1-21 3-1-22 3-1-22 3-1-23 3-1-23 3-1-24 3-1-24 3-1-25 3-1-25 3-1-26 3-1-26 3-1-27 3-1-27 3-1-28 3-1-28 3-1-29 3-1-29 3-1-30 3-1-30 3-1-43 3-1-43 3-1-44 3-1-44 3-1-45 3-1-45 3-1-46 3-1-46 3-1-47 3-1-47 3-1-48 3-1-48 3-1-49 3-1-49 3-1-50 3-1-50 3-1-51 3-1-51 3-1-52 3-1-52 3-1-53 3-1-53 4-1-1 4-1-1 4-1-2 4-1-2 4-1-3 4-1-3 4-1-11 4-1-11 4-1-12 4-1-12 4-1-13 4-1-13 4-1-14 4-1-14 4-1-15 4-1-15 4-1-16 4-1-16 4-1-17 4-1-17 4-1-18 4-1-18 4-1-19 4-1-19 4-1-20 4-1-20 4-1-21 4-1-21 4-1-22 4-1-22 4-1-23 4-1-23 4-1-24 4-1-24 4-1-31 4-1-31 4-1-32 4-1-32 4-1-33 4-1-33 4-1-34 4-1-34 4-1-35 4-1-35 4-1-36 4-1-36 4-1-37 4-1-37 4-1-38 4-1-38 4-1-39 4-1-39 4-1-40 4-1-40 4-1-41 4-1-41 4-1-42 4-1-42 4-1-43 4-1-43 4-1-44 4-1-44 4-1-45 4-1-45 4-1-46 4-1-62 4-1-47 4-1-79 4-1-48 4-1-96 4-1-51 4-1-113 4-1-52 4-1-114 4-1-53 4-1-115 4-1-54 4-1-116 4-1-55 4-1-117 4-1-56 4-1-118 4-1-57 4-1-119 4-1-58 4-1-136 4-1-71 4-1-153 4-1-72 4-1-154 4-1-73 4-1-155 4-1-74 4-1-156 4-1-75 4-1-157 4-1-76 4-1-158 4-1-77 4-1-159 4-1-78 4-1-176 4-1-79 4-1-193 4-2-1 4-2-1 4-2-2 4-2-2 4-2-3 4-2-3 4-2-4 4-2-4 4-2-5 4-2-5 4-2-6 4-2-6 4-2-7 4-2-7 4-2-8 4-2-8 4-2-9 4-2-9 4-2-10 4-2-10 4-2-11 4-2-11 4-2-12 4-2-12 4-2-13 4-2-13 4-2-14 4-2-14 4-2-15 4-2-15 5-1-1 5-1-1 5-1-1 5-2-12 5-1-1 5-2-22 5-1-1 5-2-23 5-1-1 5-2-24 5-1-1 5-2-27 5-1-1 5-2-28 5-1-1 5-2-29 5-1-1 5-2-30 5-1-2 5-1-2 5-1-3 5-1-3 5-1-4 5-1-4 5-2-91 5-2-91 5-2-92 5-2-92 5-2-93 5-2-93 5-2-94 5-2-94 5-2-95 5-2-95 5-2-96 5-2-96 5-2-97 5-2-97 5-2-98 5-2-98 5-2-99 5-2-99 5-2-100 5-2-100 5-2-111 5-2-111 5-2-112 5-2-112 5-2-113 5-2-113 5-2-114 5-2-114 5-2-115 5-2-115 5-2-116 5-2-116 5-2-117 5-2-117 5-2-118 5-2-118 5-2-119 5-2-119 5-2-120 5-2-120 5-2-121 5-2-121 5-2-122 5-2-122 5-3-1 5-3-1 6-2-1 6-2-1 6-2-2 6-2-2 6-2-3 6-2-3 6-2-4 6-2-4 6-2-5 6-2-5 6-2-6 6-2-6 6-2-7 6-2-7 6-2-8 6-2-8 6-2-9 6-2-9 6-2-10 6-2-10 6-2-11 6-2-13 6-2-12 6-2-14 6-2-13 6-2-15 6-2-14 6-2-16 6-2-15 6-2-17 6-2-16 6-2-18 7-3-1 7-3-1 7-3-2 7-3-2 7-3-3 7-3-3 7-3-4 7-3-4 7-4-1 7-4-1 7-4-2 7-4-2 7-4-3 7-4-3 7-4-4 7-4-4 7-4-5 7-4-5 7-4-6 7-4-6 7-5-1 7-5-1 7-5-2 7-5-2 7-5-3 7-5-3 7-5-4 7-5-4 7-5-5 7-5-5 7-5-6 7-5-6 7-5-7 7-5-7 7-5-8 7-5-8 7-5-9 7-5-9 8-1-1 8-1-1 8-1-2 8-1-2 8-1-3 8-1-3 8-1-4 8-1-4 8-1-6 8-1-6 8-1-7 8-1-7 8-1-8 8-1-8 8-1-9 8-1-9 8-1-10 8-1-10 8-1-12 8-1-12 8-2-1 8-2-1 8-2-2 8-2-2 8-2-3 8-2-3 8-2-4 8-2-4 8-2-5 8-2-5 8-2-6 8-2-6 8-2-7 8-2-7 8-2-8 8-2-8 8-2-9 8-2-9 8-3-1 8-3-1 8-3-2 8-3-2 8-3-3 8-3-3 8-3-4 8-3-4 8-3-5 8-3-5 8-3-6 8-3-6 8-3-7 8-3-7 8-3-8 8-3-8 8-3-9 8-3-9 8-3-10 8-3-10 8-3-11 8-3-11 8-3-12 8-3-12 8-3-13 8-3-13 8-3-14 8-3-14 8-3-15 8-3-15 8-3-16 8-3-16 8-4-2 8-4-2 8-4-3 8-4-3 8-4-4 8-4-4 8-4-5 8-4-5 8-4-6 8-4-6 9-1-1 9-1-1 9-1-2 9-1-2 9-1-3 7-5-10 9-1-7 9-1-7 9-1-8 9-1-8 9-1-10 9-1-10 9-1-12 9-1-12 9-1-13 9-1-13 9-1-14 9-1-14 9-1-15 9-1-15 9-1-16 9-1-16 9-1-17 9-1-17 9-1-21 7-6-1 9-2-1 9-2-1 9-2-2 9-2-2 9-2-3 9-2-3 9-2-4 9-2-4 9-2-5 9-2-5 9-2-6 9-2-6 9-2-7 9-2-7 9-2-8 9-2-8 9-2-9 9-2-9 9-2-10 9-2-10 9-3-1 9-3-1 9-3-3 9-3-3 9-3-4 9-3-4 9-4-1 9-4-1 10-1-1 10-1-1 10-1-2 10-1-2 10-1-3 10-1-3 10-1-4 10-1-4 10-1-5 10-1-5 10-1-6 10-1-6 10-1-7 10-1-7 10-1-8 10-1-8 10-1-9 10-1-9 10-1-10 10-1-10 10-1-11 10-1-11 10-1-12 10-1-12 10-1-13 10-1-13 10-2-1 10-2-1 10-2-2 10-2-2 10-2-3 10-2-3 10-2-4 10-2-4 10-2-5 10-2-5 10-2-6 10-2-6 10-2-7 10-2-7 10-2-8 10-2-8 10-2-9 10-2-9 10-2-10 10-2-10 10-2-11 10-2-11 10-2-12 10-2-12 10-2-13 10-2-13 10-2-14 10-2-14 10-2-15 10-2-15 10-2-16 10-2-16 10-2-17 10-2-17 10-2-18 10-2-18 10-2-19 10-2-19 10-2-20 10-2-20 10-2-21 10-2-21 10-2-22 10-2-22 10-2-23 10-2-23 10-2-24 10-2-24  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Title of 
Legislation Date Section Section 
this Code Ord. of 4-20-1987 4-20-1987 1 6-2-10 Ord. of 7-31-1989 7-31-1989 4-1-21 Ord. of 8-11-1997 8-11-1997 App. A, § 7-5 Ord. of 10-5-1998 10- 5-1998 App. A, § 6-12 Ord. of 9-9-2002 9-9-2002 App. A, § 6-1 App. A, § 6-14 App. A, §§ 7-1-7-6 App. A, § 7-6.3.b. App. A, § 8-2 App. A, § 8-5 App. A, § 8-7 App. A, § 8-13 App. A, § 9-11 Ord. of 11-14-2005 11-14-2005 App. A, §§ 10-1-10-8 App. A, §§ 11-1-11-9 App. A, §§ 13-1-13-4 App. A, §§ 14-2-14-7 App. A, §§ 15-1, 15-2 Ord. of 5-8-2006 5-8-2006 App. A, §§ 6-1, 6-2 App. A, § 9-9 Ord. of 8-14-2006 8-14-2006 App. A, § 7-7 Ord. of 4-9-2007 4-9-2007 App. B, § 2-2 App. B, § 3-1 Ord. of 9-9-2007 9-9-2007 App. A, § 3-2 Ord. of 1-14-2008 1-14-2008 App. A, § 7-5 Ord. of 3-8-2010 3-8-2010 App. A, § 10-3 Ord. of 5-10-2010  5-10-2010       Added App. A, § 7-5.12 Ord. of 11-8-2010 11-8-2010 2-2-41-2-2-52 Ord. of 12-13-2010 12-13-2010 5-2-1 Ord. of 12-13-2010(02) 12-13-2010 6-1-1 Ord. of 12-13-2010(03) 12-13-2010 3-1-42 Ord. of 12-13-2010(04) 12-13-2010 8-4-1 Ord. of 2-14-2011 2-14-2011 1 4-1-116 2 4-1-116 3 4-1-117 4 4-1-117 Ord. of 9-8-2014 9-8-2014 1 6-2-10 2 6-2-10 3 6-2-10 4 6-2-11 - 6-2-13 5 6-2-12 - 6-2-14 6 6-2-15 7 6-2-16 8 6-2-17 9 6-2-18 Ord. of 11-17-2014 11-17-2014 exh. A, § 1-3-1 1-3-1 exh. A, § 1-3-2 1-3-2 exh. A, § 1-3-3 1-3-3 exh. A, § 1-3-4 1-3-4 exh. A, § 1-3-5 1-3-5 exh. A, § 1-3-6 1-3-6 exh. A, § 1-3-7 1-3-7 exh. A, § 1-3-8 1-3-8 exh. A, § 1-3-9 1-3-9 exh. A, § 1-3-10 1-3-10 exh. A, § 1-3-11 1-3-11 exh. A, § 1-3-12 1-3-12 exh. A, § 1-3-13 1-3-13 exh. A, § 1-3-14 1-3-14 exh. A, § 1-3-15 1-3-15 exh. A, § 1-3-16 1-3-16 exh. A, § 1-3-17 1-3-17 exh. A, § 1-3-18 1-3-18 exh. A, § 1-3-19 1-3-19 exh. A, § 1-3-20 1-3-20 exh. A, § 1-3-21 1-3-21 exh. A, § 1-3-22 1-3-22 exh. A, § 1-3-23 1-3-23 exh. A, § 1-3-24 1-3-24 Ord. of 12-8-2014 12-8-2014 exh. A, § 7-1-1 7-1-1 exh. A, § 7-1-2 7-1-2 exh. A, § 7-1-3 7-1-3 exh. A, § 7-1-4 7-1-4 exh. A, § 7-1-5 7-1-5 exh. A, § 7-1-6 7-1-6 exh. A, § 7-1-7 7-1-7 exh. A, § 7-1-8 7-1-8 exh. A, § 7-1-9 7-1-9 exh. A, § 7-1-10 7-1-10 exh. A, § 7-1-11 7-1-11 exh. A, § 7-1-12 7-1-12 exh. A, § 7-1-13 7-1-13 exh. A, § 7-1-14 7-1-14 exh. A, § 7-1-15 7-1-15 exh. A, § 7-1-16 7-1-16 exh. A, § 7-1-17 7-1-17 exh. A, § 7-1-18 7-1-18 exh. A, § 7-1-19 7-1-19 exh. A, § 7-1-20 7-1-20 exh. A, § 7-1-21 7-1-21 Ord. of xx-xx-xxxx xx-xx-xxxx App. A, § 5-8 App. A, §§ 6-6, 6-7 App. A, § 6-16 App. A, § 6-18 App. A, § 7-1 App. A, § 8-12 App. A, §§ 12-1-12-4 Ord. of  6-16-2003(1) 1       Added 4-3-1 2       Added 4-3-2 3       Added 4-3-3 Ord. of  6-16-2003(2)       Added 4-3-16-4-3-22 Ord. of  9-10-2012       Added App. A, § 6-7.11 Ord. of  9- 9-2013       Added App. A, § 3-2.27.5 App. A, § 8-12 b. Ord. of  2- 9-2015 9-2-4 Ord. of  3-26-2015 7-1-21 Ord. of  6- 8-2015 6-2-12 Ord. of 10-12-2015 1-7-7(f) Ord. of  1-11-2016 App. A, § 7-4.4 Ord. of  2- 8-2016       Added App. D Ord. of 10-10-2016       Rpld 5-2-1-5-2-122       Added 5-2-1 Ord. of  6-19-2017       Rpld 1-2-4 17-01  9-18-2017 1 10-31 App. C, § 10-35(a)       Added App. C, § 10-41       Rnbd App. C, 
§§ 10-41, 10-42       as App. C, 
§§ 10-42, 10-43 App. C, § 10-42(d)       Added App. C, 
§§ 10-91-10-94 Ord. of  9-10-2018(1)       Added 1-2-4 Ord. of  9-10-2018(2) 1(exh. A)       Added 11-1-1-11-1-12  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to S.C. Code 1976. 
S.C. Code 1976 
Section Section 

this Code tit. 5 App. D, Art. I § A 5-5-10 et seq. 1-1-1 5-7-10 et seq. Tit. 1 (note) 5-7-30 Tit. 1 (note) - 1-7-7 - Tit. 3, Ch. 1 - Tit. 7, Ch. 1 5-7-90 Tit. 1, Ch. 6 - 8-1-1 5-7-110 Tit. 2, Ch. 1 5-7-130 Tit. 1 (note) - 1-3-23 - 1-4-16 5-7-160 Tit. 1 (note) 5-7-170 1-2-4 5-7-190 1-2-7 5-7-200 1-7-4 5-7-220 1-4-9 - 1-4-11 5-7-230 Tit. 1 (note) - 1-4-12 5-7-240 Tit. 1, Ch. 5, 
Art. A 5-7-250 1-3-45 5-7-260 Tit. 1, Ch. 3, 
Art. B - 1-7-7 5-7-270 1-3-44 5-7-300 Tit. 1, Ch. 5, 
Art. A - Tit. 1, Ch. 5, 
Art. B 5-11-40 Tit. 1, Ch. 5, 
Art. A 5-13-10 et seq. 1-1-1 5-13-30 1-2-5 5-13-50 1-4-3, 1-4-4 5-13-60 1-4-5 - 1-4-10 5-13-70 1-4-3 - 1-4-8 5-13-80 1-4-7 5-13-90 1-4-6 5-13-100 1-4-1 5-15-20 et seq. Tit. 1, Ch. 7 5-15-20 1-2-2 5-15-40 1-2-1 5-15-50 1-7-5 5-15-62 1-7-3 5-15-145 1-7-7 5-15-150 1-2-3 5-21-30 1-3-23 - 1-4-16 5-21-50 Tit. 1 (note) - Tit. 1, Ch. 5, 
Art. A 5-21-210 et seq. Tit. 1 (note) - Tit. 1, Ch. 5, 
Art. A 5-23-410 et seq. Tit. 5, Ch. 1 5-25-20 Tit. 2, Ch. 2,qa>Art. A 5-25-110 2-2-1 tit. 5, ch. 31 Tit. 4 (note) 5-31-900 Tit. 4, Ch. 1 5-31-1110 Tit. 2, Ch. 2 5-31-1510- 
5-31-1600 Tit. 4 (note) 5-31-1910 Tit. 4 (note) 5-31-2030 Tit. 4, Ch. 1 tit. 6 App. D, Art. I § A 6-1-315 Tit. 7, Ch. 1 6-1-330 Tit. 1 (note) - Tit. 1, Ch. 5, 
Art. A 6-1-700- 
6-1-770 11-1-1 6-1-730 11-1-4 6-7-10 et seq. Tit. 5, Ch. 1 6-9-10 Tit. 5, Ch. 2 6-9-65(B) Tit. 5, Ch. 2 6-9-80 Tit. 5, Ch. 2 6-9-130 Tit. 5, Ch. 2 6-15-10 et seq. Tit. 4 (note) 6-21-50 Tit. 4 (note) 6-29-310 et seq. Tit. 5, Ch. 1 - 5-1-1 6-29-340 5-1-4 6-29-350 5-1-2 6-29-360 5-1-3 6-29-510 et seq. Tit. 5, Ch. 1 6-29-710 et seq. Tit. 5, Ch. 3 6-29-720 Tit. 5, Ch. 3 6-29-780 Tit. 5, Ch. 3 7-5-610 1-2-2 11-35-50 Tit. 10, Ch. 2 - 10-1-1 11-35-310 10-1-1 12-21-2710 et seq. Tit. 9, Ch. 1 12-37-40 1-5-11 12-37-2690 1-5-12 14-25-5 et seq. Tit. 1, Ch. 6 14-25-15 Tit. 1, Ch. 6 14-25-35 Tit. 1, Ch. 6 14-25-45 Tit. 1, Ch. 6 14-25-65 Tit. 1, Ch. 6 14-25-75 Tit. 1, Ch. 6 14-25-85 Tit. 1, Ch. 6 14-25-95 Tit. 1, Ch. 6 - 1-6-10 14-25-105 Tit. 1, Ch. 6 14-25-115 Tit. 1, Ch. 6 14-25-125 Tit. 1, Ch. 6 14-25-135 Tit. 1, Ch. 6 16-3-1010 Tit. 9, Ch. 1 16-3-1020 Tit. 9, Ch. 1 16-5-50 9-2-7 16-5-120 Tit. 9, Ch. 2 16-7-110 Tit. 9, Ch. 2 16-7-120 Tit. 9, Ch. 2 16-9-320 9-2-7 16-11-600 Tit. 9, Ch. 3 16-11-610 Tit. 9, Ch. 3 16-11-620 Tit. 9, Ch. 3 16-11-650 Tit. 9, Ch. 3 16-11-680 Tit. 9, Ch. 3 16-13-30 Tit. 9, Ch. 3 16-13-180 Tit. 9, Ch. 3 16-13-240 Tit. 9, Ch. 3 16-13-260 Tit. 9, Ch. 3 16-13-290 Tit. 9, Ch. 3 16-13-340 Tit. 9, Ch. 3 16-15-90 et seq. Tit. 9, Ch. 4 16-15-130 Tit. 9, Ch. 4 16-15-260 et seq. Tit. 9, Ch. 4 16-17-520 Tit. 9, Ch. 2 16-17-530 Tit. 9, Ch. 2 16-17-570 Tit. 2, Ch. 2 16-17-590 Tit. 9, Ch. 3 16-17-600 Tit. 9, Ch. 3 16-17-690 Tit. 9, Ch. 1 16-19-40 Tit. 9, Ch. 1 16-23-20 Tit. 9, Ch. 2 16-23-20(12) 9-2-2 16-23-410 Tit. 9, Ch. 2 16-23-460 Tit. 9, Ch. 2 - 9-2-2 16-23-500 9-2-2 23-1-15 8-3-16 23-9-310-23-9-470 2-2-31 23-9-380 Tit. 1 (note) 23-35-10 et seq. Tit. 2, Ch. 2 - 9-2-4 30-4-70 1-3-10 30-4-70(b) 1-3-10 31-15-10 et seq. Tit. 5, Ch. 2 40-27-10-40-27-40 7-6-1 40-29-10 App. D, Art. IV § B 40-39-10 7-6-1 40-39-10-40-39-130 7-6-1 47-3-20 Tit. 6, Ch. 3 47-3-70 Tit. 6, Ch. 3 47-3-710 et seq. Tit. 6, Ch. 3 47-5-10 et seq. App. C, Art. II, 
Div. 2 52-1-10 et seq. 7-5-10 56-1-20 8-1-2 56-3-1950 et seq. 8-3-11 56-3-1960 8-3-11 Tit. 56, Ch. 5 8-1-1 56-5-30 Tit. 8 (note) 56-5-710 Tit. 8 (note) - 8-3-16 56-5-760 et seq. Tit. 2, Ch. 2 56-5-930 Tit. 8 (note) 56-5-1260 et seq. 8-1-8 56-5-1360 8-1-8 56-5-1960 Tit. 2, Ch. 2 56-5-2520 8-3-13 56-5-3850 Tit. 2, Ch. 2 56-5-5610 et seq. 8-3-13 56-5-6150 Tit. 1, Ch. 6 - 8-1-1 57-7-20 Tit. 3, Ch. 1 57-7-210 Tit. 3, Ch. 1  
