THE CODE OF THE CITY OF CLINTON, SOUTH CAROLINA 
____________ 
Published in 2019 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
  
CITY OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Bob McLean 
Mayor 
____________ 
Danny Cook 
Shirley Jenkins 
Robbie Neal 
Gary Kuykendall 
Ronnie Roth 
Megan Walsh 
City Council 
____________ 
Bill Ed Cannon 
City Manager 
____________ 
Tammy Templeton 
Clerk to Council 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Clinton, South Carolina. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1995 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1995 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been provided catchlines to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state statute citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
RELATED LAWS 	RL:1 
SPECIAL ACTS 	SA:1 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	RLCT:1 
SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	SACT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Daniel Walker, Code Attorney, and Erin McDaniel, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Mary-Wallace Riley, Executive Coordinator, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Clinton, South Carolina. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Clinton South Carolina. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Clinton, South Carolina. 2019. 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF CLINTON, SOUTH CAROLINA, PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Clinton, South Carolina," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 90, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before January 7, 2019, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished according to code Section 1-14. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that the reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after January 7, 2019, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective _______. 
Passed and adopted by the 4th day of November, 2019. 
	/s/   
      Mayor 
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/   
      City Clerk 	
 	 
1 st Reading: October 7, 2019 
2 nd Reading: November 4, 2019  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Clinton, South Carolina," and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the "Clinton City Code." 
(Code 1977, § 1-1; Code 1995, § 1-1)  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction—Generally. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the text clearly requires otherwise: 
And, or. The term "and" may be read as "or," and the term "or" as "and," where the sense requires it. 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
City. The term "city" means the City of Clinton, in the County of Laurens, and State of South Carolina, except as otherwise provided. 
City clerk/treasurer, municipal clerk/treasurer, city clerk and municipal clerk. The terms "city clerk/treasurer," "municipal clerk/treasurer," "city clerk" and "municipal clerk" mean the municipal clerk/treasurer of the city. 
Code. Whenever the term "Code" or "this Code" is used, it means the Code of the City of Clinton, South Carolina, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed, the day of the act, event or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or a state or federal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday nor such holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and holidays shall be excluded in the computation. A half-holiday shall be considered as other days and not as a holiday. 
State Law reference— Computation of time, S.C. Rules of Civil Procedure 1976, rule 6(a). 
Council or city council. The term "council" or "city council" means the city council of Clinton, South Carolina. 
County. The term "county" means the County of Laurens in the State of South Carolina. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears in this Code requiring or authorizing the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision specifically designate otherwise. 
Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
In the city. The term "in the city" means and includes any territory within the corporate limits of the City of Clinton, South Carolina, and the police jurisdiction thereof, and any other territory over which regulatory power has been conferred on the city by general or special act, except as otherwise specified. 
Joint authority. All words giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Minor. The term "minor" means any person under the age of 18 years, unless otherwise specifically provided. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Number. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural number shall include the singular. 
Oath. The term "oath" means and includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Real property and real estate. The terms "real property" and "real estate" include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Roadway. The term "roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
S.C. Code 1976. The term "S.C. Code 1976" refers to the South Carolina Code of Laws. 
S.C. Code Reg. The term "S.C. Code Reg." refers to the South Carolina Code of Regulations. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline, or the lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line is intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" means the State of South Carolina. 
Statute references. Whenever reference is made to state law or to the state statutes, it shall be construed to refer to the latest edition of the Code of Laws of South Carolina, as amended. 
Street. The term "street" includes avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and the approaches thereto and all other public thoroughfares in the city, and means the entire width thereof between opposed abutting property lines; the term "street" shall be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Writing, written. The terms "writing" and "written" include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1977, § 1-2; Code 1995, § 1-2)  
Sec. 1-3. - Definitions and rules of construction—Officers, agents, etc., of the city. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, all officers, agents, employees and other persons, together with all things and places therein referred to, unless a contrary intention appears, shall be construed to mean the officers, agents, employees and other persons, things and places situated in the city or employed by or appertaining to the city. 
(Code 1977, § 1-3; Code 1995, § 1-3)  
Sec. 1-4. - Definitions and rules of construction—Acts prohibited or punishable. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, all acts prohibited or punishable under this Code or under any particular ordinance, unless a contrary intent appears, shall be construed to refer to such acts when committed or occurring within the limits of the city or in other places over which the municipal court and city police have authority or jurisdiction under the laws of the state, even though the Code or the particular ordinance only provides that such acts shall be prohibited or punishable and shall not specifically designate the jurisdiction or scope thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 1-4; Code 1995, § 1-4)  
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code. 
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 1-5; Code 1995, § 1-5)  
Sec. 1-6. - Unauthorized alteration or tampering with Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1977, § 1-6; Code 1995, § 1-6)  
Sec. 1-7. - Police power extended to city property. 
The police power of the city is hereby extended to include all lands or property owned or leased by the city or any agency of the city and the general ordinances of the city shall be applicable on such property. 
(Code 1977, § 1-7; Code 1995, § 1-7)  
Sec. 1-8. - Incorporation by reference. 
All standard codes, rules, regulations and other subject matter herein or hereafter properly incorporated by reference, together with subsequent amendments thereto, pursuant to state law, and future incorporations by reference shall be kept and preserved in the office of the city clerk/treasurer. 
(Code 1977, § 1-8; Code 1995, § 1-8)  
Sec. 1-9. - Parenthetical and reference matter. 
The matter in parentheses at the ends of sections is for information only and is not a part of the Code. Citations to Code 1905 (e.g., Code 1995, § 1-1) indicate only the source; and the text may or may not be changed by this Code upon adoption of this code. Reference matter not in parentheses is for information only and is not a part of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 1-9; Code 1995, § 1-9)  
Sec. 1-10. - Catchlines and headings. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, printed in boldface type, and the chapter, article and division headings are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, chapter, article or division and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such section, chapter, article or division, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any such section, chapter, article or division, including the catchlines, is amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1977, § 1-10; Code 1995, § 1-10)  
Sec. 1-11. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 1-11; Code 1995, § 1-11)  
Sec. 1-12. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance. 
The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued, any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. When any ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
(Code 1977, § 1-12; Code 1995, § 1-12)  
Sec. 1-13. - Corporate limits. 
The limits and boundaries of this city shall be as shown and indicated on an official map of the city, duly adopted by the city council, and on file in the office of the city clerk/treasurer. 
(Code 1977, § 1-13; Code 1995, § 1-13)  
Sec. 1-14. - General penalty. 
(a)  Any person who is convicted for a violation of the ordinances of the city shall be subject to a maximum fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days. 
(b)  This section shall apply to violations of all ordinances of the city and for offenses falling within the jurisdiction of the courts of the city that are not otherwise regulated by the South Carolina Code of Laws. 
(Code 1977, § 1-14; Code 1995, § 1-14; Ord. of 8-2-1993)  
Sec. 1-15. - Ordinance summons. 
The city adopts the use of an ordinance summons to cite municipal ordinance violations in compliance with S.C. Code 1976, § 56-7-80. 
(Code 1995, § 1-15; Ord. of 12-7-1992(2))  
Sec. 1-16. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, when necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through _____," inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code. 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1995, § 1-16)  
Sec. 1-17. - Certain ordinances, rights not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city. 
(2)  Containing any administrative provisions of the council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(3)  Prescribing rates for city utility services. 
(4)  Granting any right or franchise and establishing any rates therefor. 
(5)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(6)  Making any appropriation. 
(7)  Levying or imposing taxes, not inconsistent with this Code. 
(8)  Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(9)  Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(10)  Adopting, extending or contracting the boundaries of the city. 
(11)  Prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city officers, employees or agents, not inconsistent with this Code, or establishing personnel policies. 
(12)  Adopting a schedule of business license rates. 
(13)  Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature. 
(14)  Concerning the zoning ordinance, zoning ordinance amendments, rezoning, and establishment of a design review committee. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the office of the city clerk/treasurer. 
(b)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 1-17)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal corporations, S.C. Code 1976, title 5; Freedom of Information Act, S.C. Code 1976, § 30-4-1 et seq.; municipal employees and officials subject to Ethics Reform Act, S.C. Code 1976, § 8-13-100. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Form of government; terms of office of mayor, councilmembers. 
(a)  The council-manager form of municipal government, with a mayor and six councilmembers, is hereby adopted for the city. 
(b)  Each councilmember shall be required to live in a ward different from that of any other councilmember and shall be elected by the persons residing within his particular ward for a four-year term of office. 
(Code 1977, § 2-1; Code 1995, § 2-1) 
State Law reference— Council-manager form of government, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-13-20; election of council, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-20.  
Sec. 2-2. - Ward boundaries. 
The city is hereby divided into six wards as particularly shown and designated on the drawing, designated as the ward map, which may be found in the office of the city clerk/treasurer. 
(Code 1977, § 2-2; Code 1995, § 2-2) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to establish ward lines, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-50.  
Sec. 2-3. - Annual budget and tax levy ordinances. 
As soon as possible after the submission to it by the city manager of the annual budget estimate, the council shall adopt a budget and pass the tax levy ordinance and such other ordinances as may be required to make the budget effective. 
(Code 1977, § 2-4; Code 1995, § 2-3) 
State Law reference— Adoption of budget required, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-260(3).  
Sec. 2-4. - Destruction of paid bonds, interest coupons. 
(a)  All bonds issued by the city and all interest coupons attached thereto, after the same have been fully paid, shall be destroyed. 
(b)  After any paying agent, bank or other institution comes into the possession of any bond or interest coupon, such paying agent, bank or institution is hereby authorized and empowered to destroy the bonds and interest coupons as agent for the city. 
(c)  Before any destruction shall take place, the paying agent, bank or other institution shall furnish the city a certificate which shall show a complete description of the bond, including the dollar amounts, series, date of issue, interest rate, coupons attached or which may be detached and a list of the bond numbers in numerical sequence. The certificate shall certify that the bonds and interest coupons have been destroyed and will contain a description of the bond issue, the maturity of the coupons, the total number of coupons, the face value and the dollar value of the coupons destroyed. 
(d)  Before any paying agent, bank or other institution shall be authorized to destroy any bonds or interest coupons, it shall enter into a written contract with the city, and under the terms of the contract agree to indemnify and hold harmless the city against any and all claims, demands, damages, liability and costs, expenses or attorney's fees incident thereto, which may arise or occur in the event any bonds or coupons described or listed in the certificate are not actually destroyed. 
(e)  The city shall have the authority to enter into a contract with any paying agent, bank or institution to pay for their costs and services in connection with the destroying of bonds and interest coupons. 
(Code 1977, § 2-5; Code 1995, § 2-4)  
Sec. 2-5. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year for the city shall begin July 1 and end June 30. 
(Code 1977, § 2-6; Code 1995, § 2-5)  
Sec. 2-6. - Administrative fee. 
(a)  The city hereby imposes an administrative fee in the amount of $25.00 to defray its internal costs of collection for any delinquent debts that are sought to be collected pursuant to the provisions of the Setoff Debt Collection Act, S.C. Code 1976, § 12-56-10 et seq. This fee is hereby declared to be a collection cost that arises by operation of law and shall be added to the delinquent debt and recovered from the debtor. 
(b)  The city hereby declares that the administrative fee charged by the municipal association of the state is also a collection cost to the city, which shall also be added to the delinquent debt and recovered from the debtor. 
(c)  All ordinances in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed. 
(d)  This chapter shall be effective on the date of final reading, provided, however, that this chapter is declared to be consistent with prior law and practice and shall not be construed to mean that any fees previously charged to debtors as costs of collection under the Act were not properly authorized or properly charged to the debtor. 
(Ord. of 10-2-2006, §§ 1—4)  
Secs. 2-7—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-31. - Composition. 
The mayor and six councilmembers shall constitute the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 2-16; Code 1995, § 2-36; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-36)) 
State Law reference— Structure of council-manager form of government, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-13-20(a).  
Sec. 2-32. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  Authority. S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-250 provides that: "The council shall determine its own rules and order of business and shall provide for keeping minutes of its proceedings which shall be a public record." 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of adopting rules of order is to enable the council to transact business with speed and efficiency while protecting the rights of all persons whether in the majority or the minority. It is the intent of the council that common sense and courtesy be applied when enforcing the rules of procedure so that the will of the majority of the council may be achieved while ensuring all positions are heard and considered. 
(c)  If there is no specific and controlling state law or provision in the adopted local rules of procedure, the council shall be guided by the current edition of Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised. The order of guidance shall be state law, local rules followed by Robert's Rules of Order. 
(d)  The council's adopted local rules of order and Robert's Rules of Order may be suspended at any meeting of the council by the consent of a two-thirds vote of councilmembers serving. 
(e)  The city attorney shall act as parliamentarian. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-37))  
Sec. 2-33. - Qualifications of mayor and councilmembers; proceedings to vacate offices. 
(a)  The mayor and councilmembers shall be qualified electors of the state, county, and city. Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other municipal office or municipal employment while serving the term for which he was elected. The mayor or any councilmember shall forfeit his office if he: 
(1)  Lacks at any time during his term of office any qualification for the office prescribed by city ordinance or the general law and constitution of the state; 
(2)  Violates any express prohibition of S.C. Code 1976, §§ 5-1-10 through 5-17-30; or 
(3)  Is convicted of a crime of moral turpitude. 
(b)  The council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its members and of the grounds for forfeiture of office as provided in S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-210. 
(c)  A member of the council intending to resign from office shall submit a written irrevocable resignation that specifies an effective date. The written resignation shall be addressed to the mayor and the council and shall be acted upon at the meeting at which it is submitted or the next council meeting if submitted between meetings. A resignation once accepted by the council is irrevocable. 
(Code 1977, § 2-17; Code 1995, § 2-37; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-38))  
Sec. 2-34. - Duties of councilmembers generally. 
The councilmembers shall attend all regular and special meetings of the city council except when excused from so doing by the city council itself and hold themselves at all times in readiness to perform any duty entrusted to them by the city council. The councilmembers shall perform the duties thus imposed upon them with dispatch and to the best of their abilities. 
(Code 1977, § 2-19; Code 1995, § 2-39; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-39))  
Sec. 2-35. - Legislative powers; matters of policy. 
All legislative powers of the city and the determination of all matters of policy are vested in the city council with each member, including the mayor, having one vote. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-40)) 
State Law reference— Powers and duties of council, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-13-30.  
Sec. 2-36. - Oath. 
(a)  The mayor and councilmembers, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, shall take the following oath: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I am duly qualified, according to the constitution of this state, to exercise the duties of the office to which I have been elected and that I will, to the best of my ability, discharge the duties thereof and preserve, protect and defend the constitution of this state and of the United States. 
As mayor (or councilmember) of the City of Clinton, I will equally, fairly and impartially, to the best of my ability and skill, exercise the trust reposed in me and will use my best endeavors to preserve the peace and carry into effect according to law the purposes for which I have been elected. So help me God." 
(b)  A city ordinance shall prescribe the date of the oath of office and effective date of service. 
(Code 1977, § 2-18; Code 1995, § 2-38; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-41)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-150.  
Sec. 2-37. - Compensation. 
(a)  The council shall determine the annual salary of the mayor and councilmembers by ordinance; provided that an ordinance establishing or increasing such salaries shall not become effective until the commencement date of the terms of two or more members elected at the next general election following the adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived. At that time the salaries will become effective for all members whether or not they were elected in such election. 
(b)  The mayor and councilmembers shall also be reimbursed for their actual expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties upon submission of signed expense reimbursement forms as provided by the city finance department. Reimbursement is subject to the availability of funds budgeted for the city council. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-42)) 
State Law reference— Salaries and expenses of mayor and councilmembers determined by council through ordinance, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-170.  
Sec. 2-38. - Mayor. 
A mayor shall be elected from the city at large in the manner provided by law. The mayor shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes. He shall preside over the meetings of the city council unless otherwise provided by the council but shall have no regular administrative duties. The mayor shall attend all regular and special meetings of the city council. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-43))  
Sec. 2-39. - Mayor pro tem. 
Immediately after any general election for the council, the council shall elect one member of its body as a mayor pro tempore to serve as such for two years. In the absence or disability of the mayor, or in the event of a vacancy in the office of mayor, the mayor pro tem shall preside over the meetings of the city council. If a vacancy occurs, he shall act as mayor until a successor is duly qualified and elected. 
(Code 1977, § 2-25; Code 1995, § 2-45; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-44)) 
State Law reference— Mayor pro tempore, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-190.  
Sec. 2-40. - Council committees. 
(a)  The city council may establish and use committees to expedite policy making and legislative functions by equally distributing the responsibilities and work load among members of the council. By focusing on specialized policy areas, committee members develop subject matter expertise which aids the vetting of issues and formulation of policy recommendations for the full council's consideration and action. To ensure committees focus on policy decisions which effectively expedite the council's prioritized goals, committee business should be limited to identified goals or to recommendations to amend the goals when necessary. 
(b)  Council committee assignments shall be made immediately after any general election for the council by a majority vote of the mayor and the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 2-20; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-45))  
Sec. 2-41. - Special committees. 
The council may appoint a special committee to assist in or hold a public hearing for the council at any time upon any matter pending before it. Minutes or reports of hearings held by special committees shall be filed with the city clerk as public records. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-46))  
Sec. 2-42. - Removal of committee members. 
The council may remove any member appointed to any city committee for misconduct or nonperformance of duty, after providing written notice to the committee or commission members and opportunity to be heard by the council. For the purposes of this section, three consecutive unexcused absences, determined as unexcused by the respective committee or commission, shall be deemed nonperformance. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-47))  
Sec. 2-43. - Neglect of duties, oppression, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any mayor or councilmember willfully to violate his oath of office, neglect his duties or practice abuse or oppression in office. Upon conviction of any person of a violation of this section, it shall be the duty of the city council to dismiss such offender forthwith and declare his office vacant. 
(Code 1977, § 2-22; Code 1995, § 2-42; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-48))  
Sec. 2-44. - Holding other office while serving on council; involvement in appointment or removal of city employees; giving orders to city employees. 
(a)  Except where authorized by law, no councilmember shall hold any other city office or city employment while serving the term for which he was elected to the council. 
(b)  Neither the council nor any of its members shall in any manner be involved in the appointment or removal of any city administrative officers or employees whom the manager or any of his subordinates are empowered to appoint. 
(c)  Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations, neither the council nor its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the manager except through the manager, and neither the council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-49)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-180.  
Secs. 2-45—2-61. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS 
 
Sec. 2-62. - Quorum; presiding officer. 
(a)  Quorum. A majority of councilmembers serving constitutes a quorum for the conduct of business at any meeting. A member present but disqualified from voting on a question by state law due to a conflict of interest shall be counted for purposes of a quorum. 
(b)  Presiding officer. The mayor or mayor pro tempore shall preside, except when both are absent the members present shall elect a presiding member. 
(Code 1977, § 2-37; Code 1995, § 2-56; Ord. of 3-6-1995, § 1; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-56))  
Sec. 2-63. - Agenda. 
(a)  Under the direction of the city manager, the city manager or his designee shall prepare an agenda for all council meetings. All requests or matters for official action by the city council shall be submitted to the city manager or his designee ten business days preceding regular council meetings. 
(b)  The agenda for regularly scheduled meetings shall then be prepared and emailed, mailed or placed in the hands of the members of the city council a minimum of five days in advance of the council meeting. Nothing shall be brought up in meetings of the city council which is not on the official agenda, except for matters offered or presented by councilmembers or the city manager which are offered or presented in accordance with applicable state laws regarding the addition of items to a council agenda. 
(c)  The mayor or any member of the council may request the city manager place an item on a future agenda by making such a request at a council meeting. 
(d)  Additions to the agenda at a meeting should be reserved solely for situations requiring immediate action to address a critical and unanticipated situation. 
(Code 1977, § 2-40; Code 1995, § 2-57; Ord. of 3-6-1995, § 2; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-57))  
Sec. 2-64. - Meetings of the council; time and place of regular meetings; special meetings; meetings to be open to the public. 
(a)  A meeting is the convening of a quorum of the council to discuss or act upon a matter over which the city council has supervision, control, jurisdiction or advisory power. 
(b)  Regular meetings of the council shall be held at 6:00 p.m. on the first Monday in each month unless changed by majority vote of members present at any regular or special meeting or unless the first Monday conflicts with a city holiday, in which case the council meeting will be held at 6:00 p.m. on the very next Monday following the holiday unless changed by majority vote of members present at any regular or special meeting. 
(c)  To allow the vetting of complex issues, the city council may schedule work sessions. The time and location of work sessions are subject to meeting notice requirements. Work sessions are public meetings. 
(d)  Special meetings of the council may be held on the call of the mayor or a majority of the members. 
(e)  As early as practical but no later than 24 hours prior to the meeting, the city clerk shall give and post notice of the regular or special meeting to all councilmembers, the media and any person requesting notification of public meetings. 
(f)  All regular, special and emergency meetings of the council shall be open to the public. 
(Code 1977, § 2-35; Code 1995, § 2-58; Ord. of 3-6-1995, § 3; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-58))  
Sec. 2-65. - Executive sessions. 
(a)  By majority vote in a public meeting, the council may hold an executive session as permitted by the South Carolina Freedom of Information Act, S.C. Code 1976, § 30-3-10 et seq., at such times and in such places as may be deemed necessary and in the public interest by the council. 
(b)  No vote may be taken in executive session. 
(c)  Minutes of executive sessions shall not be taken unless required by majority vote of the council. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a member of the council or person in attendance to disclose to another person or make public the substance of a matter discussed in executive session. 
(Code 1977, § 2-36; Code 1995, § 2-59; Ord. of 3-6-1995, § 4; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-59)) 
State Law reference— Council meetings, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-25; Freedom of Information Act, S.C. Code 1976, § 30-4-10 et seq.  
Sec. 2-66. - Voting requirements. 
(a)  All actions of the council shall be by majority vote of members present at a public meeting, except as provided in state law, the city's rules of procedure or Robert's Rules of Order. 
(b)  Every member of the council present, including the mayor or presiding member, shall vote by voice or show of hands on every question except when required to refrain from voting by state law. 
(c)  A roll call vote may be required by any member of the council. 
(d)  The vote on every question shall be recorded in the minutes. 
(Code 1995, § 2-60; Ord. of 3-6-1995, § 5; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-60))  
Sec. 2-67. - Council meeting communications. 
(a)  No person other than a member of the council shall take part in the deliberations except by special invitation from the city council nor shall any city staff member communicate, by any means including electronic communication, with any member of the council during the meeting, nor shall any member of the city council communicate with anyone by electronic communication, without authorization of the city council or the city manager. 
(b)  A city councilmember desiring to question the administrative staff shall address questions to the city manager who shall be entitled either to answer the inquiries or to designate a city staff person for that purpose. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-61))  
Sec. 2-68. - Leaving meeting without permission. 
No member of the council shall leave the council chamber during a meeting without the permission of the council except in the case of an emergency. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-62))  
Sec. 2-69. - Decisions on points of order. 
Points of order shall take precedent over all other business and shall be ruled on by the presiding officer without debate, subject to appeal to the council. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-63))  
Sec. 2-70. - Calling councilmembers to order. 
If, in speaking or otherwise, a councilmember violates any rule, the presiding officer shall, and any other councilmember may, call such member to order. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-64))  
Sec. 2-71. - Priority among speakers. 
When two or more councilmembers attempt to speak at the same time, the presiding officer shall decide who is entitled to speak first. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-65))  
Sec. 2-72. - Debate limitations. 
No councilmember shall speak more than three times on the same subject or occupy more than five minutes in making any remarks or address unless the council grants an extension. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-66))  
Sec. 2-73. - Motions. 
When a motion is made and seconded, a member of the city council or the city manager may request that the city clerk restate the motion if the motion was verbal, or a member of the city council or the city manager may request that the city clerk read the motion if the motion was in writing. At the request of the presiding officer or any councilmember, any motion shall be put in writing. 
(Code 1995, § 2-61; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-67))  
Sec. 2-74. - Minutes of meetings. 
The city clerk/treasurer shall keep the minutes of all public meetings of the city council, which shall be a matter of permanent public record. At each council meeting the minutes of the previous meeting shall be presented for approval. Minutes do not constitute the official record of a meeting until approved by the council. Any member of the council desiring to express a position on a matter voted upon by the council and reflected in the minutes may do so by presenting the position in writing to the council no later than the next regular meeting. 
(Code 1977, § 2-38; Code 1995, § 2-62; Ord. of 3-6-1995, § 7; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-68)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-220.  
Sec. 2-75. - Appearance of citizens. 
Any citizen of the municipality may speak at a regular meeting on a matter pertaining to municipal services and operation, except personnel matters, by signing an agenda list maintained by the city clerk/treasurer prior to the meeting stating their name, address, and the subject and purpose for speaking. Each person who gives notice may speak at a time designated by the agenda. Speakers may be limited to no less than a two-minute presentation, and the total time devoted to the appearance of citizens on an agenda may be limited to no more than 20 minutes if a significant number of citizens have registered to speak at the discretion of the mayor. 
(Code 1977, § 2-39; Code 1995, § 2-63; Ord. of 3-6-1995, § 8; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-69))  
Sec. 2-76. - Clerk to attend; duties. 
The city clerk/treasurer is ex officio clerk of the council. The city clerk/treasurer shall attend regular and special meetings, record votes of the council, keep minutes of council meetings, and perform such other duties as may be assigned. 
(Code 1977, § 2-42; Code 1995, § 2-65; Ord. of 3-6-95, § 10; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-70))  
Secs. 2-77—2-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, AND PROCLAMATIONS 
 
Sec. 2-96. - Ordinances required. 
(a)  The council shall act by ordinance in all matters required by law to be done by ordinance, including: 
(1)  Adopt or amend an administrative code or code or ordinances, establish, alter or abolish any municipal department, office or agency; 
(2)  Provide for a fine or other penalty or establish a rule or regulation in which a fine or other penalty is imposed for violation; 
(3)  Adopt budgets and levy taxes, except as otherwise provided with respect to the property tax levied by adoption of a budget, pursuant to public notice; 
(4)  Grant, renew or extend franchises; 
(5)  Authorize the borrowing of money or the issuance of bonds; 
(6)  Annex area to the municipality; 
(7)  Convey or lease or authorize the conveyance or lease of any lands of the municipality; 
(8)  Amend or repeal any ordinance; 
(9)  Set salaries for the city council; 
(10)  Conduct municipal elections; 
(11)  Adopt standard codes; 
(12)  Adopt the council rules of procedure; 
(13)  Adopt procurement ordinances; 
(14)  Adopt comprehensive plans, zoning and land development regulations. 
(b)  In all other matters the council may act either by ordinance or resolution, written or oral, recorded in the minutes. 
(Code 1995, § 2-76; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-76)) 
State Law reference— Acts required to be done by ordinance, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-260.  
Sec. 2-97. - Form of ordinances and resolutions. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing in the form required for final adoption, which shall include: 
(1)  A title briefly describing the content; 
(2)  Findings, reasons or basis for the ordinance, if desired and appropriate; 
(3)  An enacting clause; 
(4)  The provisions of the ordinance, including section numbers if the ordinance is to be codified or amends an existing codified ordinance; 
(5)  Citation of any ordinance repealed; 
(6)  The effective date of the ordinance, to be effective when adopted unless otherwise stated; 
(7)  Space for dates of readings and public hearing, if appropriate; and 
(8)  Space for the signatures of the mayor or presiding member of the council and the city clerk/treasurer attesting notice, if required, and adoption. 
(b)  Written resolutions may be in similar form as approved by the city attorney. 
(Code 1977, § 2-55; Code 1995, § 2-77; Ord. of 3-6-1995, § 13; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-77))  
Sec. 2-98. - Introduction of ordinances. 
(a)  An ordinance may be proposed by any councilmember, by the city manager or by the city attorney. A proposed ordinance shall be referred to the city attorney or the city manager for approval as to form. The city attorney may render assistance in the preparation of notices and ordinances. After an ordinance is in proper form, placed on an agenda for council action, and given notice (if any) required by this Code of Ordinances or by state or federal law, the ordinance shall be held by the municipal clerk for public inspection. 
(b)  An ordinance is considered to be introduced when it appears on the council agenda for a public meeting of the council and its title is read. Unless otherwise specifically required, notice shall consist posting the council agenda in city hall not less than 24 hours prior to the meeting at which it is to be read. If for any reason, the meeting is not held in the council chambers inside the city hall, then a copy of the agenda shall also be posted at the meeting location not less than 24 hours prior to the meeting. 
(Code 1977, § 2-56; Code 1995, § 2-78; Ord. of 3-6-95, § 14; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-78))  
Sec. 2-99. - Enactment of ordinances. 
(a)  An ordinance must be prepared in writing and introduced in the form required for final adoption as required by section 2-97. 
(b)  No ordinance may be adopted until it has been read two times and on separate days with at least six days between each reading. 
(c)  An emergency ordinance may be adopted on one reading without notice or hearing by affirmative vote of two-thirds of members present. An emergency ordinance may not levy taxes or relate to a franchise or service rate, and it expires automatically on the 6lst day following enactment. 
(d)  The introduction and reading of any ordinance shall be by the reading of the title only, unless a full reading is requested by a councilmember. 
(e)  After the introduction of an ordinance, a member of the council may request a public hearing which shall be set for a time determined by the council prior to final adoption of the ordinance. A public hearing may be held on the same date as the final reading. Once a public hearing has been conducted, no further public hearing on the same ordinance shall be held unless approved by a majority of the councilmembers present. 
(f)  Any ordinance may be amended on final reading. 
(g)  Upon final adoption by vote of the council, an ordinance shall be signed by the mayor or presiding member of the council and attested by the city clerk/treasurer, who shall file the original with the minutes in the permanent public records. 
(Code 1977, § 2-57; Code 1995, § 2-79; Ord. of 3-6-1995, § 15; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-79)) 
State Law reference— Introduction and passing of ordinances, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-270; emergency ordinances, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-250(b).  
Sec. 2-100. - Codification of ordinances. 
Each municipal council shall provide by ordinance for the codification and indexing of all ordinances, either typewritten or printed, and the maintenance of ordinances in a current form reflecting all amendments and repeals. All ordinances as codified shall be available for public inspection at reasonable times. S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-290. 
(Code 1995, § 2-82; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-80)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-290.  
Sec. 2-101. - Introduction of resolutions. 
A voice motion is considered to be the introduction of an oral resolution which requires no written record other than a notation in the minutes of the meeting. A resolution proposed in writing shall be introduced in the same manner as an ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 2-58; Code 1995, § 2-80; Ord. of 3-6-95, § 16; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-81))  
Sec. 2-102. - Adoption of resolutions. 
Written or oral resolutions may be adopted on one reading unless a public hearing is set by majority vote of councilmembers present. 
(Code 1977, § 2-58; Code 1995, § 2-81; Ord. of 3-6-95, § 17; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-82))  
Sec. 2-103. - Findings regarding the municipal authority to issue proclamations. 
The city council has determined that the following laws of the state or city are applicable to the government of the city in regards to the issuance of proclamations: 
(1)  The Home Rule Act permits city governments to have authority to make any law or regulation not otherwise in violation of the constitution and general law of this state when the city council determines that such laws or regulations are necessary for the security, general welfare and convenience of the city or preserving health, peace, order and good government. 
(2)  The city government shall determine its own procedural rules and order of business for the administration of city government. 
(3)  All legislative powers of the city and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in a city council, with each member, including the mayor, to have one vote. 
(4)  The powers of the city vested in the council shall be exercised by majority vote of a quorum. For the purpose of transacting council business, four members shall constitute a quorum. 
(5)  Neither the South Carolina Code nor this Code provides for the issuance of proclamations by the city, and proclamations are therefore neither precluded nor provided for currently. 
(6)  It has been the custom and tradition within the city for the mayor to issue proclamations, on request, for special events for local citizens, including, but not limited to, milestone dates such as birthdays and anniversaries. 
(7)  It has likewise been the custom within the city for proclamations dealing with citywide, statewide or nationwide issues to be placed on the agenda for issuance at a public meeting by the mayor, although not voted on by the remainder of the council. 
(8)  The city presently has a legal seal for use on legal documents and administrative documents. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-83)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 5-7-30, 5-7-250(b), 5-13-30, 5-7-160.  
Sec. 2-104. - Types; issuance. 
There shall be two types of proclamations: 
(1)  Legal proclamations. A legal proclamation dealing with citywide, statewide or nationwide issues, which shall be adopted by a majority of a quorum of members of the city council in meeting duly assembled and which shall bear the seal of the city; and 
(2)  Non-legal proclamations. A non-legal proclamation which, upon request, shall be issued by the mayor or, in the mayor's absence, the mayor pro tempore, to recognize milestones, major accomplishments and events for individual residents, couples or groups within the city, which shall bear the seal of the city. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-84))  
Sec. 2-105. - Classification and review of suggested proclamations. 
When a request or suggestion for a proclamation is received by city management, it shall be referred to the city manager for initial classification as either a legal proclamation or a non-legal proclamation. If a request is to issue a non-legal proclamation, then the mayor shall decide whether such request shall be honored in the exercise of reasonable discretion. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-85))  
Sec. 2-106. - Proclamations to be nonpartisan. 
No proclamation issued shall be for political purposes, and proclamations shall be issued only on behalf of the city on a nonpartisan basis. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-86))  
Secs. 2-107—2-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-126—2-148. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MANAGER 
 
Sec. 2-149. - Office of the city manager. 
(a)  The office of city manager is hereby created. 
(b)  The city manager shall be the chief executive officer of the city and the head of the administrative branch of the city government. The city manager shall perform and exercise the duties and responsibilities prescribed by law for this office and such other duties and responsibilities as prescribed by the city council. 
(c)  The city manager may, within the financial limits imposed by the budget approved by the city council, employ one or more assistants to exercise such supervisory responsibilities over departments as may be prescribed by the manager. 
(Code 1977, § 2-79; Code 1995, § 2-121; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-121)) 
State Law reference— Term of employment and compensation fixed by council, manager serves at pleasure of the council, provision for removal of manager, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-13-70; responsibilities of manager, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-13-90.  
Sec. 2-150. - Appointment; qualifications. 
The city manager shall be appointed by majority vote of the city council for an indefinite term. The city manager shall be chosen by the council solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications and character, with special reference to his actual experience in, or his knowledge of, accepted practice in respect to the duties of his office, set forth in this division. At the time of his appointment he need not be a resident of the city or the state, but during his tenure of office he shall reside within the city. A newly appointed city manager must establish residency within six months of the date of hire as set by the city council. The mayor and councilmembers shall be ineligible to hold the office of city manager for a period of one year after the expiration of their respective terms of office. 
(Code 1977, § 2-80; Code 1995, § 2-122; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-122)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 5-13-50, 5-13-70.  
Sec. 2-151. - Removal from office. 
During the term of the city manager, he may be removed from office by a majority vote of the city council. At least 30 days before such removal becomes effective (during which time he may be suspended from office by the council) the manager shall be furnished with a formal statement in the form of a resolution passed by a majority vote of the members of the council, stating the council's intention of removing him and the reasons therefor. If requested in writing by the city manager to do so, within five days after delivery of such statement to the manager, the council shall fix a time for a hearing upon the question of his removal, and the final resolution removing the city manager shall not be adopted until such hearing shall be had. Such hearing shall be held at a council meeting not less than 20 nor more than 30 days after the request is filed. The manager may file a written reply with the council not less than five days before the meeting. The removal shall be stayed pending the decision at the public hearing. The action of the council in removing the city manager shall be final. In the case of the absence, suspension or disability of the city manager, the council may designate a qualified administrative officer of the city to perform the duties of the city manager during such absence, suspension or disability. 
(Code 1977, § 2-81; Code 1995, § 2-123; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-123)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 5-13-70, 5-13-80.  
Sec. 2-152. - Powers and duties. 
The city manager shall be the sole executive officer and head of the administrative branch of the city. He shall be responsible to the city council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city, having general supervision, management and control of all departments of the city, and to these ends he shall have power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service, suspend, demote or remove all officers and employees of the city, except the city attorney and the municipal judge, with the further exception that he may authorize the head of a department or office to appoint, suspend or remove subordinates in such department or office. 
(2)  At least 40 days prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, prepare a budget estimate which he shall transmit to the council, and which shall set forth all proposed expenditures for the administration, operation and maintenance of all departments and agencies of the city for which appropriations are required to be made or taxes levied by the city government; all expenditures for capital projects to be undertaken or executed during the fiscal year; all interest and debt redemption charges during the fiscal year; and the actual or estimated operating deficits from prior fiscal years. In addition thereto, the budget estimate shall set forth the anticipated income and other means of financing the total proposed expenditures of the city government for the fiscal year. The city manager shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after its adoption by the city council. 
(3)  Ensure that at the end of each fiscal year an independent audit of city finances is completed in accordance with general government accounting principles and state law, and submit that report to the city council for their consideration and review in a timely manner. 
(4)  Keep the council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make such recommendations as he may deem desirable. 
(5)  Prepare and submit to the city council regular quarterly reports of the finances of the city. 
(6)  Keep the city council regularly apprised of administrative affairs of the city. 
(7)  Act in an advisory capacity to the city council and to recommend, in writing, from time to time, for adoption, such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient. 
(8)  Recommend to the council and approve of the council's actions to consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under his jurisdiction. 
(9)  Attend all meetings of the city council, unless excused therefrom by the council, except when his removal is under consideration by the council. The manager shall have the privilege of taking part in the discussion of all matters coming before the council. The manager shall be entitled to notice of all meetings, regular and special, of the council. The city council shall not attempt to conduct a meeting at such time and place as to deliberately prevent the city manager from attending. 
(10)  Purchase all materials, supplies or equipment for which funds are provided in the budget in compliance with the city purchasing ordinance, except for emergency replacement of essential equipment. 
(11)  See that city ordinances and state laws are duly enforced. 
(12)  Make investigations into the affairs of the city, or any department or division thereof. Investigate all complaints in relation to all matters concerning the administration of the government of the city, and see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed. 
(13)  Devote his entire time to the discharge of his official duties. 
(14)  Perform such other duties and exercise such other authority as the city council may fix by resolution or ordinance, provided such actions by the city council are not inconsistent with the state statutory authority given by the city manager. 
(Code 1977, § 2-82; Code 1995, § 2-124; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-124))  
Sec. 2-153. - Authority to invest city funds and deposit securities. 
(a)  Delegation. Pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, § 6-5-20, the authority to invest and reinvest money of the city, to sell or exchange securities so purchased, and to deposit such securities for safekeeping is hereby delegated to the city manager. 
(b)  Investment. The city manager is hereby authorized to purchase, at their original sale or after they have been issued, securities which are permissible investments under S.C. Code 1976, § 6-5-10 from money in his custody which is not required for the immediate necessities of the city and as he may deem wise and expedient, and to sell or exchange for other eligible securities and reinvest the proceeds of the securities so purchased. 
(c)  Redemptions. From time to time the city manager shall redeem the securities in which city money has been invested pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, so that the proceeds may be applied to the purposes for which the original purchase money was designated or placed in the city treasury. 
(d)  Reports. The city manager shall make quarterly reports of all such investments to the city council. 
(e)  Deposits. The city manager is hereby authorized to deposit for safekeeping with a trust company or a state or national bank located within this state or with any federal reserve bank or with any state or national bank located in any city designated as a reserve city by the board of governors of the federal reserve system, the securities in which the city money has been invested pursuant to subsection (b) of this section; provided, however, that the city manager shall take from such trust company or bank a receipt for the securities so deposited and shall not be responsible for such securities delivered to and receipted for by such trust company or bank until they are withdrawn therefrom by the city manager. 
(Code 1977, § 2-82.1; Code 1995, § 2-125; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-125))  
Sec. 2-154. - Council not to interfere with appointments or removals. 
Neither the council nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or his removal from, office by the city manager, or by any of his subordinates, or in any manner attempt to dictate the appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administrative service of the city. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager and no councilmember shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately. 
(Code 1977, § 2-83; Code 1995, § 2-126; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-126))  
Sec. 2-155. - Emergency contracts and purchases. 
In case of accidents or other circumstances creating an emergency, the city manager may, with the consent of the city council, award contracts and make purchases for the purpose of repairing damages caused by such accident or meeting such public emergency; but, he shall file promptly with the council a certificate showing such emergency and the necessity for such action, together with an itemized account of all expenditures. 
(Code 1977, § 2-84; Code 1995, § 2-127; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-127))  
Sec. 2-156. - Bond. 
The city manager shall furnish an adequate surety bond in the amount to be approved by the council, such bond to be conditioned on the faithful performance of his duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 2-85; Code 1995, § 2-128; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-128)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-13-60.  
Sec. 2-157. - Compensation. 
The city manager shall receive such compensation as the council shall fix from time to time by ordinance or resolution. 
(Code 1977, § 2-86; Code 1995, § 2-129; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-129)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-13-70.  
Sec. 2-158. - Vacancy. 
Any vacancy in the office of city manager shall be filled when a qualified candidate has been selected and appointed by a majority of the members of the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 2-87; Code 1995, § 2-130; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-130))  
Sec. 2-159. - Employment and officers. 
(a)  General policies; administrative and operation handbook presented for council review. Under the council-manager form of government, the city manager administers the policies set forth by the legislative body. S.C. Code 1976, § 5-14-40 prohibits the legislative body from dealing with employees or interfering with the operation of municipal departments, offices or agencies under the city manager's direction. In section 2-154 the council recognizes the full power of the city manager to appoint and remove any officer or employee within his discretion. For the purpose of establishing general operational and administrative policies, procedures and regulations regarding employment, the city manager may, from time to time within his discretion, promulgate a handbook for employees and may present the handbook for the council's review. If promulgated, the handbook shall reflect the overall legislative policies set forth herein. Because the administrative and operational control of the employment force is solely within the authority of the city manager under the council-manager form of government, the handbook shall not be adopted by ordinance or resolution. It may be reviewed by the legislative body after presented by the manager. 
(b)  Policy of at-will employment; contracts must be in writing endorsed by the manager. The city has a policy that all employment statuses are at will, with the exception of judges under the unified court system. At-will employment recognizes the right of the employee to resign at any time without providing a reason or explanation to the organization. At-will employment also recognizes the right of the city to terminate employment at any time without providing a reason or explanation to the employee. At-will employment is terminable by either party at any time, for any reason or for no reason at all. Nothing in the manager's personnel handbook can change the at-will status of employment as set forth herein or create an expectation of a contract or continued employment on the part of any employee. No one other than the city manager may make any promise or assurance or enter into any contract, whether oral or written, express or implied, that is any way inconsistent with the policy set forth herein. Any promise, assurance or purported contract or agreement shall be invalid and not binding upon the city unless adopted, endorsed or agreed to in writing by the city manager. 
(c)  Policy to remain in force. The city manager may make such rules, regulations and changes to the handbook as are necessary for the effective administration of the human resource system. Employment, promotions, demotions, discipline and training are solely within the scope of the city manager's responsibilities. The city manager may also make exceptions to or waive the procedures included in the handbook as needed to achieve organizational goals, except, however, that the general legislative policies expressed herein shall in no way be impacted. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-131))  
Secs. 2-160—2-186. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - MUNICIPAL CLERK/TREASURER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Appointment and duties of municipal clerk, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-220. 
 
Sec. 2-187. - Establishment of office; appointment, bond. 
There shall be an officer of the city known as the municipal clerk/treasurer, who shall be appointed by the city manager. He shall post bond in such amount as the city council determines. 
(Code 1977, § 2-96; Code 1995, § 2-141; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-141))  
Sec. 2-188. - Deputy—Office. 
There is hereby created the office of deputy municipal clerk/treasurer to be selected by the city manager if, in his determination, such a position is needed. 
(Code 1977, § 2-97; Code 1995, § 2-142; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-142))  
Sec. 2-189. - Deputy—Powers and duties. 
The deputy municipal clerk/treasurer shall act as assistant to the municipal clerk/treasurer, and, in the absence of that official or during a vacancy in that office for any cause, shall have and exercise all the powers and be charged with all the duties of that official. He shall be directly responsible to the municipal clerk/treasurer and shall render all needful assistance to that official in the discharge of his duties. Such deputy clerk/treasurer is empowered to attest the official seal of the city, to certify all official actions of the city council and to keep the official minutes of meetings of the city council. He shall also perform such other duties as may be required of him by the city manager. 
(Code 1977, § 2-98; Code 1995, § 2-143; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-143))  
Sec. 2-190. - Attendance at council meetings; minutes of proceedings. 
The municipal clerk/treasurer shall attend all meetings of the city council, take the minutes thereof and record them in suitable books. He shall keep, in connection with the book recording the proceedings of the city council, an index book in which shall be indexed the subject matter of the important proceedings by the city council, with reference to the pages of the record book where such matters appear. He shall read at each meeting of the city council. The minutes of the previous meeting, unless otherwise ordered, and shall preserve the original memoranda thereof for reference in case of need. 
(Code 1977, § 2-99; Code 1995, § 2-144; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-144))  
Sec. 2-191. - Petitions, etc., addressed to city council. 
The municipal clerk/treasurer shall advise the city manager of all petitions and communications addressed to the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 2-100; Code 1995, § 2-145; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-145))  
Sec. 2-192. - Communication of certain information to city manager. 
The municipal clerk/treasurer shall communicate to the city manager all information he may acquire which may be conducive to the efficiency of the city government and the welfare of its people. 
(Code 1977, § 2-101; Code 1995, § 2-146; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-146))  
Sec. 2-193. - Records. 
Except as otherwise provided, the municipal clerk/treasurer shall have charge of and be responsible for the preservation of all papers, records and documents of every description belonging to the city, and shall arrange and file all such papers in such manner as will facilitate access to them. 
(Code 1977, § 2-102; Code 1995, § 2-147; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-147))  
Sec. 2-194. - Issuance of notices. 
The municipal clerk/treasurer shall be responsible for the issuance of all notices, personal and general, which the laws, orders and interest of the city require in the administration of its government. 
(Code 1977, § 2-103; Code 1995, § 2-148; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-148))  
Sec. 2-195. - Removal of city papers. 
No original paper or document belonging to or in possession of the city shall be taken out of the custody of the municipal clerk/treasurer except with his written consent evidenced upon a receipt thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 2-104; Code 1995, § 2-149; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-149))  
Sec. 2-196. - Collection of revenue. 
It shall be the duty of the municipal clerk/treasurer to collect taxes levied by the city council according to the ordinances thereof for the support of the city government, all sums charged for licenses imposed by the city council for the privilege of conducting business within the city or otherwise, all sums realized under assessments levied by the city council for defraying the expenses of paving or otherwise improving the streets or sidewalks of the city. In general, he shall collect and receive the entire revenue of the city derived from any and all sources whatsoever. 
(Code 1977, § 2-105; Code 1995, § 2-150; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-150))  
Sec. 2-197. - Responsibility for money collected; deposits and depositories. 
After collection of money as provided in section 2-196, the municipal clerk/treasurer shall be responsible to the city for all sums so coming into his possession. He shall deposit to the credit of the city, in the bank designated by the city council as a city depository, all money received by him and belonging to the city on the same day he receives it or on the following day, unless such following day is a Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event he shall deposit such money upon the first day thereafter which is not a Sunday or a legal holiday. He shall keep official bankbooks wherein shall be entered, by the proper officers of the bank in which such deposits are made, acknowledgments of such deposits with the dates thereof. Such bankbooks shall be balanced at least once each month, and shall always be open to the inspection of the mayor, councilmembers or the city manager. 
(Code 1977, § 2-106; Code 1995, § 2-151; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-151))  
Sec. 2-198. - Disbursements generally. 
The municipal clerk/treasurer shall draw and sign all checks or drafts upon the funds of the city deposited in banks to its credit, preparatory to the official signature of the mayor and as approved by the city manager. No money on deposit in any bank to the credit of the city shall be withdrawn from such bank or disbursed otherwise than through checks thus drawn and signed by the municipal clerk/treasurer and the mayor; provided, however, that in lieu of the actual signing of such checks or drafts by the municipal clerk/treasurer and mayor, such signatures may be a facsimile signature reproduced by a machine. 
(Code 1977, § 2-107; Code 1995, § 2-152; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-152))  
Sec. 2-199. - Record of checks; paid vouchers. 
The check forms of the municipal clerk/treasurer shall show the dates, numbers and amounts of all checks drawn by him on funds on deposit to the credit of the city in the city depository, with the names of the persons in whose favor checks are drawn and for what purpose and to which department' such checks shall respectively be chargeable. The original accounts or orders and carbon copy of the checks shall all be filed together and constitute the paid voucher. 
(Code 1977, § 2-108; Code 1995, § 2-153; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-153))  
Sec. 2-200. - Books for recording financial transactions. 
The municipal clerk/treasurer shall keep a regular set of official books in which he shall enter all of the city's financial transactions in accordance with approved municipal accounting practices. Among such official books shall be kept a book in which shall be set forth the form, the condition and the amounts of the debts owed by the city, the dates when such debts were contracted and the purposes for which they were incurred, and the various rates of interest borne thereby and the respective times at which such debts shall become due. 
(Code 1977, § 2-109; Code 1995, § 2-154; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-154))  
Sec. 2-201. - Attestation of deeds, agreements, etc., generally. 
The municipal clerk/treasurer shall attest all deeds to real property sold by the city, including lots in the city cemeteries, and all agreements and other obligations issued or authorized by the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 2-111; Code 1995, § 2-156; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-156))  
Sec. 2-202. - Attestation of executions. 
The municipal clerk/treasurer shall attest all executions issued by authority of the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 2-112; Code 1995, § 2-157; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-157))  
Sec. 2-203. - Certificate of taxes due. 
The municipal clerk/treasurer shall, upon the demand of any person, issue free of charge a certificate showing the amount of taxes charged by the city against any person, together with a description of the property covered thereby. 
(Code 1977, § 2-113; Code 1995, § 2-158; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-158))  
Sec. 2-204. - Additional duties. 
The municipal clerk/treasurer shall perform all other duties which are now or may hereafter be imposed upon the municipal clerk/treasurer by the laws, ordinances or resolutions of the city or by the direction of the city manager. 
(Code 1977, § 2-114; Code 1995, § 2-159; Ord. of 11-2-2015, § 1(2-159))  
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
(RESERVED)  
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Animals, livestock and poultry, S.C. Code 1976, title 47; municipal authority regarding care and control of animals, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-3-20; municipal powers not limited by state law, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-3-70; regulation of dangerous animals, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-3-710 et seq.; rabies control. S.C. Code 1976, § 47-5-10 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Animal care. 
(a)  No owner or person having the charge or custody of any animal shall fail to provide sufficient wholesome food; clean, fresh water; proper shelter and protection from the weather; veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering; and humane treatment. An owner, possessor or person having charge or custody of any animal shall at all times maintain and clean shelter and living area free of accumulated waste and debris so that the animal shall be able to walk, move about or lie down freely without coming into contact with any waste or debris. 
(b)  Proper shelter is defined as including a structure appropriately sized for the animal to stand or lie in a normal manner. The structure must adequately protect the animal from harsh weather and at minimum shall have four sides, a watertight roof and an opening for ingress and egress. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any responsible party to tether an animal while outdoors, except when all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The animal is over the age of six months. 
(2)  The animal is not a female currently in heat cycle. 
(3)  The tether is connected to the animal with a buckle type collar or a body harness made of nylon or leather. "Slip" or choker style chains shall be prohibited. 
(4)  The tether has the following properties: 
a.  A minimum 12-foot length. 
b.  A swivel-type termination at both ends. 
c.  Is not made of chain. 
d.  Total weight does not exceed ten percent of the animal's body weight. 
e.  Is fabricated of a material that prevents tangles. 
(5)  The animal is not tethered outside during extreme weather including, but not limited to, periods during which a heat advisory has been issued, temperatures below 36 degrees Fahrenheit, snow, hail, tornadoes, thunderstorms, tropical storms or hurricanes. 
(6)  The animal is tethered as to prevent injury, entanglement or accidental strangulation. 
(7)  The animal has access to water, food and shelter at all times. 
(8)  The animal is not tethered to any stationary object that would impede free movement. 
(9)  The animal is not sick or injured in any manner. 
(10)  The animal is not tethered in proximity to any other tethered animal that would allow for entanglement. 
(11)  The animal is not tethered to any property with an unoccupied dwelling, including, but not limited to, abandoned or condemned buildings or lots. 
(12)  Any pulley, running line or trolley system to which a tether is attached shall be no less than 15 feet in length and no more than seven feet above the ground. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-2. - Keeping of poultry. 
(a)  The keeping of chickens or other domesticated foul shall be in compliance with the following, in addition to any zoning and/or building regulations that may be applicable to the construction of coops and/or runs. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow any domesticated fowl to run at large within the corporate limits of the city. It shall be lawful is keep poultry flocks of any size in A-R zones. 
(2)  It shall be lawful for any person to keep, permit, or allow chickens or any domesticated fowl within the corporate limits of the city in zones R-1, R-2, R-3, and RMH, under the following terms and conditions: 
a.  No more than four hens shall be allowed for each single-family dwelling. 
b.  Such hens or other allowable domesticated fowl must be confined in a coop that provides a minimum of two square feet area for each hen connected to a run or other enclosed area that provides at least eight square feet of ground area for each hen. 
c.  Runs must be fully enclosed and well drained so that there is no accumulation of excrement and coops and runs shall be cleaned regularly with all excrement placed in a fly-proof container unless disposed of in accordance with other local, state, or federal health regulations. 
d.  The chicken coop and run must be a minimum of 25 feet from any property line and 40 feet from any neighboring residential structure. Coops and runs may not be placed in front or side yards in any residential zoning district. 
e.  No chickens or domesticated fowl will be allowed in multifamily complexes, including, but not limited to, duplexes. 
f.  No roosters shall be allowed. 
g.  There shall be no outside slaughtering of birds, chickens, or domesticated fowl. 
h.  Failure to confine hens or other domesticated fowl allowed by this chapter, failure to maintain the coop and/or run, or failure to properly manage and dispose of the droppings and excretions of chickens or other allowable domesticated fowl in compliance with this section shall be unlawful. 
(b)  The above subsections are not intended to apply to ducks, geese, or migratory fowl utilizing city parks or other large open spaces, nor to indoor birds kept as pets, such as, but not limited to, parrots or parakeets, nor to the lawful transportation of fowl through the corporate limits of the city. Neither shall it apply to the keeping of poultry or domesticated fowl in the A-R zone. 
(Code 1977, § 4-2; Code 1995, § 10-2; Ord. of 11-12-2012; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-3. - Disposal of pet waste. 
The city has established requirements for the proper disposal of pet solid waste in the city, so as to protect health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply. 
(1)  Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Immediate means that the pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay. 
Owner/keeper means any person who shall possess, maintain, house, or harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the owner of such pet. 
Person means any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal jurisdiction. 
Pet means a domesticated animal kept for amusement or companionship. 
Pet solid waste means waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet; excrement. 
Proper disposal means placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly emptied by the city or other refuse collector; or disposal into a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and disposal. 
(2)  All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by that person. 
(3)  The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the police department and code enforcement officers. 
(4)  Any person who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be charged with a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a maximum fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, as outlined in section 1-14. 
(Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1; Ord of 9-22-2018, § 3B)  
Sec. 10-4. - Disposal of dead animals or fowl. 
(a)  Every person in whose possession any animal, fowl or bird of any kind shall die within the city shall, immediately upon the death of such animal, contact the city health officer for proper disposal of the body of the same. 
(b)  Any person neglecting to properly dispose of such dead animal, fowl or bird as directed by the city health officer within eight hours after its death shall, on conviction, be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-14. If any person shall permit any such dead animal or bird to remain in the city longer than eight hours after its death, the city health officer shall cause the animal or bird to be removed at the expense of such person, who shall forthwith repay to the city the amount of such expenses, and such amount may be recovered from such person on behalf of the city as debts of like amounts are now recovered by law. It shall be unlawful to convey any dead animal from the city unless the same is entirely covered so that no portion thereof is visible. Such dead animal shall not be carried through the more prominent streets of the city, but shall be conveyed over the less frequented streets, lanes and alleys. 
(Code 1977, § 4-4; Code 1995, § 10-4; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1) 
State Law reference— Burying or burning dead animals, S.C. Code 1976, § 44-29-30.  
Sec. 10-5. - Destruction of vicious animals. 
Whenever any animal is adjudged by the municipal court to be vicious, it shall be the duty of the animal control officer or his agent to euthanize the animal in a humane manner. 
(Code 1977, § 4-5; Code 1995, § 10-5; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-6. - Keeping swine constitutes nuisance. 
The keeping of any hog or pig within the corporate limits of the city creates noxious odors and atmospheric pollution or contamination offensive to the senses and obnoxious to the general welfare and comfort of the community; and such keeping of hogs or pigs is, therefore, hereby declared a violation of this Code and a public and private nuisance, per se. This section does not apply in agricultural districts within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 4-6; Code 1995, § 10-6; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-7. - Maintenance of private stables. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to erect any private stable within 60 feet of any residence or place of business, or to house, keep or maintain any animal that is permitted to be kept within the city limits, in any private stable within 60 feet of any residence or place of business, or to permit any animal to have the run of or to be kept in any place, lot or enclosure when such runway, place, lot or enclosure, or any part thereof, is within 30 feet of any residence or place of business, without the consent of both the owner and occupant of such residence or place of business. All such stables, runways, places, lots or enclosures shall comply with the city zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Should such consent be refused, the person desiring to erect or use such private stable or premises may apply to the city council and it may grant or refuse its permission to erect or use such private stable or premises. In these cases, the applicant shall file in the office of the city clerk/treasurer, at least three weeks prior to the date of the council meeting at which the applicant proposes to apply for such permission, a sworn petition showing the location of the private stable and premises in question, the character of the building to be used as such stable, and the number of horses and/or other animals to be kept therein. Such applicants shall also, at least three weeks prior to the meeting of the council for such permission, serve upon the person refusing his consent to the erection or use of such private stable, place, lot or enclosure a written notice of his intention to apply to the city council for such permission, stating the time when the application will be made to the city council. 
(c)  In considering and passing upon the question of granting or refusing such permit, regard shall be had by the city council to the proximity of the proposed place, lot or enclosure to places of human habitation or uses, densely populated neighborhoods, to the matter of protection against flies, to the prevention of danger to pedestrians from animals crossing sidewalks, to the proper safeguarding of the health of the community, and to the question of whether the proposed stable is so near to churches, schools, hospitals, or other institutions as to prove injurious to them. 
(Code 1977, § 4-7; Code 1995, § 10-7; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-8. - Unlawful to abandon animals. 
No person shall abandon or set at large to roam free any animal without providing for its humane care. Doing so shall be a violation of this Code punishable as specified in section 1-14 and each animal shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Secs. 10-9—10-34. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LIVESTOCK 
 
Sec. 10-35. - Running at large. 
It is unlawful for any cow, hog, goat, sheep, horse or mule to be housed or maintained within the corporate limits of the city, except in agricultural zoned areas. 
(Code 1977, § 4-19; Code 1995, § 10-31; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-36. - Impoundment. 
Any cow, hog, goat, sheep, horse or mule found running at large within the corporate limits of the city shall be seized and impounded in some suitable enclosure. 
(Code 1977, § 4-20; Code 1995, § 10-32; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-37. - Redemption of impounded animals. 
Upon the impounding of any cow, hog, sheep, goat, horse, or mule pursuant to section 10-36, if the owner thereof shall appear within five days thereafter and prove his rights to the possession of the animal, the same shall be delivered to him on payment of a scheduled charge for each and every cow, horse, mule, sheep, hog or goat so found running at large and the expense incurred thereon. 
(Code 1977, § 4-21; Code 1995, § 10-33; Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 4; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-38. - Disposal of unredeemed impounded animals. 
If no owner appears within the time provided in section 10-37 to redeem stock impounded pursuant to section 10-36 or, appearing, fails or refuses to pay the charge imposed by section 10-37, then it shall be the duty of the city manager or his designee to expose such stock to public sale, giving five days' notice by posted notice in the city hall or municipal center and at the site of the proposed sale, and such cow, hog, horse, mule, sheep or goat shall be sold for the satisfaction of such charge. The excess of such sale, if any, after paying the charge and the actual expense incurred, shall be placed to the credit of the city council to be given and delivered to the owner of the property sold upon the same being demanded within 15 days. 
(Code 1977, § 4-22; Code 1995, § 10-34; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-39. - Unauthorized removal of impounded animal. 
If any person releases or takes away without proper authority any cow, horse, mule, hog, sheep or goat which has been impounded pursuant to section 10-36, such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1977, § 4-23; Code 1995, § 10-35; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-40. - Scheduled charges. 
The city council shall establish by resolution periodically, as it deems necessary, a schedule setting out charges for redemption of impounded animals by the city. 
(Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 5; Code 1995, § 10-36; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Secs. 10-41—10-68. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DOGS AND CATS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-69. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal control officer means any police officer, animal control officer, employee of the city or agent of the city acting in the capacity of animal control officer, who is duly appointed to execute the requirements of this chapter. 
At large means off the premises of the owner and not under control of the owner and/or another person. 
Restraint means keeping an animal on the premises of its owner and fenced, chained, penned or leashed, or accompanied by a person, and under the person's control. 
(Code 1977, § 4-35; Code 1995, § 10-56; Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 6; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-70. - Dogs running at large. 
No owner or keeper of any dog shall permit such dog to run at large or unrestrained at any time. All dogs shall be kept under restraint at all times. 
(Code 1977, § 4-36; Code 1995, § 10-57; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-71. - Cats to be controlled by owners. 
No owner of any cat shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his cat or permit such cat to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. Trespassing by such cat upon public or private property in such a manner as to damage the same or to turn over garbage receptacles and/or litter on the property of others shall be deemed a nuisance. 
(Code 1977, § 4-8; Code 1995, § 10-58; Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 3; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-72. - Owner's duty to exercise control over dog. 
No owner shall fail to exercise proper care and control of his dog or permit such dog to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. Excessive, continuous or untimely barking, molesting pedestrians, garbage collectors or other persons, chasing vehicles, habitually attacking other domestic animals, and trespassing on public or private property in such manner as to damage the same shall be deemed a nuisance. 
(Code 1977, § 4-38; Code 1995, § 10-60; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-73. - Rabies inoculation; tag. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor, maintain or have possession in the city of any dog or cat over four months old unless such dog or cat has been inoculated against rabies in the preceding 12 months by a duly-licensed veterinarian or person authorized to administer the vaccine. 
(b)  At the time a dog or cat is inoculated against rabies, the owner shall obtain from the veterinarian a metal tag to be attached to the dog's or cat's collar. The tag shall bear an inscription showing that such dog or cat has been inoculated against rabies and the year of such inoculation. The collar and this tag shall, at all times, be worn by the dog or cat. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the police department or other designated agent of the city to take up and turn over to the humane society or designated city animal shelter all dogs and cats found at large on the streets of the city which do not have attached to their collar a metal tag as required by this section and which tag is valid on the dog or cat of impounding. If the humane society shelter or designated city animal shelter is filled to capacity, such dogs and cats will be turned over to a veterinarian hospital to be disposed of in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1977, § 4-39; Code 1995, § 10-61; Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 7; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-74. - Violations, penalties. 
Any owner found violating any provision of this article or any person who interferes with, hinders, molests or abuses any police officer or animal control officer in the enforcement of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-14 for such offense. 
(Code 1977, § 4-40; Code 1995, § 10-62; Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 8; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Secs. 10-75—10-91. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 10-92. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or maintain within the city any dog over four months of age unless a license has been obtained from the city. 
(Code 1977, § 4-47; Code 1995, § 10-76; Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 9; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-93. - Harborer deemed owner. 
Any person who shall keep or harbor any dog of licensing age for a period of ten days or more shall, for the purpose of this division, be deemed to be the owner of the dog so kept and harbored. Any dog over four months old shall be of licensing age. 
(Code 1977, § 4-48; Code 1995, § 10-77; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-94. - Application. 
(a)  The owner of a dog shall state at the time the application is made for the license required by this division, and upon printed forms provided for such purpose, his name and address and the name, breed, color, age and sex of each dog owned or kept by him. 
(b)  The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog which attains licensing age shall make application for a license and registration tag for such dog within ten days after such acquisition or age attainment. The fee shall not be prorated for a portion of a year. 
(Code 1977, § 4-49; Code 1995, § 10-78; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-95. - Issuance; tags; fees. 
Upon payment of a scheduled license fee, together with proof of rabies inoculation, the city shall issue to the owner a license certificate and a metallic tag for each dog so licensed. Every owner shall be required to provide each dog with a collar to which the tag must be affixed and shall see that the collar and tag are constantly worn. In case a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate will be issued by the clerk upon presentation of a receipt showing payment of the scheduled license fee and the payment for such duplicate. Dog tags shall not be transferrable from one dog to another and no refunds shall be made on any dog license because of death of the dog or owner leaving the city. 
(Code 1977, § 4-50; Code 1995, § 10-79; Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 10; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-96. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this division shall not be intended to apply to dogs whose owners are nonresidents temporarily within the city, nor to dogs brought into the city for the purpose of participating in any dog show, nor to seeing-eye dogs properly trained to assist blind persons when such dogs are actually being used by the blind persons for the purposes of aiding them for going from place to place. Any person 65 years of age or older or any disabled person is entitled to receive at a reduced fee a license for one dog upon payment as provided in section 10-95. 
(Code 1977, § 4-52; Code 1995, § 10-80; Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 11; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-97. - Schedule of license fees. 
The city council shall by resolution periodically, as it deems necessary, establish a schedule setting out license fees for dogs within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 10-81; Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 12; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Secs. 10-98—10-122. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - IMPOUNDMENT 
 
Sec. 10-123. - Impoundment. 
(a)  The animal control officer shall impound an animal if it is a stray and: 
(1)  If it is abandoned, feral, or suffering from a lack of food, water, shelter or other care such that immediate action is required. 
(2)  He personally observes acts of nuisance or dangerousness. 
(3)  Upon a written and sworn complaint alleging facts showing the animal to be a nuisance or dangerous. 
(b)  The animal control officer shall impound any non-stray animal and may seize same even if the animal is in the possession and care of the owner or upon his property: 
(1)  Upon personal observation of inhumane treatment including specifically lack of sufficient food, water and shelter such that immediate action is required or upon the owner's having failed to remedy such conditions after notice and opportunity to do so. 
(2)  Upon personal observation or sworn affidavit setting forth facts showing good cause to believe that a dangerous animal is being permitted to run free. 
(Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-124. - Notification. 
(a)  The animal control officer shall notify the owner of the impoundment, as soon as possible, in person or by telephone, or by mail, or by written notice posted at the residence of the owner and specifying: 
(1)  The identification of the animal. 
(2)  When and why the animal was impounded. 
(3)  The last day for the owner to claim the animal and any fees that must be paid. 
(4)  Any conditions the owner must comply with to bring himself into compliance with this division, and any penalties that the animal control officer intends to levy upon the owner. 
(5)  Informing the owner that if the owner fails to appear to recover his animal within five working days, excluding weekends and holidays, he shall be deemed to have abandoned it to the city. The owner may not be required to pay any costs of keeping the animal if a magistrate's hearing is scheduled and the magistrate should determine that the owner is not guilty of a violation of this division. 
(b)  In the case of animals presumed abandoned or feral, because they do not display rabies or ID tags, the animal control officer is not required to give notice but may take reasonable steps to determine and notify the owner. 
(Code 1977, § 4-62; Code 1995, § 10-93; Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 14; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-125. - Holding period. 
Any animal unclaimed within five working days, excluding weekends and holidays, after the giving of the notice or the service of the notice called for by section 10-124 or five working days after the impoundment of any presumed abandoned/feral animal is deemed abandoned, and the property of the county, and may be offered for adoption or disposed of humanely. 
(Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-126. - Redemption. 
Any owner claiming an impounded animal shall be required to pay such amount as established by the county council acting as the city's agent, plus the reasonable expense of keeping the animal and the rabies inoculation fee if required. Additionally, the owner shall be required to pay any additional fees and surcharges as set by the city council in the manner prescribed in section 10-128. 
(Code 1977, § 4-64; Code 1995, § 10-94; Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 16; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-127. - Liability. 
(a)  The city, nor its agent, shall not be held liable for accidents, disease, or treatment of animals while confined in the county animal shelter and shall be released from all responsibilities to a new owner or former owner when an animal is adopted or disposed of humanely as specified in section 10-125. 
(b)  The city or an agent authorized by the city is authorized to destroy any dangerous animal if this is a necessary for the protection of any person or non-provoking domestic animal. Animals which present a threat to the community because of disease, or in great pain due to illness or injury, may be immediately destroyed. 
(Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-3-540.  
Sec. 10-128. - Scheduled fees and charges. 
The city council shall by resolution periodically, as it deems necessary, establish a schedule setting out fees and charges for redemption of impounded dogs and cats by the city. 
(Code 1995, § 10-96; Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 18; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Secs. 10-129—10-154. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RABIES CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Rabies Control Act, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-5-10 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-155. - Definition. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means any living creature, domestic or wild. 
(Code 1977, § 4-77; Code 1995, § 10-116; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-156. - Quarantine of biting animal. 
Any animal which bites or scratches a person shall be immediately reported to the city health officer and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at the direction of the city health officer for a period of not less than ten days and shall not be released from such quarantine except by written permission of the city health officer or under his direction. At the discretion of the city health officer, such quarantine may be on the premises of the owner, at the shelter designated as the city pound, or, at the owner's option and expense, in a veterinary hospital of his choice. In the case of stray animals, or in the case of animals whose ownership is not known, such quarantine shall be at the shelter designated as the city pound. 
(Code 1977, § 4-78; Code 1995, § 10-117; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-157. - Duty of owner to surrender animal; redemption. 
The owner, upon demand by the city health officer, shall forthwith surrender any animal which has bitten a human, or which is suspected as having been exposed to rabies, for supervised quarantine, the expense of which shall be borne by the owner. The animal may be reclaimed by the owner if it is adjudged free of rabies upon payment of fees determined therefor by the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1977, § 4-79; Code 1995, § 10-118; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-158. - Disposition of dead rabid animal. 
When rabies has been diagnosed in an animal under quarantine or rabies is suspected by a licensed veterinarian and the animal dies while under such observation, the city health officer shall immediately send the head of such animal to the state health department for pathological examination and shall notify the proper public health officer of reports of human contacts and the diagnosis. 
(Code 1977, § 4-80; Code 1995, § 10-119; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-159. - Destruction or isolation of bitten animals. 
Animals bitten by a known rabid animal shall be immediately destroyed, or if the owner is unwilling to destroy the exposed animal, strict isolation of the animal in a kennel designated by the city health officer for six months shall be enforced. If the animal has been previously vaccinated, within time limits established by the public health service based on the kind of vaccination used, revaccination and restrain (leashing and confinement) shall be carried out for 30 days. 
(Code 1977, § 4-81; Code 1995, § 10-120; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-160. - Area-wide quarantine—When imposed. 
When the report indicates a positive diagnosis of rabies, the city health officer may order an area-wide quarantine for a period of 60 days, and upon the invoking of such quarantine, no pet animal shall be taken into the streets or permitted to be in the streets during such period of quarantine. During such quarantine, no animal may be taken or shipped from the city without permission of the city health officer. 
(Code 1977, § 4-82; Code 1995, § 10-121; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-161. - Area-wide quarantine—Redemption of strays restricted. 
No animal which has been impounded by reason of its being a stray, unclaimed by its owner, shall be allowed to be adopted from any animal shelter during the period of rabies emergency quarantine except by special authorization of the city health officer. 
(Code 1977, § 4-83; Code 1995, § 10-122; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-162. - Area-wide quarantine—Extension. 
If there are additional cases of rabies occurring during the period of areawide quarantine, the period of quarantine may be extended for an additional period of time. 
(Code 1977, § 4-84; Code 1995, § 10-123; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-163. - Unauthorized destruction or removal of rabid animals. 
No person shall kill or cause to be killed any rabid animal or any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies or any animal biting a human, except as herein provided, nor remove such animal from the city limits without written permission from the city health officer. 
(Code 1977, § 4-85; Code 1995, § 10-124; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-164. - Surrender of carcass. 
The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall upon demand be surrendered to the city health officer. 
(Code 1977, § 4-86; Code 1995, § 10-125; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-165. - Failure to obey city health officer. 
No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction as required when demand is made therefor by the city health officer. 
(Code 1977, § 4-87; Code 1995, § 10-126; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-166. - Report of bite cases. 
It shall be the duty of every physician or other medical practitioner to report to the city health officer the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control. 
(Code 1977, § 4-88; Code 1995, § 10-127; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-167. - Reports of suspect cases. 
(a)  It is the duty of each owner or person having control of any dog or cat, when and where such dog or cat is suspected of being affected with rabies, to report such fact to the municipal authorities at once, whereupon the treatment or disposition of such dog or cat shall be determined and made by the municipal authorities. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the city health officer any animal considered by him to be a rabies suspect. 
(Code 1977, § 4-89; Code 1995, § 10-128; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Sec. 10-168. - Exemptions. 
Hospitals, clinics and other premises operated by licensed veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals are exempt from the provisions of this article, except where expressly stated. 
(Code 1977, § 4-90; Code 1995, § 10-129; Ord. of 10-3-2016, § 1)  
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Building codes and fire prevention, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-25-10 et seq.; building, housing, electrical, plumbing and gas codes, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-9-10 et seq.; mandamus and injunctive relief for violation of code or regulation, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-9-80; codes applicable to building inspections, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-9-130; building codes modification procedure, S.C. Code Reg. 8-240; qualifications for building codes amendments, S.C. Code Reg. 8-245; local adoption of building codes, S.C. Code Reg. 8-265; dwellings unfit for human habitation, S.C. Code 1976, § 31-15-10 et seq.; municipality may not enforce national building code provisions regulating farm structures, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-9-65(B); municipal responsibility to enforce barrier-free building design standards, S.C. Code Reg. 19-400.3(B). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Fire limits. 
Fire limits shall be within the city corporate limits. 
(Code 1977, § 5-1; Code 1995, § 14-1) 
State Law reference— Municipalities required to establish fire limits, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-25-1110.  
Sec. 14-2. - Display of street address numbers. 
All homes and buildings in the city shall have street address numbers displayed in such a fashion as to be easily seen from the street by emergency response vehicles. 
(Code 1995, § 14-2; Ord. of 12-3-1990(2))  
Sec. 14-3. - Duties of enforcing officer. 
The building inspector-zoning administrator, or other designated official, is hereby authorized and empowered to: 
(1)  Enforce all ordinances relating to the construction, equipment, management and condition of all property within the city. 
(2)  Supervise the construction or reconstruction of all buildings. 
(Code 1977, § 5-4; Code 1995, § 14-3)  
Sec. 14-4. - Violations; penalties. 
Any and all persons who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order or regulation made hereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved hereunder, or any certificate or permit issued hereunder, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be punished as provided in section 1-14. The imposition of one penalty for any violation of this chapter shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The application of a penalty under section 1-14 shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1977, § 5-5; Code 1995, § 14-4)  
Secs. 14-5—14-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to adopt technical codes by reference, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-9-60. 
 
Sec. 14-27. - Technical codes adopted. 
The city shall enforce all building and technical codes established as mandatory by the state building codes council. The city also adopts by reference the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code, the 2015 International Existing Building Code, the 2015 International Performance Code, and the 2015 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code.  
Sec. 14-28. - Location, placement, use of wires and poles restricted. 
(a)  The director of the public works department, under the supervision of the city manager, is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to regulate and determine the placing of electric wires or other appliances for electric light, heat or power in the city and to cause all such wires or appliances to be so placed, constructed and guarded as not to cause fires or accidents, endangering life or property. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the director of public works to direct the placing of poles and wires in the streets, alleys and public places of the city so that the same shall cause as little obstruction as possible, either to public travel of such thoroughfares or to the private use and enjoyment of adjacent property. It shall be also his duty, and he shall have authority, to compel the removal of unsafe or superfluous poles. Any person or company owning and using any such poles who shall fail or refuse, after five days' notice from the director of public works, to remove any pole deemed by him unsuitable, unsafe or improperly located, or the location of which he shall require to be changed, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-14. The erection or use of any poles rejected or condemned by the director of public works shall subject the offender, upon conviction, to a like penalty. 
(c)  The director of public works shall cause all wires, except telephone wires, that have not been used for 30 days and which are known as dead wires to be removed at once at the expense of the owners of such wires. All dead wires of telephone companies shall be detached from the buildings to which they have been connected. 
(d)  On any pole of any electric light, power, street railway, telephone or telegraph company used jointly by two or more such companies, each company shall be allotted a special zone, and shall confine its wires to that zone. Spaces shall be measured from the tops of poles downward, and a suitable zone on every pole shall at all times be reserved for the free use of the city in stringing its fire alarm or police telegraph wires. 
(Code 1977, § 8-2; Code 1995, § 14-58)  
Sec. 14-29. - Reports by building inspector. 
The building inspector shall keep a full and complete daily record of all work done, permits and licenses issued, examinations made, and other official work performed, as required by this article and shall make a report thereof to the city manager as he requires. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3; Code 1995, § 14-59)  
Sec. 14-30. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, for which no specific penalty has been provided, or shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any order given in pursuance of and by the authority of this article and the rules embraced herein shall, upon conviction, be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4; Code 1995, § 14-60)  
Secs. 14-31—14-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - GAS 
 
Sec. 14-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gasfitter, apprentice, means any person who, as his principal occupation, is engaged in learning and assisting in the installation of gasfitting and works directly under the supervision of a person who holds a certificate of competency. 
Inspector or gas inspector means the official or employee of the city charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this article and of the building code of the city and particularly the provisions thereof relating to gas installation. 
Master gasfitter means a person who has an established place of business and who, either as principal or as the representative of any person, satisfies the gasfitters examining board that he is competent and qualifies in connection with the construction, altering or doing other work in connection with natural gas systems, or who for himself or for any person, undertakes to and does construct, alter or make any repairs or additions to a system of gas piping, venting and installation of all gas equipment, appurtenances and appliances, together with all safety and other controls of same. 
Minor repairs and connections mean minor adjustments to gas appliances and equipment which do not necessitate the installation (except connections as hereinafter provided), removal or relocation of an appliance or the installation of any pipe. The term "minor repairs and connections'' does not include any adjustments to controls which are set at the factory to permanent operation, except gas cooking stoves; provided, however, that dealers and distributors who have proved to the satisfaction of the gasfitters examining board that they are duly recognized and qualified factory representatives of equipment approved by the American Gas Association and who have been certified as such by the gasfitters examining board, may replace, repair or adjust such equipment as is handled by the particular manufacturer he represents. 
(Code 1977, § 11-1; Code 1995, § 14-96)  
Sec. 14-52. - Excavation in streets. 
(a)  A permit is required to be taken out for each excavation in a public street or alley before the work is commenced. Work under such permit is to be commenced within 48 hours after the issuance of same; otherwise, the permit shall become void. 
(b)  Such permits shall be kept at the place of excavation while the work is being done and exhibited whenever called for by any person having authority to examine the same. 
(c)  No more than one-half of such street or alley shall be opened or obstructed at one time; and no tunneling will be allowed. No authorized underground construction shall be injured or interfered with, and all such construction shall be subject to the provisions of these regulations. All portions of the street excavated shall be put in as good condition as before the excavation was made. The trench shall be filled up and thoroughly rammed, and puddled if necessary, within 48 hours after making the connection or repairs, the ramming to be done in six-inch layers, and all rubbish or other foreign material shall be removed within the time designated for the completion of the work, after which the permit shall become void and of no effect. No excavation will begin without prior location of underground utilities through the utilities location service. 
(d)  During the execution of the work, the trench shall be suitably guarded during the day and a sign placed thereon with the name of the person in charge of the work, and it shall be barricaded after dark every night and so maintained as to prevent accidents to persons or animals passing along the streets or alleys. The city shall be protected and saved harmless from the consequences of any injury to any person or property due to the execution of the permit issued by the city to any person to excavate in any public street or alley. All traffic control devices and procedures shall be in compliance with the state department of transportation and OSHA guidelines. 
(e)  When an excavation is made in any paved street where it is necessary to remove paving, the gasfitter who has taken the permit for the excavation shall leave a written notice with the street department at its office that the excavation has been properly filled and tamped and is ready for repaving. 
(f)  Whenever any person making any excavation in the street or alley fails to refill the same in a proper manner as required by this section or fails to maintain the same for a period of one year, the street department shall cause the work to be done and the cost thereof shall be charged against any deposit provided by the excavator. Any excess dirt, pieces of paving, etc., left on public property at the time the excavation is repaved will be removed by the city street department and the cost of same charged against the deposit. The same rule shall apply when it becomes necessary for the city street department to safeguard an excavation of a licensed contractor. 
(Code 1977, § 11-9; Code 1995, § 14-98)  
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to levy a business license tax, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-30; governing body may impose or increase business license tax, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-1-315. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 18-1—18-43. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSES 
 
Sec. 18-44. - License required. 
Every person engaged or intending to engage in any calling, business, occupation or profession, in whole or in part, within the city is required to pay an annual license fee and obtain a business license as herein provided. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2017, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-2019, § 1)  
Sec. 18-45. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means a calling, occupation, profession, or activity engaged with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, either directly or indirectly. 
Charitable organization means an organization that is determined by the Internal Revenue Service to be exempt from federal income taxes under 26 USC 501(c)(3), (4), (6), (7), (8), (10) or (19). 
Charitable purpose means a benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary purpose which does not result in personal gain to a sponsor, organizer, officer, director, trustee or person with ultimate control of the organization 
Classification means the division of businesses by major groups subject to the same license rate. 
Gross income means the total revenue of a business, received or accrued, for one calendar year collected or to be collected from business done within the city, except therefrom income from business done wholly outside of the city on which a license tax is paid to some other municipality or a county and fully reported to the city. The term "gross income" for brokers or agents means gross commissions received or retained, unless otherwise specified. The term "gross income" for insurance companies means gross premiums collected. The term "gross income" for business license tax purposes shall not include taxes collected for a governmental entity, escrow funds, or funds which are the property of a third party. The value of bartered goods or trade-in merchandise shall be included in gross income. The term "gross income" for business license purposes may be verified by inspections of returns filed with the Internal Revenue Service, the state department of revenue for income tax purposes, or the state insurance commission. The term "gross income" for insurance companies shall mean gross premiums collected. 
License inspector means the clerk/inspector or other person designated to administer this article. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative nonprofit membership, corporation, joint venture, association, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, holding company, or other group or combination acting as a unit, in the singular or plural, and the agent or employee having charge or control of a business in the absence of the principals. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2017, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-2019, § 1)  
Sec. 18-46. - Purpose and duration. 
The business license levied by this article is for the purpose of providing such regulation as may be required by the business subject thereto and for the purpose of raising revenue for the general fund through a privilege tax. Each license shall be issued for one year and shall expire on April 30 otherwise provided herein. The provisions of this article and the rates herein shall remain in effect from year to year as amended by the city council. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2017, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-2019, § 1)  
Sec. 18-47. - License fee. 
The required license fee shall be paid for each business subject hereto according to the applicable rate classification on or before April 30 in each year. A separate license shall be required for each place of business and for each classification of business conducted at one place. If gross income cannot be separated for classification at one location, the license fee shall be computed on the combined gross income for the classification requiring the highest rate. A license fee based on gross income shall be computed on the gross income for the preceding calendar or fiscal year, and on a 12-month projected income based on the monthly average for a business in operation for less than one year. The fee for a new business shall be computed on the estimated probable gross income stated in the license application for the balance of the license year. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2017, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-2019, § 1)  
Sec. 18-48. - Registration required. 
The owner, agent or legal representative of every business subject to this article, whether listed in the classification index or not, shall register the business and make application for a business license on or before the due date of each year, except that a new business shall be required to have a business license prior to operation within the city. Application shall be on a form provided by the license inspector which shall contain the social security number and/or the federal employer's identification number, the business name as reported on the state income tax return, and all information about the applicant and the business deemed necessary to carry out the purpose of this article by the license inspector. The applicant shall certify under oath that the information given in the application is true, that the gross income is accurately reported, or estimated for a new business, without any unauthorized deductions, and that all assessments and personal property taxes due and payable to the city have been paid. Insurance agents and brokers shall report the name of each insurance company for which a policy was issued and the total premiums collected for each company and for each type of insurance coverage on a form approved by the license inspector. Any insurance agent not employed by a company shall be licensed as a broker. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2017, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-2019, § 1)  
Sec. 18-49. - Deductions and exemptions and charitable organizations. 
(a)  No deductions from gross income shall be made except income from business done wholly outside the city on which a license tax is paid to some other municipality or a county, or income which cannot be taxed pursuant to state or federal law. The applicant shall have the burden to establish the right to deduction by satisfactory records and proof. No person shall be exempt from this article by reason of the payment of any other tax, unless exempted by state law, and no person shall be relieved of the liability of the payment of any other tax by reason of the application of this article. 
(b)  No person shall be exempt from the requirements of this article by reason of the lack of an established place of business within the municipality, unless exempted by state or federal law. The license official shall determine the appropriate classification for each business in accordance with the latest issue of the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) for the United States published by the Office of Management and Budget. The license inspector shall determine the appropriate classification for each business in accordance with the classifications contained herein and shall be also be empowered to determine the appropriate classification when a business or profession is not enumerated in the annual license schedule. No person shall be exempt from this article by reason of the payment of any other tax, unless exempted by state law, and no person shall be relieved of liability for payment of any other tax or fee by reason of application of this article. 
(c)  A charitable organization shall be exempt from the business license tax on its gross income unless it is deemed a business subject to a business license tax on all or part of its gross income as provided in this section. A Charitable Organization or any for-profit affiliate of a charitable organization, that reports income from for-profit activities, or unrelated business income, for federal income tax purposes to the Internal Revenue Service shall be deemed a business subject to a business license tax on the part of its gross income from such for-profit activities or unrelated business income. 
(d)  A charitable organization shall be deemed a business subject to a business license tax on its total gross income if: 
(1)  Any net proceeds of operation, after necessary expenses of operation, inure to the benefit of any individual or any entity that is not itself a charitable organization as defined in this article; or 
(2)  Any net proceeds of operation, after necessary expenses of operation, are used for a purpose other than a charitable purpose as defined in this article. 
Excess benefits or compensation in any form beyond fair market value to a sponsor, organizer, officer, director, trustee or person with ultimate control of the organization shall not be deemed a necessary expense of operation. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2017, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-2019, § 1)  
Sec. 18-50. - False application unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the provisions of this article to make a false application for a business license, or to give or file, or direct the giving or filing of any false information with respect to the license or fee required by this article. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2017, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-2019, § 1)  
Sec. 18-51. - Display and transfer. 
All persons shall display the license issued to them on the original form provided by the license inspector in a conspicuous place by the license inspector in a conspicuous place in the business establishment at the address shown on the license. A transient or nonresident shall carry the license upon his person or in a vehicle used in the business readily available for inspection by any authorized agent of the city. A change of address must be reported to the license inspector within ten days after removal of the business to a new location and compliance with zoning and building codes. Failure to obtain approval of the license inspector for a change of address shall invalidate the license and subject the licensee to prosecution for doing business without a license. A business license shall not be transferable and a transfer of ownership shall be considered a termination of the old business and the establishment of a new business requiring a new business license, based on old business income. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2017, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-2019, § 1)  
Sec. 18-52. - Administration of article. 
The license inspector shall administer the provisions of this article, collect license fees, issue licenses, make or initiate investigations and audits to ensure compliance, initiate denial or revocation procedures, report violations to the police department and assist in prosecution of violators, produce forms, make reasonable regulations relating to the administration of this article, and perform such other duties as may be duly assigned. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2017, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-2019, § 1)  
Sec. 18-53. - Inspections and audits. 
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article the license inspector or other authorized agent of the city is empowered to enter upon the premises of any person subject to this article to make inspections, examine and audit books and records, and it shall be unlawful for any such person to fail or refuse to make available the necessary books and records. In the event an audit or inspection reveals that false information has been filed by the licensee, the costs of the audit shall be added to the correct license fee and late penalties in addition to other penalties provided herein. Each day of failure to pay the proper amount of license fee shall constitute a separate offense. The license inspector shall make systematic inspections of all businesses within the city to insure compliance with this article. Records of inspections and audits shall not be deemed public records, and the license inspector shall not release the reported gross income of any person by name without permission of the licensee, provided that statistics compiled by classifications may be made public. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2017, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-2019, § 1)  
Sec. 18-54. - Assessments. 
When any person shall have failed to obtain a business license or to furnish the information required by this article or the city, the city or the state municipal association pursuant to contract shall proceed to examine such records of the business or any other available records as may be deemed appropriate and to conduct such investigations and statistical surveys as may be deemed appropriate to assess a license tax and penalties as provided herein. A notice of assessment shall be served by certified mail and an application for adjustment of the assessment may be made to the city within five days after the notice is mailed or the assessment will become final. The city shall establish by regulation the procedure for hearing an application for adjustment of assessment and issuing a notice of final assessment. A final assessment may be appealed to city council only by payment in full of the assessment under protest within ten days after payment pursuant to the provisions of this article relating to appeals to city council. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2017, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-2019, § 1)  
Sec. 18-55. - Delinquent license fees. 
For nonpayment of all or any part of the correct license fee, the city shall levy and collect a late penalty of five percent of the unpaid fee for each month or portion thereof after the due date until paid. If any license fee shall remain unpaid for 60 days after its due date, the city shall issue an execution which shall constitute a lien upon the property of the licensee for the tax, penalties and costs of collection, and shall proceed to collect in the same manner as prescribed by law for the collection of other taxes. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2017, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-2019, § 1)  
Sec. 18-56. - Notices. 
The city may, but shall not be required to, mail written notices that license fees are due, but if notices are not mailed there shall be published a notice of the due date in a newspaper of general circulation within the city three times prior to the due date each year. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2017, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-2019, § 1)  
Sec. 18-57. - Denial of license. 
The license inspector shall deny a license to an applicant when the application is incomplete, contains a misrepresentation, false or misleading statement, evasion or suppression of a material fact, or when the activity for which a license is sought is unlawful or constitutes a public nuisance. A decision of the license inspector shall be subject to appeal to city council as herein provided. Denial shall be written with reasons stated. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2017, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-2019, § 1)  
Sec. 18-58. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
When the license inspector determines that: 
(1)  A license has been mistakenly or improperly issued contrary to law; 
(2)  A licensee has breached any condition upon which his license was issued or has failed to comply with the provision of this article; 
(3)  A licensee has obtained a license through a fraud, misrepresentation, a false or misleading statement, evasion or suppression of a material fact in the license application; 
(4)  A licensee has been convicted of an offense under a law or ordinance regulating business, a crime involving moral turpitude, or an unlawful sale of merchandise or prohibited goods; or 
(5)  A licensee has engaged in an unlawful activity or nuisance related to the business; the license inspector shall give written notice to the licensee or the person in control of the business within the city by personal service or certified mail that the license is suspended pending a hearing before the city council for the purpose of determining whether the license should be revoked. The notice shall state the time and place at which the hearing is to be held, which shall be at a regular or special council meeting within 30 days from the date of service of this notice. The notice shall contain a brief statement of the reasons for suspension and proposed revocation and a copy of the applicable provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2017, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-2019, § 1)  
Sec. 18-59. - Appeals to city council. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a decision, final assessment, revocation, suspension, or a denial of a business license by the license inspector may appeal the decision to the city council by written request stating the reasons therefore filed with the license inspector within ten days after the payment of the assessment under protest or notice of denial is received. 
(b)  An appeal or a hearing on revocation shall be held by the city council within 30 days after receipt of a request for appeal or service of notice of suspension at a regular or special meeting which the applicant or licensee has been given written notice. At such hearings all parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to present testimony and evidence and to cross-examine witnesses. The proceedings shall be recorded and transcribed at the expense of the party so requesting. The rules of evidence and procedure prescribed by the council shall govern the hearing. The city council shall by majority vote of members present render a written decision based on findings of fact and application of the standards herein which shall be served upon all parties or their representatives and shall be final unless appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction within ten days after service. 
(c)  No person shall be subject to prosecution for doing business without a license until the expiration of ten days after notice of denial or revocation which is not appealed or until after final judgment of a circuit court upholding denial or revocation. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2017, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-2019, § 1)  
Sec. 18-60. - Confidentiality. 
Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for any official or employee to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of income or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any report or return required under this article. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2017, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-2019, § 1)  
Sec. 18-61. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be subject to a fine of up to $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days or both, upon conviction. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  Punishment for violation shall not relieve the offender of liability for delinquent taxes, penalties and costs provided for herein. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2017, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-2019, § 1)  
Sec. 18-62. - Seperability. 
A determination that any portion of this article is invalid or unenforceable shall not affect the remaining portions. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2017, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-2019, § 1)  
Sec. 18-63. - Classification. 
(a)  The Class Structure Model by the North American Industry Classification System Code, designated as Appendix B to the ordinance from which this article is derived, current copies shall be filed in the office of the municipal clerk. Appendices B and C to the ordinance from which this section is derived, are tools for classification and not a limitation on businesses subject to a license tax. The license official shall determine the proper class for a business according to the applicable NAICS code. 
(b)  The license tax for each class of businesses subject to this article shall be computed in accordance with the rate schedule, designated as Appendix A to the ordinance from which this section is derived, which may be amended by the council from time to time and a current copy filed in the office of the municipal clerk. 
(c)  Businesses are classified according to NAISC codes, which are in appendix A. 
(Ord. of 8-7-2017, § 1; Ord. of 1-7-2019, § 1)  
Secs. 18-64—18-107. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SOLICITATION FOR INFORMATION 
 
Sec. 18-108. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Interviewee means a person from whom information is requested by a solicitor. 
Soliciting means requesting information on the background, occupation, economic status, social status, religious status, political status, attitudes, viewpoints, occupants of a residence, telephone number, address, furnishings or the like of another person for the purpose of compiling such information as raw data or refined data into a document, record, book or directory to be sold or to be used wholly or in part for a commercial purpose. 
Solicitor means the person soliciting. 
(Code 1977, § 22A-21; Code 1995, § 18-41)  
Sec. 18-109. - Permit—Required. 
A permit is required for every person or organization which engages in soliciting information by means of calling upon places of residence or by means of direct personal contact in public places or upon public property. One permit may be obtained by an organization to cover the individual solicitors for the organization. Any peddling or soliciting which is carried on in connection with the solicitation of information is unlawful unless a permit has been obtained, if required by law. 
(Code 1977, § 22A-22; Code 1995, § 18-42)  
Sec. 18-110. - Permit—Application; contents. 
Application for a permit to solicit information shall be made to the city clerk/treasurer. The application shall contain the following information or, in lieu thereof, a detailed statement of reasons why such information cannot be furnished: 
(1)  The name, address or headquarters of the person applying for the permit. 
(2)  If the applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the applicant's principal officers and managers. 
(3)  The purpose for which the solicitation is to be made and the use or disposition to be made of any information therefrom. 
(4)  The names and addresses of the persons to whom the information solicited will be sent. 
(5)  The names and addresses of the persons who will be in direct charge of conducting this solicitation and the names of all promoters connected, or to be connected, with the proposed solicitation. 
(6)  A statement to the effect that if a permit is granted, it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city or by any department or officer thereof. 
(7)  Such other information as may be reasonably required by the chief of police in order for him to determine the kind and character of the proposed solicitation and whether such solicitation is not inimical to the public welfare. 
(Code 1977, § 22A-23; Code 1995, § 18-43)  
Sec. 18-111. - Number of solicitors permitted. 
The number of solicitors actively soliciting in the city will not exceed ten. 
(Code 1977, § 22A-24; Code 1995, § 18-44)  
Sec. 18-112. - Hours permitted for solicitation in residential areas. 
In residential areas solicitation will be limited to the hours between 9:30 a.m. and 8:30 p.m. or sunset, whichever occurs later. 
(Code 1977, § 22A-25; Code 1995, § 18-45)  
Sec. 18-113. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Any newsgathering activity for a bona fide news medium. 
(2)  Any solicitation of information for a telephone book by a telephone company. 
(Code 1977, § 22A-26; Code 1995, § 18-46)  
Secs. 18-114—18-157. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - YARD SALES 
 
Sec. 18-158. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Yard sale means the sale of any new or used personal property, which sale is conducted on or about the premises of a private residence or on a residentially zoned lot by any resident of a neighborhood, one of whom must be the occupant and/or owner of the premises and/or lot, and which sale is open to the public. The term "yard sale" shall apply to all sales entitled "garage," "attic," "porch," "room," "backyard," "patio," "rummage" or similar such titles commonly used to refer to yard sales. 
(Code 1995, § 18-66; Ord. of 8-3-1987(1))  
Sec. 18-159. - Certain sales considered commercial retail activity; peddlers license required. 
No new or used goods, wares or merchandise of whatsoever kind shall be offered for sale at a yard sale which was specifically purchased for resale or specifically brought in for sale, as this would constitute a commercial retail activity, and would require the seller to purchase a peddler's business license; such sales can only be conducted on properly zoned commercial property. 
(Code 1995, § 18-67; Ord. of 8-3-1987(1))  
Sec. 18-160. - Signage. 
Signs advertising a yard sale cannot be placed on city power poles, street signs, traffic signs, hydrants and any other such appurtenances. Such signs should be placed on separate posts that may be staked on city street rights-of-way and shall be removed from the rights-of-way by the conductor of a yard sale no later than 24 hours following the end of a yard sale. Such signs shall not be staked so as to block traffic signs and/or create any other type of confusion or hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1995, § 18-68; Ord. of 8-3-1987(1))  
Sec. 18-161. - Exemption from license fees. 
Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, religious, educational or governmental institutions or organizations who conduct and/or sponsor yard sales are exempt from any business license fees when the total proceeds from the sale are used directly for the institution's or organization's charitable purposes and the goods or articles are not sold on a consignment basis. 
(Code 1995, § 18-69; Ord. of 8-3-1987(1))  
Sec. 18-162. - Peddlers. 
The term "peddlers" includes any persons, who temporarily exhibit on commercial property for sale any new or used goods, wares or merchandise of whatever kind. Commercial property in this instance shall include any property presently being used for commercial purposes or any vacant property commercially zoned. 
(Code 1995, § 18-70; Ord. of 8-3-1987(1))  
Chapter 22 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to establish and regulate cemeteries, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-39-10. 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Unlawful establishment of additional cemeteries. 
It is unlawful for any person to establish within the corporate limits of the city any place for the burial of the dead, or to maintain therein any place for the burial of the dead, except such as were already established for such purpose, and it shall be unlawful for any person to enlarge the bounds of any place now established for the burial of the dead within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 6-1; Code 1995, § 22-1)  
Sec. 22-2. - Charges for purchase of gravesites; Rosemont Cemetery. 
(a)  Definition. As used in this section, the term "city residents" include only those persons who reside within the city at the time of purchase. 
(b)  Residents. Rates for gravesites in Rosemont Cemetery purchased by city residents shall be as established and published by the city council. 
(c)  Nonresidents. Rates for gravesites in Rosemont Cemetery purchased by nonresidents of the city shall be as established and published by the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 6-2; Code 1995, § 22-2; Ord. of 5-3-1993)  
Chapter 26 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal elections generally, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-61 et seq.; duty of council to enact ordinances relating to time requirements for nominations, primaries, etc., S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-70. 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Conformance to state law. 
All elections, primary, general and special, to fill municipal offices in the city shall be duly governed by the provisions of the state election law. All such municipal elections shall be nonpartisan. Provided, however, that all powers and duties of the municipal election commission of the city shall be exercised by the county elections commission. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1; Code 1995, § 26-1; Ord. of 5-5-1997)  
Sec. 26-2. - Runoffs. 
The mayor and city council adopts a method of elections for city council seats such that a candidate in a field of three or more must garner more than 50 percent of the votes cast; otherwise a runoff election two weeks later shall occur between the two candidates receiving the most votes. 
(Code 1995, § 26-2; Ord. of 5-6-1991; Ord. of 2-6-1995)  
Sec. 26-3. - Candidates to file notice of candidacy and candidacy pledge. 
Candidates desiring entry in any nonpartisan regular or special election shall file with the county elections commission, by delivering to such commission in the county, a notice of candidacy and a candidacy pledge, the same to be so filed not earlier than 60 days nor later than 12:00 noon 30 days prior to the date of the election. 
(Code 1995, § 26-3; Ord. of 5-5-1997)  
Chapter 30 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fire protection generally, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-25-10 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Establishment of limits in which outside aboveground storage of flammable liquids is prohibited. 
The storage of flammable liquids in tanks aboveground and outside buildings is prohibited within the limits established in section 14-1, provided that for existing tanks within such limits which are properly safeguarded and do not introduce a distinct hazard to other property a permit shall be granted. 
(Code 1977, § 9-2; Code 1995, § 30-2)  
Sec. 30-2. - Establishment of a false alarm fine. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a false alarm that initiates a response by the police department or fire department. Any person who willfully or knowingly causes such false alarm shall be fined in the manner set forth below for such infraction; provided, however, the police chief, or his designee, may waive such fine if he deems the circumstances warrant such waiver, in his discretion. The false alarm fine shall be in the amount of $50.00 per false alarm reported in excess of two false alarms previously occurring within any calendar year. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2005; Ord. of 9-22-2018, § 3C)  
Sec. 30-3. - Incident response fee. 
(a)  A fee, the amount of which shall be based on the level of response as set forth in subsection (b)(1)—(3) of this section, shall be charged to the registered owner of any motor vehicle that is the subject of a response by the fire department in the city (or in an area outside the city which receives fire protection services from the city) in which fire department personnel are dispatched to and arrive at the location of the motor vehicle which is the subject of the response, regardless of whether such response is for a vehicular fire, collision, or other emergency as described herein. The fire department may withhold fire reports and other documentation required by insurance providers until the amount of the fee described in this section is paid in full. 
(b)  Applicability. This rate schedule applies to all calls that the fire department responds to that include one of the following types of responses: 
(1)  Motor vehicle accident/fire. 
(2)  HAZMAT response. 
(3)  Specialized rescue operation. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2018, § 3D)  
Sec. 30-4. - Time of payment of fees. 
Except with respect to the incident response fee set forth in section 30-4, and as otherwise expressly provided with respect to any fee charged pursuant to this chapter, all fees charged under this chapter shall be due and payable upon not later than 30 days following the charge thereof. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the fire chief may set other dates and times for collection or payment of any fee, other than the fire services fee set forth in section 30-4, provided that such other dates and times for collection and payment thereof are applied uniformly to all payers. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2018, § 3E)  
Secs. 30-5—30-22. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-23. - Interference with personnel or equipment. 
It is unlawful for any person to interfere with or in any way molest or handle any fire equipment or apparatus at any time, unless authorized by the chief of the fire department or someone acting in his capacity thereunto duly authorized. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any firefighters or persons acting as such, duly authorized thereunto, while in the discharge of their duty. It shall be unlawful for any person to congregate in crowds at or near fires within the city in such a manner as to interfere with the free action of the fire department. 
(Code 1977, § 9-16; Code 1995, § 30-31)  
Sec. 30-24. - Entering safety zones. 
It is unlawful for any person during any fire within the city to go within limits established by the chief of the fire department as a safety zone, or to go within limits established as a safety zone by the chief of the fire department during any fire drill. 
(Code 1977, § 9-17; Code 1995, § 30-32)  
Sec. 30-25. - Vested with police powers in certain instances. 
All members of the fire department of the city on active duty in response to a fire alarm in the city shall be and are hereby vested with authority ordinarily incident to the office of police officer in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 9-18; Code 1995, § 30-33)  
Sec. 30-26. - Fire chief's rule-making authority. 
(a)  The chief of the fire department (also known as the fire chief) shall have the authority to establish such rules and regulations as in his judgment may be necessary in the proper handing, storing, keeping and care of all fire department equipment and apparatus. 
(b)  During any fire in the city, the chief of the fire department or anyone acting in his place and stead, when duly thereunto authorized, is hereby vested with authority to establish zones or safety areas within the vicinity of such fire and to regulate traffic within such area and to establish such rules and regulations during the continuance of any fire within the city within such areas as in his judgment may be necessary for the proper handling of the fire. 
(c)  All such rules as are established by the chief of the fire department as aforesaid shall have the force and effect of ordinances of the city and shall be enforceable as other ordinances of the city; any violation thereof shall be punishable under the provisions of section 1-14. 
(d)  In addition to the other duties of the fire chief in his capacity as department head of the fire department, the fire chief shall exercise daily operational control over the fire department and all firefighting resources including personnel and equipment; assume command of the emergency operations center at the direction of the emergency operations coordinator when its activation has been approved; direct the assignment and use of career and volunteer fire personnel and all firefighting equipment in routine and emergency conditions; ensure that all firefighting personnel are sufficiently educated with respect to the most effective firefighting techniques and that such techniques are utilized by all firefighting personnel; ensure that a proactive fire prevention and inspection regimen is followed; conduct training of firefighting personnel that is appropriate and consistent with the duties and responsibilities defined herein; ensure close and effective communication, coordination, and cooperation with area fire departments and emergency service providers; and perform other duties at the direction of the city manager, as prescribed by this Code, or as needed to meet the duties and responsibilities identified herein. 
(Code 1977, § 9-19; Code 1995, § 30-34; Ord. of 9-22-2018, § 3H)  
Secs. 30-27—30-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - INSURANCE AND INSPECTION FUND BOARD OF TRUSTEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Fireman's insurance and inspection fund generally, S.C. Code 1976, § 23-9-310 et seq. 
 
Sec. 30-56. - Established. 
There is hereby established a board of three members to be known as the board of trustees of the Firefighter's Insurance and Inspection Fund. 
(Code 1977, § 9-26; Code 1995, § 30-46)  
Sec. 30-57. - Composition. 
The board of trustees of the fund established by this division shall be composed of the mayor, the city manager and the fire chief. 
(Code 1977, § 9-27; Code 1995, § 30-47)  
Sec. 30-58. - Compensation. 
All members of the board created under this division shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1977, § 9-28; Code 1995, § 30-48)  
Sec. 30-59. - Officers. 
The board created under this division shall elect from its number a chairperson and a secretary, who shall likewise serve without compensation. The clerk/treasurer of the city shall act as treasurer of the board and have custody of all funds handled by the board. 
(Code 1977, § 9-29; Code 1995, § 30-49)  
Sec. 30-60. - Duties. 
The board of trustees created under this division shall have supervision of the firefighter's insurance and inspection fund, both as to the receipts and disbursements thereof, provided that none of such fund shall be expended for any purpose other than the betterment and maintenance of a skillful and efficient fire department in the city. Such board is hereby authorized to pay over to the state firefighter's association five percent of the gross proceeds received annually by the city from the state treasury under state law. 
(Code 1977, § 9-30; Code 1995, § 30-50)  
Secs. 30-61—30-78. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY 
 
Sec. 30-79. - Area receiving service. 
The area to be included for out-of-city fire coverage shall be that within a five-mile radius of the city, subject to agreement between the city and any other political subdivision. 
(Code 1977, § 9-36); Code 1995, § 30-61)  
Secs. 30-80—30-101. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE FEES 
 
Sec. 30-102. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Costs of the services means all expenses incurred which result from or are incidental to the provision of the services in the city, including, but not limited to, operation, maintenance and capital expenditures such as: 
(1)  Costs of acquisition, construction, renovation or repair of facilities, improvements to real property, fixtures, equipment and other personal property; 
(2)  Costs of acquisition of all lands, properties, rights and easements required for the provision of the services; 
(3)  Costs of payroll and other employment benefits; 
(4)  A reasonable reserve of working capital; and 
(5)  Lease payments, finance charges and costs of issuance of, and principal and interest payments on, bonds secured in whole or in part by the revenues generated by the fee. 
Department means the department of public safety of the city. 
Depository bank means any bank, trust company, national banking association or a national association duly qualified and doing business within the state designated from time to time by the city as a depositary of moneys or securities held in the Fire Fee Revenue Fund. 
Fiscal year means the fiscal year for the city as determined by the council, initially being the period from July 1 in any year to and including June 30 of the following year. 
Incident response fee shall have the meaning set forth for such term in section 30-103. The incident response fee is a "service or user fee" within the meaning of S.C. Code 1976, §§ 5-7-30, 6-1-300 and 6-1-330. 
Services means and refers to the provision of fire protection and fire and other emergency services performed by the department related to the prevention or minimization of potential loss of life, injury or damage from fire, disaster or public health emergency. 
(Ord. of 12-1-2014, § 1)  
Sec. 30-103. - Findings and determinations. 
(a)  The city is an incorporated municipality located in the county, and as such has all powers granted to municipalities by the constitution and general laws of the state. 
(b)  S.C. Code 1976, § 5-25-20 provides, in part, any municipality of the state having not less than 100 inhabitants may equip and control a fire department for the protection of the municipality in such way as it deems necessary. 
(c)  S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-30 provides, in part, that municipalities may enact ordinances, not inconsistent with the constitution and general law of the state, respecting any subject which appears necessary and proper for the security, general welfare, and convenience of the municipality or for the preservation of the health, peace, order and good government in the municipality, including the authority to levy and collect taxes on real and personal property and to establish uniform service charges related to the foregoing. 
(d)  S.C. Code 1976, § 6-1-330 provides, in part, that the city council may, by ordinance approved by a positive majority, authorize the charge and collection of a service or user fee. 
(e)  S.C. Code 1976, § 6-1-300 defines a "service or user fee" (as such term is used in S.C. Code 1976, § 6-1-330) as follows: A charge required to be paid in return for a particular government service or program made available to the payer that benefits the payer in some manner different from the members of the general public not paying the fee. The term "service or user fee" also includes "uniform service charges." 
(f)  Due to the ongoing reduction in available revenue from declining purchasing power from ad valorem property taxes, due to the state statutory limitations on property tax revenue; and due to increasing operational costs placing additional constraints on available funding for fire services; and due to state mandated reductions in the State Funded Local Government Fund, which is purposed to support general government operations, including the provision of public safety services; additional revenue is needed in order to adequately provide the services to city residents and visitors. 
(g)  In the event that funding is not available for the services to be performed adequately, the quality of the services provided will be likely to decrease, thus increasing the risk of property damage and risk of injury and loss of life to residents of and visitors to the city. 
(h)  Without limitation of the foregoing, in order to offset the continued reduction in funding for the services, it is necessary and in the best interest of the city and its residents and visitors for there to be charged and collected for the provision of certain of the services, certain additional service fees, user fees or uniform service charges within the meaning of S.C. Code 1976, §§ 5-7-30, 6-1-300 and 6-1-330. 
(i)  The fire fees, the charge and collection of which is approved and established under this division, are service fees, user fees or uniform service charges within the meaning of S.C. Code 1976, §§ 5-7-30, 6-1-300 and 6-1-330. 
(j)  The payers of the incident response fee will all receive a special benefit from the payment of such fees different from the benefit received by the general public, as such payers will receive directly the benefit of the additional services to which such fees relate. 
(k)  Pursuant to this division, the revenue derived from the charge and collection of the fire fees must be used only to pay costs of the services, and shall, prior to such use, be deposited and maintained in the Fire Fee Revenue Fund, which fund is created under this division to be separate and segregated from the city's general fund and all other funds of the city. 
(l)  The revenue derived from the collection of the fire fees for a given fiscal year will not exceed the costs of the services with respect to such fiscal year. 
(m)  The fire fees are uniformly imposed on all payers thereof as set forth herein. 
(n)  The approval and establishment of the charge and collection of the incident response fees, the creation of the Fire Fee Revenue Fund, the authorization of the expenditures of amounts on deposit in the Fire Fee Revenue Fund to pay for the costs of the services, all as set forth herein, is within the power and authority of the city council in accordance with the provisions of this Code and laws of the state. All requirements of S.C. Code 1976, § 6-1-330 have been met with respect to the enactment of this division and the charge and collection of the fire fees. 
(Ord. of 12-1-2014, § 2)  
Sec. 30-104. - Establishment and amount of incident response fees. 
There is hereby established the incident response fee of the city. The incident response fee shall be charged to the registered owner of any vehicle which is the subject of a response by department personnel in which department personnel are dispatched to and arrive at the location of the motor vehicle which is the subject of the response, regardless of whether such response is for vehicular fire, collision or other emergency. The amount of the incident response fee shall be as set forth from time to time. 
(Ord. of 12-1-2014, § 3)  
Sec. 30-105. - Establishment of the Fire Fee Revenue Fund; expenditure of funds; control. 
(a)  There is hereby established the Fire Fee Revenue Fund of the city. The Fire Fee Revenue Fund shall be a segregated fund and account of the city held by a depositary bank. All revenues resulting from the charge and collection of the fire fees shall be promptly deposited in the Fire Fee Revenue Fund, but no other funds from sources other than the charge and collection of the fire fees may be deposited or maintained therein. Once deposited in the Fire Fee Revenue Fund, funds shall remain therein until expended on costs of the services provided herein. 
(b)  Funds deposited in the Fire Fee Revenue Fund may only be disbursed therefrom for the payment of costs of the services. 
(Ord. of 12-1-2014, § 4)  
Sec. 30-106. - Time of payment; violation. 
The date and time for collection and payment of all fire fees shall be as established from time to time. Failure to make payment in full of all fire fees charged in accordance with the provisions of this division when due shall constitute a violation punishable as set forth in section 1-14. 
(Ord. of 12-1-2014, § 5)  
Secs. 30-107—30-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - OPEN BURNING 
 
Sec. 30-126. - Prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to burn any tires, rubber material, bunker C residual oil, asphalt, roofing material, tar, railroad cross-ties, other creosoted lumber, plastics, garbage, or other organic refuse, outside of any building at any time in the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to burn grass or brush at any time in the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to burn leaves at any time in the city. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to burn papers, excelsior, or other material which may be blown about by the wind anywhere in the city unless the same is burned in a stove, fireplace, or furnace or in an incinerator sufficiently fine to prevent the escape of ignited particles. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to burn when the state forestry commission issues a burning ban for the area including the city.  
Sec. 30-127. - Campfires. 
Ornamental, ceremonial, and campfires are permitted in the city only under the following conditions: 
(1)  There is no burning ban issued by the state forestry commission 
(2)  Ornamental, ceremonial or campfire shall be contained in a metal or masonry container with a cleared area at least 25 feet in circumference around the container, and there shall be no fences, decks, trees, homes, or other combustibles at least 50 feet from the fire enclosure or pit. 
(3)  A responsible adult of at least 18 years of age shall be in attendance at all times that the ornamental fire is burning. When adult supervision ceases, the fire shall be extinguished with water and the coals spread out in the enclosure. 
(4)  Ornamental and campfires shall be extinguished if, in the opinion of a responding fire department employee, there is danger that smoke or fire will inflict injury upon someone or will cause damage to property. 
(5)  It shall be determined by this policy that the owner of the property of which the ornamental, ceremonial or campfire is found shall have consented to such fire. 
(6)  At no time shall any smoke from either of the allowed burning above reduce visibility of a public road and or public way, or create a smoke nuisance to other properties.  
Sec. 30-128. - Outdoor cooking fires. 
Charcoal or small wood fires for cooking purposes are permitted in containers designed for cooking over such fires. These containers shall be placed so that they do not cause fire or smoke damage to property or injury to any person.  
Sec. 30-129. - Permitted hours of burning. 
With the exception of ornamental, ceremonial, campfires, and cooking fires, other approved fires, shall not be started except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.  
Sec. 30-130. - Training of firefighters. 
Open burning is allowed for instruction and training of firefighters. 
(1)  Department shall have a burn plan and permission from the state department of health and environmental control (DHEC). 
(2)  The fire department shall keep fire within the property of origin, and shall minimize smoke as best possible. 
(3)  The fire department shall only burn within the hours specified within this division. 
(4)  The fire department shall not burn asbestos, heavy oils, plastics, or rubber.  
Sec. 30-131. - Special recreational fires. 
With the written permission of the fire chief and in accordance with the conditions prescribed by the fire chief, may be allowed. Special recreational fires shall be permitted at special events such as high school or college pep rallies. The fire chief shall have sole discretion to issue a letter of permission for such fires based upon the potential for danger to persons or property. He or she may prescribe such mandatory conditions as are necessary or desirable to ensure the safety of persons and property, including but not limited to a safety area, and the department present at the expense of the event host.  
Sec. 30-132. - Prescribed burning. 
Prescribed burning for alternative landscapes may be allowed, when meeting the intent of SCDHEC. This includes area of burning must be 1,000 feet away from a public roadway and residential, commercial, or industrial site. The material to be burned was generated from the property of burning. The wind on the burn day shall not take smoke to the roadway or properties identified, and SC Forestry has not issued a burn advisory or ban. 
(1)  There shall not be any banned items within or added to the material to burn. 
(2)  No more than two piles of 30 feet by 30 feet may be burned at one time. 
(3)  Equipment and dirt shall be in excess to extinguish the burn or its residual when the materials have been consumed, or weather changes, or smoke levels necessitate the fires extinguishment. 
(4)  The fire must be started between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. 
The responsible party for the prescribed burning shall have a permit from the state forestry department, and shall notify the fire department.  
Sec. 30-133. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the responsibility of the fire chief, his designee, or the police chief or his designee to enforce this section of the Code.  
Secs. 30-134—30-149. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIREWORKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Fireworks and explosives generally, S.C. Code 1976, § 23-35-10 et seq. 
 
Sec. 30-150. - Sale, storage, transportation, use. 
The sale, storage, transportation and use of fireworks in the city shall be in accordance with S.C. Code 1976, § 23-35-10 et seq., and rules and regulations promulgated by the state board of pyrotechnic safety. (Code 1995, § 30-81)  
Chapter 34 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Statutory authorization. 
The state legislature of has in S.C. Code 1976, titles 5 and 6, and amendments thereto, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council does ordain as set out herein.  
Sec. 34-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The special flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(b)  Furthermore, these flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.  
Sec. 34-3. - Statement of purpose and objectives. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this chapter to protect human life and health, minimize property damage, and encourage appropriate construction practices to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions by requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. Uses of the floodplain which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion are restricted or prohibited. These provisions attempt to control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters, and control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion. Additionally, this chapter prevents or regulates the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(b)  The objectives of this chapter are to protect human life and health, to help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, and to ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. The provisions of this chapter are intended to minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in the floodplain, and prolonged business interruptions. Also, an important floodplain management objective of this chapter is to minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects and rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding. 
(c)  Floodplains are an important asset to the community. They perform vital natural functions such as temporary storage of floodwaters, moderation of peak flood flows, maintenance of water quality, groundwater recharge, prevention of erosion, habitat for diverse natural wildlife populations, recreational opportunities, and aesthetic quality. These functions are best served if floodplains are kept in their natural state. Wherever possible, the natural characteristics of floodplains and their associated wetlands and water bodies should be preserved and enhanced. Decisions to alter floodplains, especially floodways and stream channels, should be the result of careful planning processes that evaluate resource conditions and human needs.  
Sec. 34-4. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
(a)  This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its flood insurance study with accompanying maps and other supporting data that are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(b)  Upon annexation any special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its flood insurance study for the unincorporated areas of the county, with accompanying map and other data are adopted by reference and declared part of this chapter.  
Sec. 34-5. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities.  
Sec. 34-6. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.  
Sec. 34-7. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements, liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state law. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions, shall prevail.  
Sec. 34-8. - Partial invalidity and severability. 
If any part of this chapter is declared invalid, the remainder of the chapter shall not be affected and shall remain in force.  
Sec. 34-9. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.  
Sec. 34-10. - Penalties for violation. 
Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.  
Secs. 34-11—34-38. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 34-39. - General. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure (appurtenant structure) means structures that are located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Accessory Structures should constitute a minimal investment, may not be used for human habitation, and be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of accessory structures are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds. 
Addition (to an existing building) means an extension or increase in the floor area or height of a building or structure. Additions to existing buildings shall comply with the requirements for new construction regardless as to whether the addition is a substantial improvement or not. Where a firewall or load-bearing wall is provided between the addition and the existing building, the addition shall be considered a separate building and must comply with the standards for new construction. 
Agricultural structure means a structure used solely for agricultural purposes in which the use is exclusively in connection with the production, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of agricultural commodities, including the raising of livestock. Agricultural structures are not exempt from the provisions of this chapter 
Appeal means a request for a review of the local floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means any enclosed area of a building that is below grade on all sides. 
Building. (See Structure. ) 
Critical development means development that is critical to the community's public health and safety, is essential to the orderly functioning of a community, store or produce highly volatile, toxic or water-reactive materials, or house occupants that may be insufficiently mobile to avoid loss of life or injury. Examples of critical development include jails, hospitals, schools, fire stations, nursing homes, wastewater treatment facilities, water plants, and gas/oil/propane storage facilities. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls parallel to the flow of water. 
Executive Order 11988 (floodplain management). Issued by President Carter in 1977, this order requires that no federally assisted activities be conducted in or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard areas, unless there is no practicable alternative. 
Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before the initial FIRM date, or January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. 
Existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete slabs). 
Flood means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency which contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Flood-resistant material means any building material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact (minimum 72 hours) with floodwaters without sustaining damage that requires more than low-cost cosmetic repair. Any material that is water-soluble or is not resistant to alkali or acid in water, including normal adhesives for above-grade use, is not flood-resistant. Pressure-treated lumber or naturally decay-resistant lumbers are acceptable flooring materials. Sheet-type flooring coverings that restrict evaporation from below and materials that are impervious, but dimensionally unstable are not acceptable. Materials that absorb or retain water excessively after submergence are not flood-resistant. Please refer to Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, dated 8/08, and available from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Class 4 and 5 materials, referenced therein, are acceptable flood-resistant materials. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of flood plain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term "functionally dependent use" includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of the structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior (DOI)) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places; 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of Interior in states without approved programs. 
Some structures or districts listed on the state or local inventories may not be historic as cited above, but have been included on the inventories because it was believed that the structures or districts have the potential for meeting the historic structure criteria of the DOI. In order for these structures to meet NFIP historic structure criteria, it must be demonstrated and evidenced that the state department of archives and history has individually determined that the structure or district meets DOI historic structure criteria. 
Increased cost of compliance (ICC) applies to all new and renewed flood insurance policies effective on and after June 1, 1997. The NFIP shall enable the purchase of insurance to cover the cost of compliance with land use and control measures established under section 1361. It provides coverage for the payment of a claim to help pay for the cost to comply with state or community floodplain management laws or ordinances after a flood event in which a building has been declared substantially or repetitively damaged. 
Limited storage means an area used for storage and intended to be limited to incidental items that can withstand exposure to the elements and have low flood damage potential. Such an area must be of flood resistant or breakaway material, void of utilities except for essential lighting and cannot be temperature controlled. If the area is located below the base flood elevation in an A, AE and A1-A30 zone it must meet the requirements of section 34-101. 
Lowest adjacent grade (LAG) means an elevation of the lowest ground surface that touches any deck support, exterior walls of a building or proposed building walls. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means, for the purpose of this chapter, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which the base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) are shown. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)of 1929 means elevation reference points set by National Geodetic Survey based on mean sea level. 
New construction means a structure for which the start of construction commenced on or after the date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. The term "new construction" also includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete slabs, is completed on or after the date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 means vertical control, as corrected in 1988, used as the reference datum on flood insurance rate maps. 
Primary frontal dune means a continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and subject to erosion and overtopping from high tides and waves during coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct change from a relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Repetitive loss means a building covered by a contract for flood insurance that has incurred flood-related damages on two occasions during a ten-year period ending on the date of the event for which a second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25 percent of the market value of the building at the time of each such flood event. 
Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. The Act provides that no new flood insurance shall be provided for any property found by the Federal Emergency Management Agency to have been declared by a state or local authority to be in violation of state or local ordinances. 
Stable natural vegetation means the first place on the oceanfront where plants such as sea oats hold sand in place. 
Start of construction , for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for footings, piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. Such repairs may be undertaken successively and their costs counted cumulatively. Please refer to the definition of Substantial improvement . 
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures that have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project of improvement to a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Permits shall be cumulative for a period of five years. If the improvement project is conducted in phases, the total of all costs associated with each phase, beginning with the issuance of the first permit, shall be utilized to determine whether substantial improvement will occur. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction, or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from a term or terms of this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with these regulations.  
Secs. 34-40—34-66. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 34-67. - Designation of floodplain administrator. 
The floodplain administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter.  
Sec. 34-68. - Adoption of letter of map revisions (LOMR). 
All LOMRs that are issued in the areas identified in section 34-4 are hereby adopted.  
Sec. 34-69. - Development permit and certification requirements. 
(a)  Development permit. Application for a development permit shall be made to the local floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him prior to any development activities. The development permit may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing: the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures; and the location of fill materials, storage areas, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  A plot plan that shows the 100-year floodplain contour or a statement that the entire lot is within the floodplain must be provided by the development permit applicant when the lot is within or appears to be within the floodplain as mapped by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the floodplain identified pursuant to either the duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator of section 34-70(k) or the standards for subdivision proposals of section 34-102 and the standards for streams without estimated base flood elevations and floodways of section 34-103. The plot plan must be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by them. The plot plan must show the floodway, if any, as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the floodway identified pursuant to either the duties or responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator of section 34-70(k) or the standards for subdivision proposals of section 34-102(12) and the standards for streams without estimated base flood elevations and floodways of section 34-103. 
(2)  Where base flood elevation data is provided as set forth in section 34-4 or the duties and responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator of section 34-70(k) the application for a development permit within the flood hazard area shall show: 
a.  The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor of all new and substantially improved structures; and 
b.  If the structure will be floodproofed in accordance with the non-residential construction requirements of section 34-102(2) the elevation in relation to mean sea level to which the structure will be floodproofed. 
(3)  Where base flood elevation data is not provided as set forth in section 34-4 or the duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator of section 34-70(k), then the provisions in the standards for streams without estimated base flood elevations and floodways of section 34-103 must be met. 
(4)  Alteration of watercourse. Where any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development, the application for a development permit shall include a description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation, an engineering study to demonstrate that the flood- carrying capacity of the altered or relocated watercourse is maintained and a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation. 
(b)  Certifications. 
(1)  Floodproofing certification. When a structure is floodproofed, the applicant shall provide certification from a registered, professional engineer or architect that the non-residential, floodproofed structure meets the floodproofing criteria in the non-residential construction requirements of sections 34-102(2) and 34-105(2)b. 
(2)  Certification during construction. A lowest floor elevation or floodproofing certification is required after the lowest floor is completed. As soon as possible after completion of the lowest floor and before any further vertical construction commences, or floodproofing by whatever construction means, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the floodplain administrator a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, or floodproofed elevation, whichever is applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea level. Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by them. Any work done prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The floodplain administrator shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. The permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed shall correct deficiencies detected by such review. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(3)  As-built certification. Upon completion of the development a registered professional engineer, land surveyor or architect, in accordance with state law, shall certify according to the requirements of section 34-69(b)(1), (2) that the development is built in accordance with the submitted plans and previous pre-development certifications.  
Sec. 34-70. - Duties and responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator. 
(a)  Permit review. Review all development permits to ensure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(b)  Requirement of federal and/or state permits. Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334. 
(c)  Watercourse alterations. 
(1)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources, land, water, and conservation division, state coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(2)  In addition to the notifications required watercourse alterations per subsection (c)(1) of this section, written reports of maintenance records must be maintained to show that maintenance has been provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained. This maintenance must consist of a comprehensive program of periodic inspections, and routine channel clearing and dredging, or other related functions. The assurance shall consist of a description of maintenance activities, frequency of performance, and the local official responsible for maintenance performance. Records shall be kept on file for FEMA inspection. 
(3)  If the proposed project will modify the configuration of the watercourse, floodway, or base flood elevation for which a detailed flood insurance study has been developed, the applicant shall apply for and must receive approval for a conditional letter of map revision with the federal emergency management agency prior to the start of construction. 
(4)  Within 60 days of completion of an alteration of a watercourse, referenced in the certification requirements of section 34-69(b)(3), the applicant shall submit as-built certification, by a registered professional engineer, to the federal emergency management agency. 
(d)  Floodway encroachments. Prevent encroachments within floodways unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of section 34-102(5) are met. 
(e)  Adjoining floodplains. Cooperate with neighboring communities with respect to the management of adjoining floodplains and/or flood-related erosion areas in order to prevent aggravation of existing hazards. 
(f)  Notifying adjacent communities. Notify adjacent communities prior to permitting substantial commercial developments and large subdivisions to be undertaken in areas of special flood hazard and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
(g)  Certification requirements. 
(1)  Obtain and review actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor of all new or substantially improved structures, in accordance with administrative procedures outlined in section 34-69(b)(2). 
(2)  Obtain the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which the new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with the floodproofing certification outlined in section 34-69(b). 
(3)  When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with the non-residential construction requirements outlined in section 34-102(2). 
(h)  Map interpretation. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
(i)  Prevailing authority. Where a map boundary showing an area of special flood hazard and field elevations disagree, the base flood elevations for flood protection elevations (as found on an elevation profile, floodway data table, etc.) shall prevail. The correct information should be submitted to FEMA as per the map maintenance activity requirements outlined in section 34-1027. 
(j)  Use of best available data. When base flood elevation data and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with section 34-4, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize best available base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, including data developed pursuant to the standards for subdivision proposals outlined in section 34-102(12), in order to administer the provisions of this article. Data from preliminary, draft, and final flood insurance studies constitutes best available data from a federal, state, or other source. Data must be developed using hydraulic models meeting the minimum requirement of NFIP approved model. If an appeal is pending on the study in accordance with 44 CFR Ch. 1, Parts 67.5 and 67.6, the data does not have to be used. 
(k)  Special flood hazard area/topographic boundaries conflict. When the exact location of boundaries of the areas special flood hazards conflict with the current, natural topography information at the site; the site information takes precedence when the lowest adjacent grade is at or above the BFE, the property owner may apply and be approved for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) by FEMA. The local floodplain administrator in the permit file will maintain a copy of the letter of map amendment issued from FEMA. 
(l)  On-site inspections. Make on-site inspections of projects in accordance with the administrative procedures outlined in section 34-71(a). 
(m)  Administrative notices. Serve notices of violations, issue stop-work orders, revoke permits and take corrective actions in accordance with the administrative procedures in section 34-71. 
(n)  Records maintenance. Maintain all records pertaining to the administration of this article and make these records available for public inspection. 
(o)  Annexations and detachments . Notify the state department of natural resources land, water and conservation division, state coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program within six months, of any annexations or detachments that include special flood hazard areas. 
(p)  Federally funded development. The president issued Executive Order 11988, Floodplain Management May 1977. E.O. 11988 directs federal agencies to assert a leadership role in reducing flood losses and losses to environmental values served by floodplains. Proposed developments must go through an eight-step review process. Evidence of compliance with the executive order must be submitted as part of the permit review process. 
(q)  Substantial damage determination. Perform an assessment of damage from any origin to the structure using FEMA's residential substantial damage estimator (RSDE) software to determine if the damage equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
(r)  Substantial improvement determinations. Perform an assessment of permit applications for improvements or repairs to be made to a building or structure that equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction. Cost of work counted for determining if and when substantial improvement to a structure occurs shall be cumulative for a period of five years. If the improvement project is conducted in phases, the total of all costs associated with each phase, beginning with the issuance of the first permit, shall be utilized to determine whether "substantial improvement" will occur. The market values shall be determined by one of the following methods: 
(1)  The current assessed building value as determined by the county's assessor's office or the value of an appraisal performed by a licensed appraiser at the expense of the owner within the past six months. 
(2)  One or more certified appraisals from a registered professional licensed appraiser in accordance with the laws of the state. The appraisal shall indicate actual replacement value of the building or structure in its pre-improvement condition, less the cost of site improvements and depreciation for functionality and obsolescence. 
(3)  Real estate purchase contract within six months prior to the date of the application for a permit.  
Sec. 34-71. - Administrative procedures. 
(a)  Inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to a permit progresses, the local floodplain administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the floodplain administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial jurisdiction at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. Whenever a building or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation of this article, the floodplain administrator may order the work to be immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to the person doing the work. The stop-work order shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reasons for the stoppage, and the conditions under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Revocation of permits. The local floodplain administrator may revoke and require the return of the development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing, stating the reason for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the approved application, plans, or specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may also be revoked. 
(d)  Periodic inspections. The local floodplain administrator and each member of his inspections department shall have a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action. 
(e)  Violations to be corrected. When the local floodplain administrator finds violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his/her duty to notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law on the property he owns. 
(f)  Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the floodplain administrator shall give him written notice, by certified or registered mail to his last known address or by personal service, that: 
(1)  The building or property is in violation of the flood damage prevention ordinance; 
(2)  A hearing will be held before the local floodplain administrator at a designated place and time, not later than ten days after the date of the notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and 
(3)  Following the hearing, the local floodplain administrator may issue such order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as appears appropriate. 
(g)  Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the floodplain administrator shall find that the building or development is in violation of the flood damage prevention ordinance, he shall make an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation within such period, not less than 60 days, the floodplain administrator may prescribe; provided that where the floodplain administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may be feasible. 
(h)  Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action may appeal from the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of appeal in writing to the floodplain administrator and the clerk within ten days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order of the floodplain administrator shall be final. The local governing body shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke the order. 
(i)  Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action from which no appeal has been taken, or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an appeal, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in the discretion of the court. 
(j)  Denial of flood insurance under the NFIP. If a structure is declared in violation of this chapter and after all other penalties are exhausted to achieve compliance with this chapter then the local floodplain administrator shall notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to initiate a section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 action against the structure upon the finding that the violator refuses to bring the violation into compliance with this chapter. Once a violation has been remedied the local floodplain administrator shall notify FEMA of the remedy and ask that the section 1316 be rescinded. 
(k)  Documentation. The following documents are incorporated by reference and may be used by the local floodplain administrator to provide further guidance and interpretation of this chapter as found on FEMA's website at www.fema.gov: 
(1)  FEMA 55 Coastal Construction Manual. 
(2)  All FEMA Technical Bulletins. 
(3)  All FEMA Floodplain Management Bulletins. 
(4)  FEMA 348 Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damage. 
(5)  FEMA 499 Home Builder's Guide to Coastal Construction Technical Fact Sheets.  
Secs. 34-72—34-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 34-101. - General standards. 
Development may not occur in the special flood hazard area (SFHA) where alternative locations exist due to the inherent hazards and risks involved. Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall demonstrate that new structures cannot be located out of the SFHA and that encroachments onto the SFHA are minimized. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Reasonably safe from flooding. Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(2)  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure. 
(3)  Flood resistant materials and equipment. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with flood resistant materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage in accordance with Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, dated 8/08, and available from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(4)  Minimize flood damage. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages. 
(5)  Critical development. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated to the 500-year flood elevation or be elevated to the highest known historical flood elevation, where records are available, whichever is greater. If no data exists establishing the 500-year flood elevation or the highest known historical flood elevation, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis that generates 500-year flood elevation data. 
(6)  Utilities. Electrical, ventilation, plumbing, heating and air conditioning equipment including ductwork, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of the base flood plus feet (freeboard). 
(7)  Water supply systems. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(8)  Sanitary sewage systems. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(9)  Gas or liquid storage tanks. All gas or liquid storage tanks, either located above ground or buried, shall be anchored to prevent floatation and lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads. 
(10)  Alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement to a structure that is in compliance with the provisions of this article, shall meet the requirements of new construction as contained in this article. This includes post-FIRM development and structures. 
(11)  Non-conforming buildings or uses. Non-conforming buildings or uses may not be enlarged, replaced, or rebuilt unless such enlargement or reconstruction is accomplished in conformance with the provisions of this article. Provided, however, nothing in this article shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or replacement of an existing building or structure located totally or partially within the floodway, provided that the bulk of the building or structure below base flood elevation in the floodway is not increased and provided that such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other requirements of this article, 
(12)  American with Disabilities Act (ADA). A building must meet the specific standards for floodplain construction outlined in section 34-102, as well as any applicable ADA requirements. The ADA is not justification for issuing a variance or otherwise waiving these requirements. Also, the cost of improvements required to meet the ADA provisions shall be included in the costs of the improvements for calculating substantial improvement.  
Sec. 34-102. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard (zones A, AE, AH, AO, and A1-30) where base flood elevation data has been provided, as set forth in section 34-4 or outlined in the duties and responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator in section 34-70, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the lowest floor elevated no lower than feet above the base flood elevation. No basements are permitted. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, flood openings sufficient to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces, shall be provided in accordance with the elevated buildings requirements in subsection (4) of this section. 
(2)  Non-residential construction. 
a.  New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the lowest floor elevated no lower than two feet above the level of the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, flood openings sufficient to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces, shall be provided in accordance with the elevated buildings requirements in subsection (4) of this section. No basements are permitted. Structures located in A-zones may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation provided that all areas of the structure below the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. 
b.  A registered, professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in the floodproofing certification requirements in section 34-69(b). A variance may be considered for wet floodproofing agricultural structures in accordance with the criteria outlined in section 34-126. Agricultural structures not meeting the criteria of section 34-126 must meet the non-residential construction standards and all other applicable provisions of this chapter. Structures that are floodproofed are required to have an approved maintenance plan with an annual exercise. The local floodplain administrator must approve the maintenance plan and notification of the annual exercise shall be provided to it. 
(3)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites outside a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or sub-division, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, must be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than feet above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
b.  Manufactured homes that are to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that are not subject to the provisions for residential construction in subsection (1) of this section must be elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower feet than above the base flood elevation, and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement in accordance with section 40-29-10 of the state manufactured housing board regulations, as amended. Additionally, when the elevation requirement would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36 inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in height an engineering certification is required. 
d.  An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood-prone areas. This plan shall be filed with and approved by the local floodplain administrator and the local emergency preparedness coordinator. 
(4)  Elevated buildings. New construction and substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other than a basement, and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to preclude finished space and be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed all of the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. 
2.  The bottom of each opening must be no more than one foot above the higher of the interior or exterior grade immediately under the opening. 
3.  Only the portions of openings that are below the base flood elevation (BFE) can be counted towards the required net open area. 
4.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
5.  Fill placed around foundation walls must be graded so that the grade inside the enclosed area is equal to or higher than the adjacent grade outside the building on at least one side of the building. 
b.  Hazardous velocities. Hydrodynamic pressure must be considered in the design of any foundation system where velocity waters or the potential for debris flow exists. If flood velocities are excessive (greater than five feet per second), foundation systems other than solid foundations walls should be considered so that obstructions to damaging flood flows are minimized. 
c.  Enclosures below lowest floor. 
1.  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
2.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms, must be void of utilities except for essential lighting as required for safety, and cannot be temperature controlled. 
3.  One wet location switch and/or outlet connected to a ground fault interrupt breaker may be installed below the required lowest floor elevation specified in the specific standards outlined in subsections (1)—(3) of this section. 
4.  All construction materials below the required lowest floor elevation specified in the specific standards outlined in subsections (1)—(4) of this section should be of flood resistant materials. 
(5)  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-4, are areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris and potential projectiles and has erosion potential. The following provisions shall apply within such areas: 
a.  No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, additions, and other developments shall be permitted unless: 
1.  It has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood. Such certification and technical data shall be presented to the local floodplain administrator. 
2.  A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) has been approved by FEMA. A letter of map revision must be obtained upon completion of the proposed development. 
b.  If subsection (5)a of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
c.  No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring and the elevation standards of subsection (3) of this section and the encroachment standards of subsection (5)a of this section are met. 
d.  Permissible uses within floodways may include: general farming, pasture, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, forestry, wildlife sanctuary, game farm, and other similar agricultural, wildlife, and related uses. Also, lawns, gardens, play areas, picnic grounds, and hiking and horseback riding trails are acceptable uses, provided that they do not employ structures or fill. Substantial development of a permissible use may require a no-impact certification. The uses listed in this subsection are permissible only if and to the extent that they do not cause any increase in base flood elevations or changes to the floodway configuration. 
(6)  Recreational vehicles. 
a.  A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is: 
1.  On wheels or jacking system; 
2.  Attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices; and 
3.  Has no permanently attached additions. 
b.  Recreational vehicles placed on sites shall either be: 
1.  On site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
3.  Meet the development permit and certification requirements of section 34-70, general standards outlined in section 34-101 and manufactured homes standards in subsections (3) and (4) of this section. 
(7)  Map maintenance activities. The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) requires flood data to be reviewed and approved by FEMA. This ensures that flood maps, studies and other data identified in section 34-4 accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain management criteria are based on current data. The following map maintenance activities are identified: 
a.  Requirement to submit new technical data. 
1.  For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical or scientific data reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA as soon as practicable , but no later than six months of the date such information becomes available. These development proposals include; but are not limited to: 
(i)  Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood elevations or alter floodway boundaries; 
(ii)  Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard area; 
(iii)  Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of culverts; and 
(iv)  Subdivision or large scale development proposals requiring the establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with section 34-69(a). 
2.  It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data, required in accordance with this subsection, prepared in a format required for a conditional letter of map revision or letter of map revision, and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions shall also be the responsibility of the applicant. 
3.  The local floodplain administrator shall require a conditional letter of map revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for: 
(i)  Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood elevation; and 
(ii)  Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation by more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations but no floodway. 
4.  Floodplain development permits issued by the local floodplain administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a letter of map revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to this subsection. 
b.  Right to submit new technical data. The floodplain administrator may request changes to any of the information shown on an effective map that does not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or base flood elevations, such as labeling or planimetric details. Such a submission shall include appropriate supporting documentation made in writing by the local jurisdiction and may be submitted at any time. 
(8)  Accessory structures. 
a.  A detached accessory structure or garage, the cost of which is greater than $3,000.00, must comply with the requirements as outlined in FEMA's Technical Bulletin 7-93 Wet Floodproofing Requirements or be elevated in accordance with subsections (1) and (4) of this section or dry floodproofed in accordance with subsection (2) of this section. 
b.  If accessory structures of $3,000.00 or less are to be placed in the floodplain, the following criteria shall be met: 
1.  Accessory structures shall not be used for any uses other than the parking of vehicles and storage; 
2.  Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential; 
3.  Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters; 
4.  Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure; 
5.  Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be installed in accordance with section 34-101; 
6.  Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be provided below base flood elevation in conformance with subsection (4) of this section; and 
7.  Accessory structures shall be built with flood resistance materials in accordance with Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, dated 8/08, and available from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Class 4 and 5 materials, referenced therein, are acceptable flood-resistant materials. 
(9)  Swimming pool utility equipment rooms. If the building cannot be built at or above the BFE, because of functionality of the equipment then a structure to house the utilities for the pool may be built below the BFE with the following provisions: 
a.  Meet the requirements for accessory structures in subsection (8) of this section. 
b.  The utilities must be anchored to prevent flotation and shall be designed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of the base flood. 
(10)  Elevators. 
a.  Install a float switch system or another system that provides the same level of safety necessary for all elevators where there is a potential for the elevator cab to descend below the BFE during a flood per FEMA's Technical Bulletin 4-93 Elevator Installation for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas. 
b.  All equipment that may have to be installed below the BFE such as counter weight roller guides, compensation cable and pulleys, and oil buffers for traction elevators and the jack assembly for a hydraulic elevator must be constructed using flood-resistant materials where possible per FEMA's Technical Bulletin 4-93 Elevator Installation for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas. 
(11)  Fill. An applicant shall demonstrate that fill is the only alternative to raising the building to meet the residential and non-residential construction requirements of subsections (1) and (2) of this section, and that the amount of fill used will not affect the flood storage capacity or adversely affect adjacent properties. The following provisions shall apply to all fill placed in the special flood hazard area: 
a.  Fill may not be placed in the floodway unless it is in accordance with the requirements in subsection (5)a of this section. 
b.  Fill may not be placed in tidal or non-tidal wetlands without the required state and federal permits. 
c.  Fill must consist of soil and rock materials only. A registered professional geotechnical engineer may use dredged material as fill only upon certification of suitability. Landfills, rubble fills, dumps, and sanitary fills are not permitted in the floodplain. 
d.  Fill used to support structures must comply with ASTM standard D-698, and its suitability to support structures certified by a registered, professional engineer. 
e.  Fill slopes shall be no greater than two horizontal to one vertical. Flatter slopes may be required where velocities may result in erosion. 
f.  The use of fill shall not increase flooding or cause drainage problems on neighboring properties. 
g.  Fill may not be used for structural support in the coastal high hazard areas. 
h.  Will meet the requirements of FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01, Ensuring That Structures Built On Fill in or Near Special Flood Hazard Areas Are Reasonable Safe from Flooding. 
(12)  Standards for subdivision proposals and other development. 
a.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in these regulations. 
b.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
c.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. 
d.  The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical data to FEMA in subsection (7) of this section when a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis is completed that generates base flood elevations.  
Sec. 34-103. - Standards for streams without established base flood elevations and floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard (zone A) established in section 34-4, are small streams where no base flood data has been provided and where no floodways have been identified. The following provisions apply within such areas: 
(1)  In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for all subdivision proposals and other proposed developments containing at least 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less. 
(2)  No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and new development shall be permitted within 100 feet of the stream bank unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  If section subsection (1) of this section is satisfied and base flood elevation data is available from other sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas shall comply with all applicable flood hazard ordinance provisions of this article and shall be elevated or floodproofed in accordance with elevations established in accordance with section 34-71(k). 
(4)  Data from preliminary, draft, and final flood insurance studies constitutes best available data. Refer to FEMA Floodplain Management Technical Bulletin 1-98 Use of Flood Insurance Study (FIS) Data as Available Data. If an appeal is pending on the study in accordance with 44 CFR Ch. 1, Parts 67.5 and 67.6, the data does not have to be used. 
(5)  When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available from a federal, state, or other source one of the following methods may be used to determine a BFE For further information regarding the methods for determining BFEs listed below, refer to FEMA's manual Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas: 
a.  Contour interpolation. 
1.  Superimpose approximate Zone A boundaries onto a topographic map and estimate a BFE. 
2.  Add one-half of the contour interval of the topographic map that is used to the BFE. 
b.  Data extrapolation. A BFE can be determined if a site within 500 feet upstream of a reach of a stream reach for which a 100-year profile has been computed by detailed methods, and the floodplain and channel bottom slope characteristics are relatively similar to the downstream reaches. No hydraulic structures shall be present. 
c.  Hydrologic and hydraulic calculations. Perform hydrologic and hydraulic calculations to determine BFEs using FEMA approved methods and software.  
Sec. 34-104. - Standards for streams with established base flood elevations but without floodways. 
Along rivers and streams where base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway is identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in the FIS, no encroachments including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.  
Sec. 34-105. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-4, are areas designated as shallow flooding. The following provisions shall apply within such areas: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor elevated to at least as high as the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall: 
a.  Have the lowest floor elevated to at least as high as the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade; or 
b.  Be completely floodproofed together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is required as stated in section 34-70. 
(3)  All structures on slopes must have drainage paths around them to guide water away from the structures.  
Secs. 34-106—34-121. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 34-122. - Establishment of appeal board. 
The appeal board as established by the city, shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.  
Sec. 34-123. - Right to appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the court.  
Sec. 34-124. - Historic structures. 
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.  
Sec. 34-125. - Functionally dependant uses. 
Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependant use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exist, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage and create no additional threat to public safety.  
Sec. 34-126. - Agricultural structures. 
Variances may be issued to wet floodproof an agricultural structure provided it is used solely for agricultural purposes. In order to minimize flood damages during the base flood and the threat to public health and safety, the structure must meet all of the conditions and considerations of section 34-128, this section, and the following standards: 
(1)  Use of the structure must be limited to agricultural purposes as listed below: 
a.  Pole frame buildings with open or closed sides used exclusively for the storage of farm machinery and equipment. 
b.  Steel grain bins and steel frame corncribs. 
c.  General-purpose barns for the temporary feeding of livestock that are open on at least one side. 
d.  For livestock confinement buildings, poultry houses, dairy operations, and similar livestock operations, variances may not be issued for structures that were substantially damaged. New construction or substantial improvement of such structures must meet the elevation requirements of section 34-102(2). 
(2)  The agricultural structure must be built or rebuilt, in the case of an existing building that is substantially damaged, with flood-resistant materials for the exterior and interior building components and elements below the base flood elevation. 
(3)  The agricultural structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. All of the structure's components must be capable of resisting specific flood-related forces including hydrostatic, buoyancy, hydrodynamic, and debris impact forces. Where flood velocities exceed five feet per second, fast-flowing floodwaters can exert considerable pressure on the building's enclosure walls or foundation walls. 
(4)  The agricultural structure must meet the venting requirement of section 34-102(4). 
(5)  Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be located above the base flood elevation (BFE), plus any required freeboard, or be contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with section 34-101(5). 
(6)  The agricultural structure must comply with the floodway encroachment provisions of section 34-102(5). 
(7)  Major equipment, machinery, or other contents must be protected. Such protection may include protective watertight floodproofed areas within the building, the use of equipment hoists for readily elevating contents, permanently elevating contents on pedestals or shelves above the base flood elevation, or determining that property owners can safely remove contents without risk to lives and that the contents will be located to a specified site out of the floodplain. 
(8)  Considerations. In passing upon such applications, the appeal board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and: 
a.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
b.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage, and the safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
c.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
d.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
e.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
f.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
g.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development, and the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
h.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
i.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(9)  Agricultural structures must be located in wide, expansive floodplain areas, where no other alternative location for the agricultural structure exists. The applicant must demonstrate that the entire farm acreage, consisting of a contiguous parcel of land on which the structure is to be located, must be in the special flood hazard area and no other alternative locations for the structure are available.  
Sec. 34-127. - Findings. 
Findings listed above shall be submitted to the appeal board, in writing, and included in the application for a variance. Additionally, comments from the department of natural resources, land, water and conservation division, state coordinator's office, must be taken into account and included in the permit file.  
Sec. 34-128. - Floodways. 
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result unless a CLOMR is obtained prior to issuance of the variance. In order to ensure the project is built in compliance with the CLOMR for which the variance is granted the applicant must provide a bond for 100 percent of the cost to perform the development.  
Sec. 34-129. - Conditions. 
Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. The following conditions shall apply to all variances: 
(1)  Variances may not be issued when the variance will make the structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or ordinances. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(3)  Variances shall only be issued upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(4)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and a written statement that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. 
(5)  The local floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) upon request. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued for unpermitted development or other development that is not in compliance with the provisions of this article. Violations must be corrected in accordance with section 34-71(e).  
Secs. 34-130—34-156. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 34-157. - Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing flood damage prevention ordinance. 
This chapter in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of the provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance previously enacted by the city and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued there under are reserved and may be enforced. The enactment of this chapter shall not affect any action, suit or proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance of the city previously enacted, as amended, which are not reenacted herein, are repealed.  
Sec. 34-158. - Effect upon outstanding building permits. 
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size or designated use of any building, structure or part thereof for which a building permit has been granted by the chief building inspector or his authorized agents before the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived; provided, however, that when start of construction has not occurred under such outstanding permit within a period of 60 days subsequent to passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, construction or use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.  
Chapter 38 - HOUSING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— South Carolina Fair Housing Law, S.C. Code 1976, § 31-21-10 et seq. 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Fair housing policy. 
(a)  The mayor and city council do hereby appoint the city manager and his designated agent as a fair housing administrator. 
(b)  The city manager or his designated agent shall receive and review any and all grievances concerning discrimination in the provision of housing within the city. 
(c)  The city manager or his designated agent shall forward all unresolved grievances to the Equal Opportunity Housing Section, United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, Area Office, Columbia, South Carolina. 
(d)  The council will encourage all local realtors, homeowners and contractors to provide for nondiscrimination in the provision of housing within the city. 
(Code 1995, § 38-1; Ord. of 10-5-1987)  
Chapter 42 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal police officers, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-110. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 42-1. - Aid to other subdivisions. 
Upon the request of the governing body of any other political subdivision of the state, the city council may send any law enforcement officer to the requesting political subdivision in cases of emergency, in accordance with S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-120. 
(Ord. of 7-11-2005, § 2)  
Secs. 42-2—42-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 42-21. - Creation; composition; rank and authority of officers and members. 
(a)  The city shall have and maintain a police department for the preservation of order within the city and for the enforcement of the rules, regulations and ordinances of the city. The department shall be composed of such number of officers as the city manager may recommend to be adequate and proper for that purpose and as funded by the city council. 
(b)  As directing head of the police department, there shall be a chief of police (also known as the police chief). 
(c)  There may be a differential in pay among all ranks, depending on their particular duties, and such differential shall be determined and fixed by the city manager. 
(d)  Exercise by the city council of its prerogatives herein shall be made by and with any recommendations of the city manager, who shall be in charge of the operation of the entire department. 
(e)  In addition to the other duties of the chief of police pursuant to the position of department head of the police department, the police chief shall establish appropriate administrative and operational procedures for the police department pursuant to this Code, the city's administrative regulations, and the direction of the city manager; ensure close and effective communication, coordination, and cooperation with area public safety departments, and law enforcement agencies. 
(Code 1977, § 21-1; Code 1995, § 42-26; Ord. of 9-22-2018, § 3F)  
Sec. 42-22. - Oath. 
Before entering upon the discharge of their duties as such, all members of the police department shall take the following oath: 
"As a member of the police force of the City of Clinton, I will equally, fairly and impartially, to the best of my ability and skill, exercise the trust reposed in me, and will use my best endeavors to carry into effect, according to law, the purposes for which I have been elected, so help me God." 
(Code 1977, § 21-2; Code 1995, § 42-27)  
Sec. 42-23. - Powers under state law. 
The members of the police department, in addition to the powers and duties specifically set forth in this Code, shall have and exercise all such powers as are bestowed upon them by the laws of the state. 
(Code 1977, § 21-4; Code 1995, § 42-28)  
Sec. 42-24. - Authority to order arrest upon sworn complaint. 
Any police officer is hereby authorized and empowered to order or cause any person who violates any of the ordinances of the city to be arrested upon the sworn affidavit of any complainant. 
(Code 1977, § 21-5; Code 1995, § 42-29)  
Sec. 42-25. - Record of money, other articles taken into custody. 
Except as otherwise provided, it shall be the duty of each member of the police department when he has lawfully taken into possession or custody any money or other articles or property to keep such records thereof as the city manager directs. 
(Code 1977, § 21-6; Code 1995, § 42-30)  
Sec. 42-26. - Emergency operations center. 
(a)  The police department will maintain a fully functional emergency operations center to be activated for weather, natural, or man-caused disasters. The police department will coordinate the implementation of the emergency action plan, hurricane plan, and related emergency plans in response to natural, weather, and/or man-caused disasters, with special attention to senior citizens, the homebound, the disabled, and other persons with special needs. 
(b)  The police chief shall serve as the emergency operations coordinator, and in such role shall ensure the readiness of the emergency operations center and the emergency operations plan of the city, implement the emergency operations plan, and activate the emergency operations center pursuant to this Code when directed by the city manager or, in the discretion of the emergency operations coordinator, such action is appropriate when an emergency situation poses imminent danger to the city, its residents, or property. The emergency operations coordinator shall also ensure close communication, coordination, and cooperation with area emergency preparedness agencies and the state. 
(Ord. of 9-22-2018, § 3G)  
Chapter 46 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The municipal court may (1) Under S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-6150, try and determine criminal cases involving violations of S.C. Code 1976, title 56, chapter 5, occurring within the respective limits of this municipality, when the penalty prescribed by S.C. Code 1976, title 56, chapter 5 for such violations does not exceed 30 days' imprisonment nor a $100.00 fine, and may have trial jurisdiction over such criminal cases the same as magistrates; (2) Under S.C. Code 1976, § 61-6-4500, try and determine all cases involving a violation of S.C. Code 1976, title 61, chapter 6, art. 13, except § 61-6-4720; (3) Maintain jurisdiction for trial of persons under 17 years of age, for alleged violations of S.C. Code 1976, title 50, when the court would have jurisdiction if the offense charged was committed by an adult. 
State Law reference— Municipal courts generally, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-5 et seq.; trial of persons charged with violations of ordinances or state law, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-90; appointment and duties of clerk of court, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-35; maximum penalties imposed by municipal court, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-65; judge may suspend sentences, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-75; disposition of fines and penalties, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-85; appeals to court of common pleas, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-95; municipal judge to make return, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-105; jury commissioners, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-135; demand for jury trial; composition, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-125; payment of assessments under certain conditions, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-1-208; municipal courts may require public service work as condition of sentence suspension, S.C. Code Reg. 130-20.B.1(b). 
 
Sec. 46-1. - Established. 
There is hereby established a municipal court for the city, which shall be a part of the unified judicial system of the state. 
(Code 1977, § 16-1; Code 1995, § 46-1)  
Sec. 46-2. - Judges. 
The municipal court shall be presided over by one or more full-time or part-time judges, at the discretion of the city council. The municipal judge shall be appointed by the council for a term fixed by the council not to exceed four years nor less than two years, and shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The compensation of the municipal judge shall be as, from time to time, determined by the council. Vacancies shall be filled in accordance with S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-25. 
(Code 1977, § 16-2; Code 1995, § 46-2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 14-25-15, 14-25-25.  
Sec. 46-3. - Clerk. 
The council shall designate a clerk of the municipal court, who shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by the municipal judge or the state court administrator. The council may designate the city clerk/treasurer or other municipal employee to serve as clerk of the court. 
(Code 1977, § 16-3; Code 1995, § 46-3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-35.  
Sec. 46-4. - Jurisdiction. 
The municipal court shall have jurisdiction to try all cases arising under the ordinances of the city. The court shall also have all such powers, duties and jurisdiction in criminal cases made under state law and conferred upon magistrates. The court shall have the power to punish for contempt of court by imposition of sentences up to the limits imposed on municipal courts. The court shall have no jurisdiction in civil matters. 
(Code 1977, § 16-4; Code 1995, § 46-4) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-45.  
Sec. 46-5. - Imposition of maximum penalty. 
Whenever the municipal judge finds a party guilty of violating a municipal ordinance or a state law within the jurisdiction of the court, he may impose a fine or imprisonment, or both, not to exceed $500.00 or 30 days. 
(Code 1977, § 16-5; Code 1995, § 46-5) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 14-25-75, 14-25-85.  
Sec. 46-6. - Suspension of sentences. 
The municipal judge may suspend sentences imposed by him upon such terms and conditions as he deems proper including, without limitation, restitution or public service employment. 
(Code 1977, § 16-6; Code 1995, § 46-6) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-75.  
Sec. 46-7. - Disposition of fines. 
All fines and penalties collected by the municipal court shall be forthwith turned over to the clerk for deposit to the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 16-7; Code 1995, § 46-7) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-85.  
Sec. 46-8. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any party shall have the right to appeal from the sentence or judgment of the municipal court to the court of common pleas. Notice of intention to appeal, setting forth the grounds for appeal, shall be given in writing and served on the municipal judge or the clerk of the municipal court within ten days after sentence is passed or judgment rendered, or the appeal shall be deemed waived. The party appealing shall enter into a bond, payable to the city, to appear and defend such appeal at the next term of the court of common pleas or shall pay the fine assessed. 
(b)  In the event of an appeal, the municipal judge shall make a return to the court of common pleas, as provided by S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-105. 
(Code 1977, § 16-8; Code 1995, § 46-8) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-105.  
Sec. 46-9. - Jury trials. 
Any person to be tried in the municipal court may, prior to trial, demand a jury trial, and such jury when demanded shall be composed of six persons drawn from the qualified electors of the city in the manner prescribed by law. The right to a jury trial shall be deemed to have been waived unless demand is made prior to trial. 
(Code 1977, § 16-9; Code 1995, § 46-9) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-125.  
Sec. 46-10. - Jury commissioners. 
The city council shall serve as jury commissioners for the municipal court. 
(Code 1977, § 16-10; Code 1995, § 46-10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-135.  
Sec. 46-11. - Ministerial recorder. 
There is hereby established the office of ministerial recorder. Ministerial recorders shall be elected from time to time by the city council and shall serve at its pleasure or until the office is vacated when employment with the city is terminated. Ministerial recorders shall perform the powers provided by law and shall be subject to the supervision of the municipal judge. Ministerial recorders shall not be law enforcement officers. 
(Code 1977, § 16-11; Code 1995, § 46-11) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-115.  
Chapter 50 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Crimes and offenses, S.C. Code 1976, title 16; fortune-telling to promote business, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-17-690; coin-operated devices, S.C. Code 1976, § 12-21-2710 et seq.; unlawful games and betting, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-19-40; removal of doors from abandoned airtight containers, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-3-1010; open and unprotected abandoned wells, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-3-1020. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 50-1. - Posting private advertisements. 
The placement of private advertisements, personal, commercial and/or political, on city property for the purpose of promoting or advertising a product, organization and/or individual is strictly prohibited. 
(Code 1995, § 50-1; Ord. of 4-11-1988)  
Sec. 50-2. - Adoption of state criminal law. 
All acts and conduct that constitute violations of the common law and the statutory law of the state as set forth in the South Carolina Code 1976, as amended, are declared unlawful when such acts, conduct or violations occur insofar as such provisions and violations can have application to and the punishment of which is within the jurisdiction of the town.  
Sec. 50-3. - Aiding or abetting ordinance violations. 
It is unlawful for any person to counsel, advise, incite, abet, procure or aid any other person in the violation of any of the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17-2; Code 1995, § 50-3)  
Sec. 50-4. - False alarm of fire or need for police or ambulance assistance. 
It is unlawful for any person intentionally to make, turn in, or give a false alarm of fire, or of need for police or ambulance assistance, or aid or abet in the commission of any such act. 
(Code 1977, § 17-6; Code 1995, § 50-4)  
Sec. 50-5. - False report of crime. 
It is unlawful for any person to make to, or file with, the police department of the city or any police officer any false, misleading or unfounded statement or report concerning the commission or alleged commission of any crime. 
(Code 1977, § 17-7; Code 1995, § 50-5)  
Sec. 50-6. - Assisting in escape from custody. 
It is unlawful for any person to offer or endeavor to assist any person in the custody of a police officer, or a person duly empowered with police authority, to escape or to attempt to escape from such custody. 
(Code 1977, § 17-8; Code 1995, § 50-6)  
Sec. 50-7. - Providing liquor, tools or other implements to prisoners. 
It is unlawful for any person to make available to, present to or place within the reach of any person confined under authority of the city any intoxicating or malt liquors, or any tool, implement or other thing calculated to aid in the escape of such person so confined or any other person confined under authority of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17-9; Code 1995, § 50-7)  
Secs. 50-8—50-32. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NOISES 
 
Sec. 50-33. - Loud, raucous noises prohibited generally. 
It is unlawful to create and continue any loud and raucous noises within the city. It is unlawful for any person to cause, make or contribute to creating any loud and raucous noise which because of its volume level, duration and character disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities. 
(Code 1977, § 17-54; Code 1995, § 50-61; Ord. of 11-5-1990(1))  
Sec. 50-34. - Enumeration of specific prohibited noises. 
The following acts among others are declared to be loud and raucous noises in violation of this article, but shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding or blowing of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, motor bus or other vehicle, except as a danger signal; the creation by means of any signal device of any loud or harsh noise; and the sounding of such device for any unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, etc. The playing of any radio, television, phonograph, piccolo or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities in any dwelling, hotel or other residence. 
(3)  Pets. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities in the vicinity. 
(4)  Use of vehicle. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or used or repaired in such manner, as to create loud noises, particularly grating, grinding, rattling, riveting or other disturbing noises. 
(5)  Exhaust discharge. To discharge into the open air the exhaust from any steam engine, stationary internal-combustion engine, motorboat engine or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(6)  Devices using compressed air. The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air, unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced. 
(7)  Building operations. The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in a residential or business district other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in cases of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety and then only with a permit from the mayor. 
(8)  Noises near schools, hospitals, churches, etc. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, library, sanitorium or hospital, or adjacent to any church during church services or other church activity, which interferes with the work or worship in any such place or institution. 
(9)  Loading and unloading operations. The creation of loud and excessive noises in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle, or opening and destroying bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(10)  Bells or gongs. The sounding of any bell or gong attached to any building or premises or vehicle or cart which disturbs the quiet or repose of any person in the vicinity thereof. 
(11)  Hawking, peddling, soliciting. Shouting, loud talking, crying or soliciting by peddlers, hawkers, taxi drivers, solicitors and vendors, of such a loud and raucous nature so as to disturb the quiet and peace of any reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities in the neighborhood. 
(12)  Noises to attract attention. The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance or event, show, sale or display or advertisement or merchandise by the creation of loud and raucous noise. 
(13)  Loudspeakers or amplifiers on vehicles. The use of any mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks, airplanes or other vehicles for advertising or other purposes. 
(14)  Business noises at night near residences. The operation of any garage, filling station, auto repair business, taxi business, plant, store, factory or other place of business, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to create loud and raucous noises of such frequency or volume as to disturb the quiet and comfort of any reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities, and particularly the creating of disturbing noises of such frequency and volume as to disturb the peace or repose of any reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities in any dwelling, hotel, boardinghouse or other type of residence. 
(Code 1977, § 17-55; Code 1995, § 50-62; Ord. of 11-5-1990(2))  
Sec. 50-35. - Musical devices, radios, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate on public streets or public places or from any motor vehicles on public streets or public places, within the corporate limits of the city, at any time, any musical device, radio, amplifier, loudspeaker or sound- or noise-producing or transmitting device of any kind at such volume that it can be heard beyond a distance of 50 feet or within any house, church or other building other than the one in which such device is being used. 
(b)  Allowable variances shall be: 
(1)  A special permit may be issued by the city manager for an event to be held by an institution or for a public event. Permits shall not be issued for private events. The request must be made no later than 30 days prior to the event. 
(2)  Regularly scheduled ball games or other outdoor events on school campuses shall be allowed to use speaker systems and amplified music. 
(3)  The use of amplified sound shall not be allowed after 10:00 p.m. for any outdoor event. 
(4)  In the event of widespread complaints prior to 10:00 p.m., the police may require the event manager to make a decision to reduce the volume to a reasonable level. Failure to comply may cause discontinuation of the event by the department. 
(Code 1995, § 50-63; Ord. of 10-1-1990(2); Ord. of 7-10-2000)  
Secs. 50-36—50-58. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS 
 
Sec. 50-59. - Assault and battery. 
It is unlawful for any person to commit any assault or assault and battery or in any manner whatever engage in any combat or fight, except in defense of his person, within any private or public house or other place within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17-84; Code 1995, § 50-111)  
Secs. 50-60—50-76. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER 
 
Sec. 50-77. - Loitering—About schools, churches, etc. 
It is unlawful for any person to loiter or loaf about any college, school, hospital, orphanage, church, commercial property or public property within the corporate limits of the city, and it is unlawful for any person not connected therewith unless on legitimate business to trespass upon any of the grounds of any such institution or continuously to ride any vehicle over the streets near any such institution. Commercial property must be posted indicating that loitering is prohibited in compliance with this section. 
(Code 1977, § 17-1997; Code 1995, § 50-132; Ord. of 10-1-1990(1))  
Sec. 50-78. - Loitering—About jail. 
It is unlawful for any person to loiter about the jail of the city or to communicate with any prisoner therein without the consent of the officer on duty. 
(Code 1977, § 17-98; Code 1995, § 50-133)  
Sec. 50-79. - Interference with, resisting officers. 
It is unlawful for any person to resist or interfere, or to aid or abet another to resist or interfere, by act or otherwise, with any police officer, member of the fire department or any other officer of the city, while in the discharge or apparent discharge of his duty. Speech alone that questions or expresses opposition to law enforcement action does not constitute a violation of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 17-100; Code 1995, § 50-135)  
Sec. 50-80. - Creating a nuisance. 
Whenever any business concern or the inmates, occupants or owners of any house or premises in the city shall so improperly conduct themselves, their business or their premises as to become a nuisance to the adjacent neighborhood, or detrimental to the interests of the same and shall be reported to the municipal judge by three or more responsible citizens of the immediate neighborhood, then it shall be lawful for the municipal judge to cause the offending parties to be brought before him for trial, and, upon conviction, the offending parties shall each be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1977, § 17-102; Code 1995, § 50-137)  
Sec. 50-81. - Disturbing meetings or gatherings. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone in any public building or entertainment to whistle, talk in a loud voice, or in any other way interrupt or disturb any performance or meeting of a public nature or in a public place. If any person is engaged in a violation of this section, the police shall order him to desist therefrom, and upon refusal or failure so to desist, the person so refusing shall be removed from the building or assembly. 
(Code 1977, § 17-103; Code 1995, § 50-138)  
Secs. 50-82—50-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 50-106. - Damaging, destroying, etc.—Private property. 
It is unlawful for any person to destroy, damage, mutilate, move or remove any property of another within the city. Such acts are not limited to but include the following: 
(1)  Any person who shall willfully cut, shoot, maim, wound or otherwise injure any personal property of another person. 
(2)  Any person who shall willfully cut, mutilate, deface or otherwise injure any tree, shrub, house, outside fence or fixture of another, or commit any other trespass upon real property in possession of another. 
(3)  Any person who shall damage or deface in any way whatever any fixture, building, tombstone, seat, bench, chair, railing, enclosure, tree, shrub, vine, bulb, flower, pipe, watering device or other thing placed, put or growing in any cemetery. 
(Code 1977, § 17-115; Code 1995, § 50-161)  
Sec. 50-107. - Damaging, destroying, etc.—City property. 
It is unlawful for any person willfully or negligently to cut, mutilate, deface or otherwise injure any building, tree, shrub, lamppost, fence, bridge, hydrant, fireplug, fire engine, hose, cart, truck, street cleaning equipment, or other real or personal property belonging to or under the control of the city, or used for any public purpose. 
(Code 1977, § 17-116; Code 1995, § 50-162)  
Sec. 50-108. - Throwing stones, other missiles. 
It is unlawful for any person to throw any stone or any other missile upon or at any vehicle, building or other public or private property or upon or at any person in any public or private way or place or enclosed or unenclosed ground. 
(Code 1977, § 17-122; Code 1995, § 50-168)  
Sec. 50-109. - Uttering fraudulent checks; application of state law provisions. 
All provisions and sections of Act 93 of 1979 (S.C. Code 1976, §§ 34-11-60, 34-11-70, 34-11-90, and 34-11-95, relating to the drawing and uttering of fraudulent checks) are hereby adopted and by reference are incorporated herein as an offense under this Code. A copy of such provisions is on file with the city clerk/treasurer. 
(Code 1977, § 17-123; Code 1995, § 50-169)  
Secs. 50-110—50-131. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PICKETING AND DEMONSTRATIONS 
 
Sec. 50-132. - Prohibited acts. 
When picketing or engaging in any demonstration within the corporate limits of the city, no person shall: 
(1)  Use on the streets or public places within the city any verbal abuse, including curses, insults or threats or acts of violence directed against any person or any law enforcement agency of the city, county or state or any officer thereof. 
(2)  March, parade, protest or picket in any manner other than as permitted by this article, except with the express written consent of the city council. 
(3)  Engage in riotous and loud conduct which invades the privacy of homes or businesses. 
(4)  Damage or destroy or injure the persons or property of others. 
(5)  Block, in any manner, the streets and means of ingress and egress to places of business within the city. This shall include, but not be limited to, sit-downs, sit-ins, stand-ins, or becoming limp inside or outside of such places of business or in or on the streets of the city. 
(6)  Interfere with, in any manner, or obstruct any official in the performance of his duties. 
(7)  Interfere in any manner with the attendance, during school hours, of children in the public schools, by inciting or urging them to participate in demonstrations or for any other unlawful purpose or reason, or permitting them to be or remain in churches or other places used in such demonstrations. 
(Code 1977, § 17-141; Code 1995, § 50-196)  
Sec. 50-133. - Picketing restrictions. 
Picketing shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Picketing shall be conducted in a manner so as not to interfere with pedestrians or vehicular traffic. 
(2)  Picketing shall be in a manner so as not to block entrances or exits to or from picketed establishments. 
(3)  No more than four pickets shall be posted at any one time at any one business establishment. 
(4)  No more than two business establishments shall be picketed in the same block at the same time. 
(5)  No picket shall trespass upon the property of the business establishment being picketed. 
(6)  Pickets shall patrol on the sidewalk at a distance of not less than eight feet from every other picket. 
(7)  No person, whether in sympathy with the pickets or not, shall assemble, loiter, congregate or engage in any kind of picketing of the establishment being picketed. 
(Code 1977, § 17-142; Code 1995, § 50-197)  
Sec. 50-134. - Demonstration restrictions. 
Demonstrations shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Demonstrators shall walk not more than two abreast upon the public sidewalks, or in groups of not more than 100 persons. 
(2)  Demonstrators shall observe all traffic signals. 
(3)  Demonstrators shall walk close to the building line or close to the curb so as not to interfere with or obstruct other pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk. 
(4)  Demonstrators shall assemble peacefully and speak peacefully for a period of time not exceeding 30 minutes, and when traffic to and from places of business or employment is not at its peak, and in such circumstances as will not unduly disrupt the public peace, and conduct the demonstration in such manner as not to deprive the public of adequate police and fire protection. 
(Code 1977, § 17-143; Code 1995, § 50-198)  
Secs. 50-135—50-151. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - WEAPONS 
 
Sec. 50-152. - Carrying or displaying—Generally. 
It is unlawful for any person to carry, wear under his clothes, conceal about his person or display in a threatening manner any dangerous or deadly weapon including, but not by way of limitation, any cross knuckles or knuckles of lead, brass or other metal, or any Bowie knife, or any knife resembling a Bowie knife, or any knife with a switchblade or device whereby the blade can be opened by a flick of a button, pressure on the handle or other mechanical contrivance; provided, however, the provisions hereof shall not apply to peace officers in the actual discharge of their duties or to the right to keep or carry in accordance with state law. Any such weapon found to be used by a person in violation hereof shall be forfeited to the city upon the conviction of such person of such a violation. 
(Code 1977, § 17-155; Code 1995, § 50-211)  
Sec. 50-153. - Carrying or displaying—In public buildings or areas adjacent thereto. 
(a)  Any person who carries into any private or public school, college or university building or any publicly-owned building, or has in his possession in the area immediately adjacent to such buildings, a firearm of any kind, without the express permission of the authorities in charge of the buildings, or who, upon entering such buildings, or the areas immediately adjacent thereto, displays, brandishes or threatens others with a firearm shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any guard, law enforcement officer or member of the armed forces, or to any student of military science, or to any married student residing in apartments provided by such private or public school whose presence with a weapon in or around a particular building is authorized by persons legally responsible for the security of such buildings. 
(Code 1977, § 17-156; Code 1995, § 50-212) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-23-420.  
Sec. 50-154. - Discharging firearms, explosives, etc.; shooting squirrels and vermin. 
(a)  Any person who shall fire or discharge any gun, pistol or other small arms, cracker, skyrocket or explosive and noisy substance or thing, calculated to injure persons or property or frighten horses, within the corporate limits of the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any gun, pistol or other small arms discharged in violation of subsection (a) of this section by any minor or disorderly person having no ostensible property to pay the penalty for such violation may be seized by the mayor or any one of the councilmembers or police who shall observe such person so offending, and in case the person so offending shall not, within ten days after conviction, pay the penalty imposed and the costs of the prosecution, such gun, pistol or other small arms shall be sold to discharge the penalty and costs; provided that nothing herein contained shall extend to prohibit or restrain military parades, police duty or any other duty enjoined by law, the shooting of any mad dog or other dangerous animal. 
(c)  Persons desiring to use firearms to shoot squirrels or vermin on their private property within the corporate limits of the city shall first obtain a written permit from the chief of police and sign a waiver indemnifying and holding harmless the city from any liability for the use of a firearm in such a manner on their private property. In addition, the shooting of squirrels and vermin on private property shall be done in such a manner as not to endanger other persons or their property and the type of firearm used shall only be as permitted by the chief of police. The use of a firearm for the shooting of squirrels and vermin on private property within the corporate limits of the city shall also meet all state and federal firearm and/or hunting requirements. 
(Code 1977, § 17-157; Code 1995, § 50-213; Ord. of 1-4-1993, § 1)  
Sec. 50-155. - Bows and arrows, air guns, slingshots, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot bows and arrows or use air guns, slingshots or any other device for throwing missiles in, across or near any of the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the city or the land of any other person. Public safety officers shall, whenever any bows and arrows, air guns, slingshots or other devices for throwing missiles are found in the possession and use of any minor or other irresponsible person, seize and destroy the same and such seizure shall not prevent the imposing of a fine or imprisonment. Provided that the use of air guns/rifles, BB guns/rifles, pellet guns/rifles, bows and arrows, etc., shall be afforded minors but only under the direct supervision of a responsible adult, only on private property as permitted by the property owner, only with the use of an appropriate backstop (i.e., hay bale, wood wall, etc.) and only used in such a manner as not to violate any other section of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 17-158; Code 1995, § 50-214; Ord. of 1-4-1993, § 2)  
Sec. 50-156. - Sale of knives. 
It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale or display any knife having the appearance of a pocket knife, the blade of which can be opened by a flick of a button, pressure on the handle, or other mechanical devices. Such knife is hereby declared to be a dangerous weapon within the meaning of the ordinances of the city and shall be subject to forfeiture to the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17-160)  
Secs. 50-157—50-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Ordinances relating to upkeep of property within municipality, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-80. 
 
Sec. 50-181. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abate means repair, replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy the condition in question by means, in such time, in such a manner and to such an extent as the enforcement officer shall determine to be in the best interest of the public, taking into account all facts and circumstances. 
Business days means Monday through Friday. 
Enforcement officer means a law enforcement officer, code enforcement official or city employee or official as may be designated in writing by the city manager to enforce the provisions of this article. 
Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting, or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by any graffiti implement, to the extent that the graffiti was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of the property, or, despite advance authorization. 
Industrial waste means all liquid and waterborne solid, liquid, or gaseous wastes resulting from industrial manufacturing, food processing operation, processing any natural resource or mixture of such wastes with water or domestic sewage. 
Person means any landlord, property owner, manager, lessee, tenant, or individual, group, association, corporation, partnership, trust, estate, or receiver having the capacity to sue or be sued. 
Premises means any building, lot parcel, real estate, or land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, occupied or unoccupied, including adjacent parking. 
Public nuisance means, as determined by an enforcement officer based upon the facts and circumstances found after reasonable inquiry, investigation or upon citizen report, those conditions or events which constitute an unreasonable interference with rights of the public in general, and where, in a public place, or where the public congregates, or where the public is likely to come within the range of influence through the senses, a person unlawfully does an act or omits to perform a duty, which act or omission does any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Annoys, injures, subverts, or endangers the public's order, economy, resources, safety, health, welfare, comfort, repose, or offends public decency. 
(2)  Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct, or renders dangerous for passage any waters or public places of way. 
Structure means anything constructed, built, or planted upon, any edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, which structure requires location on the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2005, § 1)  
Sec. 50-182. - Nuisances enumerated. 
(a)  Nuisances affecting public health. The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public health: 
(1)  All decayed or unwholesome food products or food waste not properly contained either inside or outside for more than 24 hours before pick up; 
(2)  Litter, debris, trash, or refuse which is not placed within the appropriate container; 
(3)  All pools of stagnant water or vessels, such as discarded or stored tires, holding stagnant water in which mosquitoes can breed, excluding required retention ponds; 
(4)  Swimming pools which either: 
a.  Are empty, excluding such pools that are completely and effectively covered; or 
b.  Contain liquids and/or debris which are not bacteriologically, chemically, or physically safe for swimming or other intended uses. 
(5)  Animal carcasses not buried or disposed of in a lawful and sanitary manner within 24 hours after its death; 
(6)  Leaking septic tanks or sewer lines or other sewage existing in an unsanitary manner; 
(7)  Weeds or other rank growths of vegetation upon private or public property, and all other vegetation at any stage of maturity which: 
a.  Exceeds 12 inches in height, except for healthy trees, shrubs, plants grown in a tended and cultivated garden or plot; 
b.  Regardless of height, harbors, conceals, or invites rodents, pests, or vermin deposits of refuse; 
c.  Gives off noxious odors and/or is poisonous; 
d.  Constitutes a fire or traffic safety hazard. 
(8)  Damaged or diseased limbs of trees or trees to the extent of potential injury to the public at large due to imminent structural failure; 
(9)  Deliberate placement or discharge of into any part of a stormwater drainage system of: 
a.  Untreated sewage; 
b.  Sewage solids; 
c.  Process wastewater; 
d.  Refuse; 
e.  Explosive or combustible liquids, solids, or gases; 
f.  Oils or greases; 
g.  Industrial water or other polluted water except where a federal, state, or local permit for connections, discharge or disposal has been obtained prior to the event; 
h.  Waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous wastes to constitute a hazard to humans, plants, or animals or to cause corrosion, discoloration, or deposition on real or personal property; 
i.  Any solid or viscous substances in such quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in the stormwater drainage system or other interference with the proper operation of the drainage system of the city; 
(10)  Offensive odors; 
(11)  Improper use of indoor/non-weather proofed furniture and appliances, including those which: 
a.  Harbors, conceals, or invites rodents, pests, or vermin refuse deposits; 
b.  Gives off noxious odors; 
c.  Constitutes a fire or other safety hazard. 
(b)  Nuisances offending public decency, peace, and order. The following are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting public decency, peace, and order, when such violations are of a continual, reoccurring, or constant nature; provided, however, that no person shall be held liable or no structure shall be declared a nuisance in the event that person does not generate, enable, or contribute to the occurrence of unlawful behavior by a management policy or practice, personal conduct, lack of control or supervision, absence or ineffectiveness of security or other factors: 
(1)  Any structure, whether commercial or residential, where gambling devices, slot machines, punch boards, and other such contrivances of similar character involving any elements of chance as a consideration or any type of gambling, bookmaking, wagering, or betting is carried on, and all gambling equipment, except where such specific form of gambling is permitted by applicable law; 
(2)  Any structure, whether commercial or residential, operated as a bawdy house, house of assignation, place of prostitution, or used and maintained for the commercial or criminal purposes of unlawful sexual activity in violation of federal, state, or local law; 
(3)  Any structure, whether commercial or residential, where intoxicating liquors are manufactured, sold, bartered, or given away in violation of federal, state, or local law; 
(4)  Any structure, whether commercial or residential, where acts of sale, possession, or distribution of controlled substances occur in violation of federal, state, and local law; 
(5)  Any structure, whether commercial or residential, where breaches of the peace, disorderly conduct, or offences against the person found in S.C. Code 1976, title 16, chapter 3, or offences against the person found in this Code which occur with such disproportionate frequency when compared to frequency of law enforcement action required at other similarly situated structures. After notice of the continuing nature of the nuisance and specific identification of the facts and circumstances that either generate, enable, or contribute to the nuisance, the owner, lessee, renter, management, or the person in control, may be held responsible for the maintenance of a public nuisance and the structure declared a public nuisance. 
(c)  Nuisances affecting public welfare and safety. The following are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting public welfare and safety: 
(1)  All trees, hedges, signs, or other obstructions, or any portion of the same, so located on private property which prevent persons driving vehicles approaching an intersection of streets from having a clear safe view of traffic approaching such intersection; 
(2)  All trees, hedges, signs, or other obstructions, or any portion of the same, so located on private property which prevents the clear and unobstructed view of a fire hydrant, fire department connection, or other fire protection device, or directional or identification signage pertaining to the above, from a public way; 
(3)  Any obstruction, erosion, or depression which poses a potential hazard to vehicles or pedestrians using a right-of-way on private property where the public is invited or permitted to traverse for commercial purposes; 
(4)  All wires, strings, ropes, or lighting contrivances over streets, alleys, or public grounds which are not authorized or permitted by the city or which are strung so that the lowest portion is less than 13½ feet above the surface of the ground; 
(5)  All explosives, flammable liquids, and other dangerous substances stored in any manner, in any amount other than that manner or amount permitted by law; 
(6)  All hanging signs, awnings, canopies, and other similar structures over the streets or sidewalks so situated or constructed as to endanger public safety or to be contrary to ordinance; 
(7)  Any motor vehicle that is unregistered, inoperable, derelict, or abandoned on any highway right-of-way, or other public or private property, unless such vehicle is stored inside of a building or shielded from any view affecting the public; 
(8)  Any abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator, ice chest, or other type of air-tight container whose door, lid or other closing devise has not been removed. 
(d)  Nuisances affecting public economy. The following are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting public economy. 
(1)  All structures bearing graffiti, to be abated by applicable law; 
(2)  All structures, whether commercial or residential, in violation of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted and all structures, for a period of one month, which remain unoccupied and boarded up, and whose exterior finish is destroyed, decayed, dilapidated, or deteriorated in violation of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted, provided, however, unoccupied structures shall not be considered a public nuisance affecting public economy if the building exterior is weather tight and maintained for purposes or appearance and security according to the International Property Maintenance Code, and the material which secures the building is compatible with the exterior in appearance, color, texture, and design, and the premises are kept in compliance with all applicable building, property maintenance, zoning, and land use laws; 
(3)  All businesses or commercial enterprises operating without a valid, current, and displayed business license; 
(4)  All premises continually not in compliance with applicable licensing, zoning, and land use laws; 
(5)  All businesses with an outstanding arrearage of applicable city liens, taxes, fees, charges, or assessments; 
(6)  All premises which originate false fire or burglar alarms, as defined by applicable law. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2005, § 2)  
Sec. 50-183. - Other nuisances. 
The enumeration of specific nuisances in this article shall not be deemed to make lawful any other act of condition declared to be a nuisance by any other city ordinance, state or federal law, or court decision. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2005, § 3)  
Sec. 50-184. - Nuisances prohibited and unlawful. 
No person shall create any public nuisance in the city, and no person shall by inaction permit a public nuisance to occur or continue on any real property under such person's control, whether by recorded or unrecorded instrument or permission. Nor shall any person permit a public nuisance to occur involving any personal property under such person's control. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2005, § 4)  
Sec. 50-185. - Institution of criminal process and penalty. 
(a)  The public nature of a public nuisance must be made by an enforcement officer or other appropriate governmental official. Enforcement of this article's provisions may be accomplished upon the institution of criminal process by way of uniform traffic ticket, municipal ordinance summons, or warrant made only by a law enforcement officer or appropriate government official. 
(b)  Each day of violation constitutes a separate misdemeanor offence, subject to a fine up to $500.00 and/or up to 30 days imprisonment for each offense. In its discretion, the city may elect to use other applicable Code sections pertaining to remediation, abatement, or offenses. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2005, § 5)  
Sec. 50-186. - Public abatement; notice, service. 
(a)  If a person fails or refuses to discharge the duty imposed by section 50-184, the city may concurrently serve an administrative notice to abate a public nuisance upon the owner or occupant and demand that compliance must be achieved within seven consecutive days, after service of the notice, not including the date of receipt or posting. 
(b)  The city shall determine the individual, firm, or corporation or lien holder who, from the records in the county tax assessor's office, appears to be the titled owner or lien holder of the property and cause a written notice of public nuisance to be served on such individual, firm, or corporation or lien holder by: 
(1)  Personal service as attested to by affidavit of service; or 
(2)  Copy mailed to such owner or lien holder at such place or address by United States certified mail return receipt requested. 
After due diligence, if service is unable to be perfected as described above, the city shall cause a copy of the aforesaid notice to be posted at such structure, location, or premise, which shall serve as notice to the public. 
(c)  The notice to abate the nuisance shall inform the person of the specific nuisance with citation to this section, provide names, numbers, and addresses for contact with the city and upon the eighth day after receipt of service or posting, the city may abate the condition and assess an administrative fee and all public costs as a lien against the property. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2005, § 6)  
Sec. 50-187. - Liability for costs. 
In the event of refusal or neglect of a person to cause such nuisance to be abated in the manner and within the time provided herein, it shall be reported to the manager. The manager may, in a reasonable and prudent manner, direct the expenditure of public resources to abate the nuisance condition. The cost of abatement shall include an administrative assessment of $250.00 in addition to the actual cost of labor and materials expended in public abatement. The person shall be served with a notice of assessment within seven days of the completion of the abatement. The notice of assessment shall include the administrative fee and a statement of public cost, attested to by affidavit, and shall be issued and served, as provided for in section 50-186(b), upon the person responsible for payment who shall make payment within 30 days of the date of service. Upon the expiration of the 30-day period, if the amount has not been paid in full or contested before the manager, the manager may cause a lien in that amount to be filed with the county clerk of court and the finance director of the city. The lien shall be of record in the county courthouse and the office of the finance director in the book of liens, until paid or recovered, or otherwise released. Collection of the lien by way of recovery or foreclosure may be instituted by the city attorney on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2005, § 7)  
Secs. 50-188—50-212. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA 
 
Sec. 50-213. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Controlled substance means a drug, substance or immediate precursor in schedules I through V in S.C. Code 1976, §§ 44-53-190, 44-53-210, 44-53-230, and 44-53-270, as amended, and as may be amended from time to time hereafter. 
Crack means "crack cocaine" as defined in S.C. Code 1976, § 44-53-110, as amended. 
Deliver or delivery means that actual, constructive or attempted transfer of a controlled substance or illegal drug, or paraphernalia as defined in this article. 
Drug is a substance as defined in S.C. Code 1976, § 44-53-110, as amended, and as may be amended from time to time hereafter. 
Ice or crank means a crystal form of d-methamphetamine hydrochloride, a crystal form of other amphetamine or methamphetamine derivatives, and means such other form of amphetamine or methamphetamine or such other drug as may be otherwise defined in S.C. Code 1976, § 44-53-110, as amended. 
Marijuana is a substance as defined in S.C. Code 1976, § 44-53-110, as amended. 
Narcotic drug means opium, coca leaves, opiates, compounds, manufacture, salt, derivative or preparation of opium, coca leaves or opiates, together with the definition of narcotic drug as defined in S.C. Code 1976, § 44-53-110, as amended, and as may be amended from time to time hereafter. 
Paraphernalia means any instrument, device, article, or contrivance used, designed for use, or intended for use in ingesting, smoking, administering, preparing or otherwise consuming marijuana, hashish, hashish oil, heroin, cocaine or any derivatives thereof, "ice," "crank," "crack," or any other drugs or other controlled substance, but shall not include cigarette papers and tobacco pipes, but shall include, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes used, designed for use with, or intended for use with: marijuana, hashish, hashish oil, cocaine, narcotic drugs, "ice," "crank," "crack," or other illegal drug or controlled substance, whether or not such pipe is equipped with screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, "crack" heads, "ice" heads, or punctured metal bowls. 
(2)  Water pipes used with, designed for use with, or intended for use with: marijuana, hashish, hashish oil, cocaine, narcotic drugs, "ice," "crank," "crack" or other illegal drug or controlled substance. 
(3)  Carburetor pipes, tubes or devices, that is, devices incorporating a tube and which are used for the controlled ingestion into the lungs of the use of substantial quantities of smoke derived from the burning of marijuana, hashish, hashish oil, cocaine, heroin, narcotic drugs, "ice," "crank," "crack" or other illegal drug or controlled substance. 
(4)  Smoking and carburetion masks, that is devices incorporating masks which exclude normal air from the facial orifices of the user, and which allow the user to ingest into his lungs substantial quantities of smoke derived from the burning of marijuana, hashish, hashish oil, cocaine, heroin, narcotic drugs, "ice," "crank," "crack," or other illegal drug or controlled substance. 
(5)  "Roach clip," that is a clip-type or spring-type or other device used for the holding of marijuana cigarettes to facilitate the smoking of marijuana cigarettes by the user of the "roach clip." 
(6)  Separation gins used for, designed for use, or intended for use in cleaning marijuana. 
(7)  Spoons or vials used for the storage or consumption of cocaine, heroin, "crack," "crank," "ice," or other narcotic drugs or controlled substances. 
(8)  Chamber pipes, that is devices incorporating a smoke chamber and a method for burning marijuana, hashish, hashish oil, cocaine, narcotic drugs, "ice," "crank," "crack" or other illegal drug or controlled substance, and used for, intended to be used for, or designed for use in connection with the smoking of the drugs aforementioned. 
(9)  Electric pipes that is, devices incorporating a tube or pipe, and an electric blower device, and which are used for, designed for use for, or intended for use for the controlled ingestion into the lungs of the user of substantial quantities of smoke derived from the burning of marijuana, hashish, hashish oil, cocaine, narcotic drugs, "ice," "crack," "crank," or other illegal drugs or controlled substance. 
(10)  Air-driven pipes that is, devices incorporating a tube or pipe and a means of mechanically forcing air through the tube or pipe, and which are used for, designed for use for, or intended for use for the controlled ingestion into the lungs of the user of substantial quantities of smoke derived from the burning of marijuana, hashish, hashish oil, cocaine, narcotic drugs, "ice," "crank," "crack," or other illegal drugs or controlled substances. 
(11)  "Bong" means the slang term for a carburetor tube or pipe as defined in subsection (3) of this definition. 
(12)  "Ice pipe" or "chiller" means a carburetor type tube or pipe as defined in subsection (3) of this definition, which has the additional feature of incorporating a cooling mechanism for the cooling of the smoke produced by said device. 
(13)  Syringes means those syringes used for, designed for use for, or intended for use for administration of drugs, controlled substance and/or narcotic drugs, and which syringes are not possessed pursuant to a valid prescription from a medical doctor. 
(14)  Possession means having paraphernalia on or about the person, or having dominion and control over those portions of a premises wherein the person knows or reasonably should know, that paraphernalia is located. 
(Code 1995, § 50-261; Ord. of 3-1-1999, § I)  
Sec. 50-214. - Offense. 
The possession anywhere in the corporate limits of the city, paraphernalia as defined in this article, shall be illegal unless otherwise authorized by state or federal law, or unless authorized by valid prescription from a physician licensed to practice medicine in the state, or licensed by the United States Government. 
(Code 1995, § 50-262; Ord. of 3-1-1999, § II)  
Sec. 50-215. - Presumptions. 
(a)  If any person has possession, dominion or control over paraphernalia or over the premises where such paraphernalia is located, and at the same time and place has dominion or control over controlled substances, including, but not limited to, narcotic drugs, marijuana, "crack," "heroin," "ice," or "crank," that the court or jury may find, but is not required to find, that such person has possession of paraphernalia, in contravention of this article. 
(b)  If any person has possession, dominion or control over paraphernalia, and such paraphernalia is contaminated with any trace or small amount of controlled substances, including, but not limited to, narcotic drugs, marijuana, "crack," "heroin," "ice," or "crank," the court or jury may presume that such paraphernalia is used, designed to be used, or intended to be used as paraphernalia as defined in this article, and such person may be found guilty of violating this article. 
(Code 1995, § 50-263; Ord. of 3-1-1999, § III)  
Sec. 50-216. - Penalty. 
Any person found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating this article, shall be subject to the maximum penalties now provided, or which may hereafter be provided, by the laws of the state for violations of criminal offenses within the jurisdiction of the municipal courts of this state. 
(Code 1995, § 50-264; Ord. of 3-1-1999, § IV)  
Secs. 50-217—50-240. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - JUVENILE CURFEW 
 
Sec. 50-241. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Promote the general welfare and protect the general public through the reduction of juvenile violence and crime within the city; 
(2)  Promote the safety and well-being of the city's youngest citizens, persons under the age of 17, whose inexperience renders them particularly vulnerable to becoming participants in unlawful activities, particularly unlawful drug activities, and to being victimized by older perpetrators of crime; and 
(3)  Foster and strengthen parental responsibility for children. 
(Ord. of 1-6-2003, § I)  
Sec. 50-242. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curfew hours means the hours of 11:00 p.m. through 6:00 a.m. on Sunday through Thursday and 12:00 midnight through 6:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
Emergency means unforeseen circumstances, or the status or conditions resulting therefrom, requiring immediate action to safeguard life, limb or property. The term "emergency" includes, but is not limited to, fires, natural disasters, automobile accidents, or other similar circumstances. 
Establishment means any place of business within the city to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. With respect to such establishment, the term "operator" means any person and any firm, association, partnership (and the members of partners thereof) and/or any corporation (and the officers thereof) conducting or managing that establishment. 
Guardian means: 
(1)  A person judicially appointed as a legal guardian of the juvenile; and/or 
(2)  A person 18 years of age or older standing in loco parentis as indicated by the authorization of a parent or guardian as defined below, for the person to assume the care of physical custody of the child, or as indicated by any other circumstances. 
Juvenile means any person under 17 years of age who is not married, emancipated, or serving as a member of the armed forces of the United States. 
Officer means a public safety or other law enforcement officer charged with the duty of enforcing the laws of the state and/or the ordinances of the city. 
Parent means: 
(1)  A person who is a juvenile's biological or adoptive parent and who has legal custody of, or visitation rights with, a juvenile (including either parent, if custody is shared under a court order or agreement); and/or 
(2)  A person who is the biological or adoptive parent with whom a juvenile resides. 
Person means an individual, not any association, corporation, or any other legal entity. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, including, but not limited to: streets, highways, roads, sidewalks alleys, avenues, parks, and/or the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, businesses, office buildings, transportation facilities, and shops. 
Remain means the following actions: 
(1)  To linger or stay at or upon a place; and/or 
(2)  To fail to leave a place when requested to do so by an officer or by the owner, operator or other person in control of that place. 
(Ord. of 1-6-2003, § II)  
Sec. 50-243. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for a juvenile, during curfew hours, to remain in or upon any public place within the city, to remain in any motor vehicle operating or parked therein or thereon, or to remain in or upon the premises of any establishment within the city, unless: 
(1)  The juvenile is accompanied by a parent or guardian; 
(2)  The juvenile is on an errand at the direction of a parent or guardian, and the juvenile has in his possession a writing signed by the parent or guardian containing the following information: the name, signature, address and telephone number where the parent or guardian may be reached during the errand, the name of the juvenile, and a brief description of the errand, the juvenile's destination and the hours the juvenile is authorized to be engaged in the errand; 
(3)  The juvenile is involved in interstate travel through, or beginning or terminating in the city; 
(4)  The juvenile is engaged in an employment activity, or is going to or returning home from such activity without detour or stop; 
(5)  The juvenile is involved in a verified emergency; or 
(6)  The juvenile is attending an activity sponsored by a school, or civic organization, by a public organization or agency, or by another similar organization or entity, which activity is supervised by adults, and/or the juvenile is going to or returning from such an activity without detour or stop. 
(Ord. of 1-6-2003, § III)  
Sec. 50-244. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  This article will be enforced uniformly in all areas of the city. If a juvenile is observed by a city police officer and is in violation of this article and is under the age of 17 years old he will be transported to the city police department where their parent or guardian will be called. 
(b)  The parent or guardian and the juvenile will be issued a violation of this article warning and the warning will be placed on file at the city police department. The juvenile who is being detained will be released to a parent or guardian. With a second violation by the juvenile of this article the juvenile will be brought to the city police department and parents or guardians will be called again and the child will be released to the parent or guardian. The juvenile will be charged in juvenile court with the violation of this article's second offense and depending on the circumstances related to the parent or guardian's ability to control the actions of the juvenile, the parent or guardian may be charged with a curfew violation. 
(c)  If the juvenile has violated this article two or more times the officer will issue a summons/citation to the parent/guardian to appear in municipal court; bond on the parent/guardian will be set by the municipal court judge depending on the circumstances related to the parent/guardian's ability to control the juvenile. 
(d)  In the above matters, in the event a parent or guardian cannot be located, the juvenile will be taken into custody for safekeeping and will be referred to the department of social services. 
(Ord. of 1-6-2003, § III)  
Secs. 50-245—50-266. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - SMOKING PROHIBITIONS 
 
Sec. 50-267. - Findings and determinations. 
The city council hereby finds and determines: 
(1)  The city, is an incorporated municipality located in the county, and as such possesses all powers granted to municipalities by the constitution and the laws of the state, including the powers enumerated in S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-30, relating to regulating streets, markets, and public health. 
(2)  Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke (also known as environmental tobacco smoke) is a cause of disease in healthy nonsmokers, including heart disease, stroke, respiratory disease, and lung cancer. The National Cancer Institute has determined that secondhand smoke is responsible for the early deaths of up to 65,000 Americans annually. (National Cancer Institute (NCI), "Health effects of exposure to environmental tobacco smoke: the report of the California Environmental Protection Agency. Smoking and Tobacco Control Monograph 10," Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute (NCI), August 1999.) The surgeon general has declared that: 
a.  Secondhand smoke causes disease and premature death in nonsmokers exposed to smoke; 
b.  Children exposed to secondhand smoke have an increased risk for sudden death syndrome, acute respiratory infections, ear problems, and more severe asthma; 
c.  Adults exposed to secondary smoke have a higher risk of coronary heart disease and lung cancer; 
d.  There is no safe level of exposure to secondhand smoke; and 
e.  Separating smoking and nonsmoking sections of indoor areas does not sufficiently remove the threats of secondhand smoke in enclosed areas. 
(3)  A significant amount of secondhand smoke exposure occurs in the workplace. Employees who work in smoke-filled businesses suffer a 25 to 50 percent higher risk of heart attack and higher rates of death from cardiovascular disease and cancer, as well as increased acute respiratory disease and measurable decrease in lung function. (Pitsavos, C.; Panagiotakos, D.B.; Chrysohoou, C.; Skoumas, J.; Tzioumis, K.; Stefanadis, C.; Toutouzas, P., "Association between exposure to environmental tobacco smoke and the development of acute coronary syndromes: the CARDIO2000 case-control study," Tobacco Control 11(3): 220-225, September 2002.) 
(4)  Smoke-filled workplaces result in higher worker absenteeism due to respiratory disease, lower productivity, higher cleaning and maintenance costs, increased health insurance rates, and increased liability claims for diseases related to exposure to secondhand smoke. ("The high price of cigarette smoking," Business & Health 15(8), Supplement A: 6-9, August 1997.) 
(5)  When there is a presence of secondhand smoke in enclosed spaces where there is a public gathering resulting in people being in close proximity in places that are otherwise open to the public at large inevitably results in persons who do not smoke being forced to bear unwarranted health risks and inappropriate deprivation of peaceful enjoyment of the premises to which they have been invited or permitted to enter, even when steps have been taken to separate smoking and nonsmoking areas within the confined space. 
(6)  The city recognizes that smoke creates a danger to the health and safety of the public at large and that, in order to protect the health and welfare of the public, it is necessary to restrict smoking in the manner provided for in this article. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2011, § 1)  
Sec. 50-268. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Bar means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including, but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets. 
Business means a sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity, either for-profit or not-for-profit, including retail establishments where goods or services are offered for sale; professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered; and private clubs. 
Employee means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages, commission, goods or services in kind or like compensation, and it shall also mean a person who volunteers his services for a nonprofit entity. 
Employer means a person, business, partnership, association, corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity that employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by walls or windows (exclusive of doorways), which extend from the floor to the ceiling, or walls substantially enclosing the area or walls four feet or more in height including stationary structures and mobile public conveyances. Enclosure of an outdoor area attached to a building or structure through the use of any sort of canopy, tent or other structure which consists of coverings on all sides shall render such enclosed area an enclosed area for purposes of this article. 
Health care facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of persons having diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, nursing homes (except as otherwise permitted herein), homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. The term "health care facility" includes all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semi-private rooms, and wards within health care facilities. 
Place of employment means an area under the control of a public or private employer that employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, and vehicles. A private residence is not a place of employment for purposes of this article unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility, nor is a private passenger motor vehicle a place of employment when used in the performance of employment responsibilities, provided it is not being used as public conveyance. 
Private club means an organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes, or for purposes of benefiting particular club members and their guests, which is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. The affairs and management of the organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The organization has established bylaws and/or a constitution to govern its activities. The organization has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 USC 501. Establishments which are in fact operating as bars, restaurants, or entertainment venues primarily for the pecuniary benefit of the owner, or chief operating officer, or other person having substantial control shall not be treated as private clubs under this article. 
Public place means an area to which the public is invited or to which the public is permitted to have access, including, but not limited to, banks, bars, educational facilities, health care facilities, hotel and motel lobbies, laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, theaters and waiting rooms. A private club is a public place when being used for a function to which the general public is allowed entry. A private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Restaurant means an eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, ice cream parlors, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant" includes a bar area within the restaurant. 
Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. The term "retail tobacco store" specifically includes cigar bars, which are establishments licensed for the on-premises sale of beer, wine, and alcoholic beverages as well as some food service, but the term "retail tobacco store" does not include any establishment which is primarily a bar or restaurant and which undertakes to make retail offerings of tobacco products as a means of circumventing the purposes of this article. 
Service line means an indoor line in which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money. 
Shopping mall means an enclosed public plaza, promenade, walkway, or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other lighted tobacco product in any manner or in any form. 
Sports arena means any indoor sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, and other similar places where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other events. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2011, § 2)  
Sec. 50-269. - Application to city facilities. 
All enclosed facilities, buildings, and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the city shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2011, § 3)  
Sec. 50-270. - Prohibition of smoking in enclosed public places. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the city, including, but not limited to, the following places: 
(1)  Galleries, libraries, and museums. 
(2)  Areas available to and customarily used by the general public in businesses and nonprofit entities patronized by the public, including, but not limited to, professional offices, banks, laundromats, hotels, and motels. 
(3)  Bars. 
(4)  Bingo facilities. 
(5)  Convention facilities, conference centers, and exhibition halls. 
(6)  Educational facilities, both public and private. 
(7)  Elevators. 
(8)  Health care facilities. 
(9)  Hotel and motel lobbies. 
(10)  Licensed child care and adult day care facilities. 
(11)  Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities. 
(12)  Polling places. 
(13)  Private clubs when being used for a function to which the general public is admitted. 
(14)  Public transportation facilities, including buses and taxicabs, and ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit depots. 
(15)  Restaurants. 
(16)  Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other common-use areas. 
(17)  Retail stores. 
(18)  Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings. 
(19)  Service lines. 
(20)  Shopping malls. 
(21)  Sports arenas. 
(22)  Theaters, performance halls, lecture halls, and similar facilities, inclusive of lobbies, audience seating areas, dressing rooms, projection booths, back stage areas, and the stage, but excluding smoking on stage when it is an integral part of a theatrical performance. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2011, § 4)  
Sec. 50-271. - Prohibition of smoking in places of employment. 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas within places of employment where smoking is prohibited without exception, including, but not limited to, common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, vehicles used for the conveyance of the public, but not including vehicles used in performing employment responsibilities when the sole occupants and users are persons who smoke. 
(b)  This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated by employers to all existing employees by the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and to all prospective employees upon their application for employment. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2011, § 5)  
Sec. 50-272. - Reasonable distance of entry and outdoor area. 
Smoking is prohibited within a distance often feet from any entry into an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited, so as to ensure that tobacco smoke does not enter the area through entrances, windows, ventilation systems, or other means. Smoking is also prohibited within ten feet of the boundary of the outdoor areas where smoking is prohibited. Persons who have begun smoking prior to approaching the ten-foot distance may continue doing so, provided they do not stop, stand, sit, or linger within the ten-foot distance. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2011, § 6)  
Sec. 50-273. - Where smoking not regulated. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of sections 50-270 and 50-271: 
(1)  Private residences, except when used as a licensed child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
(2)  Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; provided, however, that not more than 20 percent of rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated. All smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to add additional nonsmoking rooms. 
(3)  Retail tobacco stores, provided that smoke from these places does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes and long-term care facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is permitted; provided that smoke from these places does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. 
(5)  Private clubs that have no employees, except when being used for a function to which the general public is admitted. 
(6)  Outdoor areas of places of employment except those covered by the provisions of section 50-272. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2011, § 7)  
Sec. 50-274. - Disposal of cigarettes in outdoor areas of places of employment. 
Where smoking is allowed in outdoor areas of places of employment, employers must provide proper receptacles for the disposal of used cigarettes. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2011, § 8)  
Sec. 50-275. - Declaration of establishment as nonsmoking. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to the requirements of section 50-276(a) is posted. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2011, § 9)  
Sec. 50-276. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  "No Smoking" signs or the international "no smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted in every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article, by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of that place. 
(b)  Every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(c)  All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager, or other person having control of the area. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2011, § 10)  
Sec. 50-277. - Nonretaliation; nonwaiver of rights. 
(a)  No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment, or customer because that employee, applicant, or customer exercises any rights afforded by this article or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this article. 
(b)  An employee who works in a setting where an employer allows smoking does not waive or otherwise surrender any legal rights the employee may have against the employer or any other party. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2011, § 11)  
Sec. 50-278. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the office of the city manager or an authorized designee. 
(b)  Notice of the provisions of this article shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the city. 
(c)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may initiate enforcement with the office of the city manager. 
(d)  The personnel of the department of administrative and community services' including, but not limited to, the building official, and the personnel of the department of public safety including, but not limited to, fire inspection personnel, or their designees shall, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this article. 
(e)  An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an employee or member of the public may bring legal action against a person, business, or organization in violation of this article to enforce this article. 
(g)  In addition to the remedies provided by the provisions of this section, the city or any person aggrieved by the failure of the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of a public place or a place of employment to comply with the provisions of this article may apply for injunctive relief to enforce those provisions in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2011, § 12)  
Sec. 50-279. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $25.00. 
(b)  A person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $25.00. 
(c)  In addition to the fines established by this section, repeated violations of this article by a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation of any occupancy permit or business license issued to the person for the premises on which the violation occurred. 
(d)  Violation of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by the city by restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction, or other means provided for by law, and the city may take action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement. 
(e)  Each day of a continuing violation of this article shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2011, § 13)  
Sec. 50-280. - Public education. 
The city shall engage in a continuing program to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this article to citizens affected by it, and to guide owners/operators, and managers in their compliance with it. The program may include publication of a brochure for affected businesses and individuals explaining the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2011, § 14)  
Sec. 50-281. - Governmental agency cooperation. 
The city shall annually request other governmental and educational agencies having facilities within the city to establish local operating procedures in cooperation and compliance with this article. This includes urging all federal, state, county, city, and school district agencies to update their existing smoking control regulations to be consistent with the current health findings regarding secondhand smoke. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2011, § 15)  
Sec. 50-282. - Other applicable laws. 
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2011, § 16)  
Sec. 50-283. - Interpretation for intent. 
It is the intent of the city council to prohibit smoking whenever the private choice of smoking intrudes or has the capacity to intrude upon the right of persons concerned about protecting their own rights to be free from the hazards and inconvenience of secondhand smoke in places where they work, stand, sit, walk, dine, drink, read, study, or engage in entertainment and recreation. All provisions shall be construed to achieve these purposes. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2011, § 17)  
Sec. 50-284. - Effect of section headings. 
The headings or titles of the several sections hereof shall be solely for convenience of reference and shall not affect the meaning, construction, interpretation or effect of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-7-2011, § 19)  
Secs. 50-285—50-301. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - PUBLIC DRUNKENNESS 
 
Sec. 50-302. - Drunkenness. 
It is unlawful for any person to be in a drunken condition in any public place, upon the premises of any place of business whether within or without a building, or upon any street or sidewalk or in any vehicle at any such place within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 3-5; Code 1995, § 6-2)  
Sec. 50-303. - Drinking in public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume any alcoholic beverage, including, but not limited to, beer, wine or other types of intoxicating beverages, outside the licensed premises in which such alcoholic beverages are sold, including city streets and sidewalks. 
(Code 1977, § 3-5.1; Code 1995, § 6-3)  
Chapter 54 - PLANNING  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 54-1. - Comprehensive plan. 
Pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, title 6, ch. 29, the city council adopts, by means of an ordinance, the document entitled "Clinton City Comprehensive Plan" including maps referenced therein, as recommended by the city planning commission. 
(Code 1995, § 54-1; Ord. of 7-6-1998, § 1)  
Secs. 54-2—54-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Planning commissions generally, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-310 et seq. 
 
Sec. 54-21. - Planning commission established. 
There is hereby established a planning commission for the city, which shall have the powers and duties as provided in S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-310, et seq. 
(Code 1995, § 54-26; Ord. of 4-21-1999; Ord. of 7-7-2003)  
Sec. 54-22. - Composition of the board. 
The planning commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the city council for a term of three years, staggered so that one-third of the members shall have terms expiring each year. Members shall service until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(Code 1995, § 54-27; Ord. of 4-21-1999; Ord. of 7-7-2003)  
Sec. 54-23. - Term limits. 
No member may serve for more than two successive terms, except for extraordinary circumstances where the council believes it to be in the best interest of the community to have a continuation for a specified period of a particular member of the commission. This limitation shall not prevent any person from being appointed to the commission after an absence of one year. Service for a partial term of less than 1½ years shall not constitute a term of service for purposes of this section. 
(Ord. of 4-21-1999; Ord. of 7-7-2003)  
Sec. 54-24. - Qualifications. 
All members of the planning commission shall be residents of the city. No member of the planning commission shall be the holder of an elected public office or position in the city. 
(Code 1995, § 54-28; Ord. of 4-21-1999; Ord. of 7-7-2003)  
Sec. 54-25. - Compensation. 
Members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation. Reimbursement for actual expenses incurred in the performance of official duties may be reimbursed from budgeted fund pursuant to reimbursement policies and procedures for employees of the city. 
(Code 1995, § 54-29; Ord. of 4-21-1999; Ord. of 7-7-2003)  
Sec. 54-26. - Removal of members. 
Member of the planning commission may be removed at any time by the city council for cause. The existence of cause shall be discussed by the council in executive session as permitted by the Freedom of Information Act, S.C. Code 1976, § 30-4-70(a)(1), and the determination of removal shall be by vote in public session declaring a vacancy in the position without a statement of cause. Any fact which in the discretion of the council is deemed to adversely affect the public interest, including lack of attendance at meetings, may constitute cause. 
(Code 1995, § 54-30; Ord. of 4-21-1999; Ord. of 7-7-2003)  
Sec. 54-27. - Organization of rules of procedure. 
The planning commission shall organize, elect officers, and adopt rules of procedure as required by S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-360. 
(Code 1995, § 54-31; Ord. of 7-7-2003)  
Sec. 54-28. - Public hearings. 
The planning commission shall hold all public hearings on amendments to the zoning ordinance and map pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-760(A). 
(Code 1995, § 54-32; Ord. of 7-7-2003)  
Sec. 54-29. - Powers and duties. 
The planning commission under S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-340 has the authority to do all of the following: 
(1)  Comprehensive plan. Prepare and revise periodically, plans and programs for development and redevelopment of its areas. 
(2)  Implementation. Prepare and recommend plans and programs in its areas for adoption to the city council, as follows: 
a.  Zoning ordinances to include zoning district maps and appropriate revisions thereof; 
b.  An official map and appropriate revisions of it showing the exact location of existing or proposed public streets, highways and utility rights-of-way, and public building sites, with regulations and procedures for administering the official map ordinance; 
c.  A landscaping ordinance setting forth required planting, tree preservation and other aesthetic considerations for land and structures; 
d.  A capital improvements program setting forth projects required to implement plans which have been prepared and adopted, including an annual listing of priority projects for consideration by the city council prior to preparation of their capital budgets; and 
e.  Policies and procedures to implement adopted comprehensive plan elements. 
(3)  Delegation of authority. The planning commission may delegate the authority to review and approve all subdivisions to the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003)  
Chapter 58 - PURCHASING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipalities required to establish purchasing regulations, S.C. Code 1976, § 11-35-50. 
 
Sec. 58-1. - Purchasing agent, specified duties. 
The city manager, or an officer of the city designated by the city manager, shall be the purchasing agent for the city. He shall be responsible for: 
(1)  The purchase of supplies, material, equipment and contractual services required by any department of the city government. 
(2)  The storage and distribution of all supplies, materials and equipment required by any office or department of the city government. 
(3)  Establishing written specifications, whenever practical, for supplies, materials and equipment required by any office or department of the city government. Such specifications shall be definite and certain and shall permit competition. 
(4)  Maintaining, whenever practical, a perpetual inventory records of all materials, supplies and equipment stored in storerooms or warehouses. 
(5)  Soliciting and maintaining an up-to-date list of qualified suppliers who have requested their names to be added to a bidders list. The purchasing agent shall have authority to remove temporarily the names of vendors who have defaulted on their quotation, attempted to defraud the city or who have failed to meet established specifications or delivery dates. 
(6)  Obtaining full and open competition whenever possible on all purchases, contracts and sales. 
(7)  The purchasing agent shall work closely with other city employees tasked with the financial management and operation of the city. The purchasing agent's duties shall include the management of all purchasing activities undertaken by the city and shall be responsible for ensuring that all purchasing is done in accordance with all applicable local ordinances, policies, procedures, and state and federal regulations where applicable. 
(8)  Developing procedures and guidelines, as required, regarding the management of purchasing and procurement of supplies, material, equipment and contractual services required by any department of the city government. 
(Code 1977, § 21A-1; Code 1995, § 58-1; Ord. of 11-15-2007, § 58-1(7); Ord. of 6-3-2013, § 58-1)  
Sec. 58-2. - Purchase orders. 
The basic document in the purchasing system is the purchase order. A purchase order shall be issued for all materials or supplies that exceed $100.00 in value. No invoice may be honored for such commodities unless it is supported by a properly signed purchase order. The purchase order shall be pre-numbered, shall include complete specifications or reference to specifications, as well as shipping and invoicing instructions. The finance officer must determine whether a sufficient balance remains in the budget or appropriation to liquidate the invoice when it is received, and may not validate any purchase order unless sufficient funds are available to pay the obligation when it is due. Open purchase orders may be used for many repetitive, usually low value, purchases from one vendor. Rather than issuing a purchase order for each purchase, one purchase order with a designated dollar limit may be issued for a period of time, e.g., one month, to cover all purchases made during that month. 
(Code 1977, § 21A-2; Code 1995, § 58-2; Ord. of 6-3-2013, § 58-2)  
Sec. 58-3. - Formal contract procedures. 
The following formal contract procedures shall apply to procurement activities undertaken by the city: 
(1)  All supplies, apparatus, materials or equipment exceeding an estimated cost of $8,000.00 in any division except those divisions engaged in the direct provision of utility services, and all supplies, apparatus, materials or equipment exceeding an estimated cost of $10,000 in a division engaged in the direct provision of utility services, shall be purchased by formal, written contract from the lowest responsible bidder, after due notice inviting bids. No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this section. 
(2)  All contracts for repair work exceeding an estimated cost of $30,000.00 shall be awarded by formal, written contract to the lowest responsible bidder, after due notice inviting proposals. No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this section. 
(3)  The purchasing agent shall have the authority to purchase parts necessary to repair vehicles and equipment at a level not to exceed $8,000.00 provided that a requisition listing parts or services needed for said repairs is provided to the purchasing agent at the time of authorization. 
(4)  All sales of personal property which have become obsolete or unusable, when the estimated value shall exceed $5,000.00, shall be sold by formal written contract or at a public auction to the highest responsible bidder, after due notice inviting proposals and bidders. Public auctions may be conducted as a live auction, a sealed bid auction, or by utilizing an electronic or internet based auction service. 
(5)  Informal bidding procedures may be followed on purchases of gasoline, diesel fuel, alcohol fuel, propane, motor oil or fuel oil regardless of the size of the purchase. 
(6)  Informal bidding procedure may be followed on the purchase of supplies, materials, apparatus or equipment with an estimated cost of less than $8,000.00, contracts for repair work with an estimated cost of less than $30,000.00, and repair to vehicles and equipment with a cost estimated to be less than $8,000.00. 
(Code 1977, § 21A-3; Code 1995, § 58-3; Ord. of 1-8-90(2); Ord. of 6-3-2013, § 58-3)  
Sec. 58-4. - Competitive bidding required; exception. 
The following exceptions to competitive bidding are allowed: 
(1)  Before any purchases or contracts for supplies, apparatus, materials or equipment, or for construction or repair work exceeding $499.00 but less than $8,000.00 are made, the purchasing agent shall give ample opportunity for competitive bidding. For purchases or contracts not exceeding the formal contract limits of section 58-3, informal oral and/or written bids may be accepted. It is the duty of the purchasing agent to keep and maintain for public inspection a record of all bids submitted for purchases or contracts exceeding $1,000.00. 
(2)  Competitive bidding shall be encouraged for all contracts, purchases or sales; provided, however, that in the case of professional services, competitive bidding may be suspended. Professional services are defined to include, but are not limited to, the following professions: architects, attorneys, brokers, doctors, accountants, engineers, insurance providers, planners, information technology service providers, programmers, technical consultants, graphic designers and advertising development firms. Professional services are to be obtained on the basis of written contract proposals, not considered as bids or subject to bid requirements, and selected on the basis of qualifications and fairness in pricing. 
(3)  Competitive bidding shall be encouraged for all contracts, purchases or sales; provided however, that in the case of the following items, competitive bidding may be suspended: 
a.  One-of-a kind items; 
b.  Published books, maps, periodicals, subscriptions, and technical pamphlets, training/professional; development programs; 
c.  Membership fees; 
d.  Postage stamps and other delivery fees; 
e.  Tuition reimbursements; 
f.  Conference registration; 
g.  Public advertising; 
h.  Safety shoes and prescription safety glasses; 
i.  Bullet proof vests; 
j.  Existing bid or contract for like supplies, services, construction; 
k.  State of S.C. or U.S. communities contracts; 
l.  Supplies/services from other governmental agencies, including public colleges/universities; 
m.  Medicine/drugs; 
n.  State/federal surplus; 
o.  Used equipment supplies; or 
p.  Equipment maintenance or service agreement with the manufacturer or authorized agent. 
(4)  In the event of an emergency affecting the public welfare, health or safety, the provisions of this section shall not apply. A full report of the circumstances of an emergency purchase shall be filed by the purchasing agent with the city council and shall be entered in the minutes of the council meeting. 
(Code 1977, § 21A-4; Code 1995, § 58-4; Ord. of 2007; Ord. of 6-3-2013, § 58-4)  
Sec. 58-5. - Award to lowest bidder; when advertising required. 
(a)  All purchases or contracts for supplies, apparatus, materials or equipment, or for construction or repair work, exceeding the formal contract limits of section 58-3, shall be awarded to the lowest responsible and qualified bidder after publication in newspaper of general circulation in the city at least five days before the last day set for receipt of bids and/or proposals. The newspaper notice required herein shall include a general description of the articles or work to be purchased and shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured and the time and place for opening bids. 
(b)  In the case of professional services, when competitive bids are secured, this section shall not apply. 
(Code 1977, § 21A-5; Code 1995, § 58-5; Ord. of 6-3-2013, § 58-5)  
Sec. 58-6. - Bid deposits. 
When deemed necessary by the purchasing agent, bid deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Upon entering into a contract, bidders shall be entitled to return of bid deposit where the purchasing agent has required such. A successful bidder shall forfeit any bid deposit required by the purchasing agent upon failure on his part to enter into a contract within ten days after the award; provided, however, that the city, in its controlled discretion, may waive this forfeiture. 
(Code 1977, § 21A-6; Code 1995, § 58-6; Ord. of 6-3-2013, § 58-6)  
Sec. 58-7. - Sealed bid procedures. 
Procedure for sealed bids shall be as follows: 
(1)  Sealing. Bids shall be submitted to the purchasing agent securely sealed in an envelope, and shall be identified on the envelope in accordance with the bid instructions. State contract items shall be considered to be a valid bid under this section of the ordinance. 
(2)  Opening. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. 
(3)  Tabulation. A tabulation of all bids received shall be available for public inspection. 
(4)  Negotiating. The purchasing agent may enter into negotiations with the lowest responsible bidder making reasonable changes in the contract price within the funds available, and may award a contract to such bidder to perform the work at the negotiated price within the funds available. If the above cannot be done, the city council may re-advertise on the basis of altered plans and specifications designed to lower the cost to the point necessary. 
(5)  Rejection of bids. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to reject all bids, parts of all bids, or all bids for any one or more supplies or contractual services included in the proposed contract, when the public interest will be served thereby. 
(6)  Bidders in default to city. The purchasing agent shall not accept the bid of a vendor or contractor who is delinquent in the payment of taxes, license or other monies due the city. 
(7)  Award of contract. 
a.  Authority in agent. The city manager shall have the authority to award contracts within the purview of this article; provided, however, that city council approved the purchase of material, supplies, or equipment during the budget approval process and the cost of the contract does not exceed $40,000.00. The purchasing agent shall file a written report with council when such purchases are made. In the event the purchase exceeds the amount budgeted or $40,000.00, the city manager will shall present the request to city council for possible approval. 
b.  Lowest responsible bidder. Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. In determining the lowest responsible bidder, in addition to price, the purchasing agent shall consider: 
1.  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required. 
2.  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference. 
3.  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder. 
4.  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services. 
5.  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or services. 
6.  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service. 
7.  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to the particular use required. 
8.  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract. 
9.  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
10.  The ability of contractors and professional service providers contracted by the city to meet the requirement that they shall provide a certificate of insurance with limits acceptable to an approved by the city manager or his designee prior to commencing work. Certificates containing wording that release the insurance company from liability for non-notification or cancellation of the insurance policy shall not be acceptable. Policies shall be endorsed to include a waiver of subrogation against the city, its officers, officials, agents, and employees. Insurance is to be placed with an insurer with a current A.M. Best Rating not less than A:VII unless otherwise allowed by the city manager or his or her designee. Separate endorsements shall be required, naming the city as additional insured, for liability insurance providing a waiver of subrogation for worker's compensation insurance. At any time, if insurance as required by the city is cancelled, then all work shall cease until insurance that meets the aforementioned requirements is provided. The city manager or his designee may, for good cause, waive the certificate of insurance for professional services, but only when the lack of such coverage shall have no anticipated significant impact on the city. 
11.  Any company or person conducting business with or on behalf of the city shall obtain a city business license in compliance with this Code. 
(8)  Award to other than the low bidder. When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons for placing the order elsewhere shall be prepared by the purchasing agent and filed with the papers relating to the transaction and held for a period of no less than 12 months. 
(9)  Tie bids; local vendors. If all bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, the contract shall be awarded to the local bidder. If two or more of such bids are submitted by local bidders, the purchasing agent shall award the contract to one of the local tie bidders by drawing lots in public. If local bidders are not involved in the tie bids, the purchasing agent shall award the contract to one of the outside bidders by drawing lots in public. The purchasing agent, local bidders and vendors should bear in mind, however, that to award a contract to a local vendor where he is not the lowest responsible bidder, or where price, quality and services are not equal, is to give preference to one minute segment of the citizenry against the best interests of the community as a whole. 
(10)  Performance bonds. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to require a performance bond, before entering into a contract, in such form and amount, as he shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interest of the city. 
(11)  Payment bond/labor and material bond. The purchasing agent may require a payment bond and a labor and material bond, before entering into a contract, in such form and amount, as he shall deem necessary to protect the best interest of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 21A-7; Code 1995, § 58-7; Ord. of 6-3-2013, § 58-7)  
Sec. 58-8. - Materials testing. 
The purchasing agent shall have the authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and deliveries, which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with the specifications. In the performance of such tests, the purchasing agent shall have the authority to make use of laboratory facilities of any agency of the city government or any outside laboratory. 
(Code 1977, § 21A-8; Code 1995, § 58-8; Ord. of 6-3-2013, § 58-8)  
Sec. 58-9. - Financial interest of city officials and employees prohibited. 
(a)  No member of city council or any officer or employee of the city shall have a financial interest in any contract or in the sale to the city or to a contractor supplying the city of any land or rights or interests in any land, materials, supplies or services; except when a majority of the city council determines such exception in the best interest of the city; provided, however, that no councilperson whose interest is involved shall vote on the question. Any willful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office, and any officer or employee of the city found guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit his office or position. Any violation of this section with the knowledge express or implied of the person or corporation contracting with the city shall render the contract voidable by the city manager or the city council. 
(b)  Furthermore, the knowing use of confidential information for actual or anticipated gain personal gain, or actual or anticipated personal gain of another person shall be unlawful and unethical. 
(Code 1977, § 21A-9; Code 1995, § 58-9; Ord. of 2007; Ord. of 6-3-2013, § 58-9)  
Sec. 58-10. - Records of open market orders and bids. 
The purchasing agent shall keep a record of all open market orders and the bids submitted in completion thereon, and such records shall be open to public inspection. 
(Code 1977, § 21A-10; Code 1995, § 58-10; Ord. of 6-3-2013, § 58-10)  
Sec. 58-11. - Stock reports. 
All offices, departments or agencies of the city government shall submit to the purchasing agent, at such times and in such form as he shall prescribe, reports showing stock of all supplies which no are longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out or scrapped. 
(Code 1977, § 21A-11; Code 1995, § 58-11; Ord. of 6-3-2013, § 58-11)  
Sec. 58-12. - Surplus stock. 
The purchasing agent shall have the authority to transfer surplus stock to other offices, departments or agencies of the city government. 
(Code 1977, § 21A-12; Code 1995, § 58-12; Ord. of 6-3-2013, § 58-12)  
Sec. 58-13. - Supplies unsuitable for public use, sale or exchange. 
The purchasing agent shall have the authority to sell all supplies, which have become unsuitable for use, or to exchange the same for, or trade in the same on, new supplies. Such sales shall be made to the highest bidder, and in conformance with section 58-3. All monies received from such sales shall be paid into the appropriate fund of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 21A-13; Code 1995, § 58-13; Ord. of 6-3-2013, § 58-13)  
Sec. 58-14. - Gifts and rebates. 
The purchasing agent and every officer and employee of the city are expressly prohibited from accepting, directly or indirectly, from any person to which any purchase order or contract is, or might be awarded, any rebate, gift, money or anything of value whatsoever, except where given for the use and benefit of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 21A-14; Code 1995, § 58-14; Ord. of 6-3-2013, § 58-14)  
Sec. 58-15. - Cooperative purchasing. 
(a)  The purchasing agent shall have the authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of the city would be served thereby, provided that the purchasing agent of the city is given the authority to make purchases of supplies and equipment through the property division of the state budget and control board, without the formality of publication and receiving competitive bids. 
(b)  Whenever the city enters into an intergovernmental agreement for a joint project with the federal or a state government, or with another governmental entity including, but not limited to, a county, regional council, special purpose district, special tax district, stat authority, joint district, or public university, then the purchasing practices of the other public entity may be used in lieu of the city's own procedures. 
(Code 1977, § 21A-15; Code 1995, § 58-15; Ord. of 6-3-2013, § 58-15)  
Sec. 58-16. - Priority to local vendors when practical. 
It is the intent of the city to support local merchants, professionals, vendors, and suppliers by promoting the use of local businesses and the hiring of citizens of the city whenever practical and when deemed to be in the best interest of the city pursuant to the following: 
(1)  A city contractor or business shall be defined as a business or contractor possessing a valid city business license and having a primary place of business located inside the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  A local contractor or business shall be defined as a business or contractor having a primary place of business located inside the county, and being in good financial standing with the city. 
(3)  Priority to city contractors and business: 
a.  City contractors and businesses with a valid city business license shall have a five percent advantage during the consideration of bids whenever practical and when deemed to be in the best interests of the city. 
b.  The maximum value of the five percent advantage will be capped at $10,000.00. 
c.  If a city business is within five percent, not exceeding $10,000.00, of the lowest bid received, the city business will be given consideration of the bid award if they are willing to provide goods or services at the price of the lowest bid received. If the city business is not willing to provide goods or services at the price of the lowest bid received, the consideration of the bid award will revert back to the lowest bid received, or the next lowest city business within the five percent (maximum $10,000.00) advantage threshold. 
(4)  Priority to local contractors and business: 
a.  If a city business or contractor does not win the bidding process, does not qualify for the priority to city contractors or businesses, or cannot meet the stipulations set forth above, then a local business or contractor shall have a five percent advantage during the consideration of bids whenever practical and when deemed to be in the best interests of the city. 
b.  Local contractors and businesses shall have a five percent advantage during the consideration of bids whenever practical and when deemed to be in the best interests of the city. 
c.  The maximum value of the five percent advantage will be capped at $10,000.00. 
d.  If a local business is within five percent, not exceeding $10,000.00, of the lowest bid received, the local business will be given consideration of the bid award if they are willing to provide goods or services at the price of the lowest bid received. If the local business is not willing to provide goods or services at the price of the lowest bid received, the consideration of the bid award will revert back to the lowest bid received, or the next lowest local business within the five percent (maximum $10,000.00) advantage threshold. 
(5)  The local contractor and/or business must make a reasonable attempt to hire local city residents. 
(6)  Selected contractors must make a reasonable effort to purchase/lease all material, equipment and supplies associated with the awarded bid to a local business with a valid city of business license. 
(Ord of 2-2-1998; Ord. of 9-6-2011; Ord. of 6-3-2013, § 58-16; Ord. of 6-2-2014)  
Sec. 58-17. - Minority-owned and women-owned businesses 
It is the policy of the city to provide minorities and women equal opportunity for participating in all aspects of the city's contracting and procurement programs, including but not limited to, employment and construction projects consistent with the state laws. It is further the city's policy to prohibit discrimination against any person or business in pursuit of these opportunities on the basis of race, color, national origin, religion, sex, age, handicap, or veterans' status. It is further the policy of the city to conduct its contracting and procurement programs so as to prevent such discrimination and to resolve any and all claims of such discrimination. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2011; Code 1995, § 58-17; Ord. of 6-3-2013, § 58-17)  
Sec. 58-18. - Protests 
(a)  Right to protest. Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror, or contractor who is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of a contract may protest to the purchasing agent, except as otherwise stated in this article. The protest shall be submitted in writing within ten calendar days after such aggrieved person knows or should have known the facts giving rise thereto. 
(b)  Authority to resolve protests. The purchasing agent shall have the authority, prior to being heard by the city council, to settle and resolve a protest by an aggrieved bidder, offeror, or contractor, actual or prospective, concerning the solicitation or award of a contract. 
(c)  Decision. If the protest is not resolved by mutual agreement, the purchasing agent shall issue a decision in writing within ten calendar days. The decision shall: 
(1)  State the reasons for the action taken; and 
(2)  Inform the protestant of his right to city council review as provided in this article. 
(d)  Notice of decision. A copy of the decision under subsection (b) of this section shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the protestant and any other intervening party. Copies of the notices will be provided to city council as well. 
(e)  Finality of decision. A decision under subsection (b) of this section shall be final and conclusive, unless fraudulent, or a person adversely affected by the decision appeals administratively to the city council in accordance with this article. 
(f)  Appeals to city council. A decision by the purchasing agent can be appealed to city council within five days after a decision is issued through a written request addressed to the city council. The request must outline the reasons why he is adversely affected by a decision and the desired outcome of a hearing. The request will be heard by the city council at the next scheduled city council meeting in accordance with all applicable state and federal laws regarding the placement of items on the agenda of the city council. The decision of the city council will finalize the award. 
(Ord. of 9-6-2011; Ord. of 6-3-2013, § 58-18)  
Chapter 62 - RAILROADS 
(RESERVED)  
Chapter 66 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Powers of municipalities generally, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-30; collection of garbage generally, S.C. Code 1976, § 44-55-1010 et seq. 
 
Sec. 66-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cellulosic debris means tree cuttings, leaves and garden vegetation, and other cellulosic debris. 
Contract work means any work conducted by any persons, whether or not engaged in such business as a trade or profession, where compensation, either in the form of money or kind, is given for the work provided. 
Garbage, generally, means refuse of animal or vegetable foodstuffs and the packaging incident thereto resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Hired man means a day worker who uses no equipment other than normal residential yard/garden equipment. 
Manmade materials means materials not including garbage or cellulosic debris. The term "manmade materials" includes consumer goods, etc. 
Refuse means, separately or combined, garbage, rubbish, trash, debris, etc. 
(Code 1977, § 10-1; Code 1995, § 66-1; Ord. of 9-14-1987(1))  
Sec. 66-2. - Promulgation of rules and regulations. 
(a)  The city manager shall promulgate rules and regulations governing the placing of refuse for collection and shall make a schedule for the time of collections of such refuse in the various sections of the city. Such rules and regulations so promulgated shall be submitted to the city council for its approval. 
(b)  All such rules and regulations so promulgated shall, after approval by the city council, have the force and effect of an ordinance of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with such rules and regulations so promulgated and approved. 
(Code 1977, § 10-2; Code 1995, § 66-2)  
Sec. 66-3. - Interference with city employees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with city employees engaged in the collection of refuse. 
(Code 1977, § 10-3; Code 1995, § 66-3)  
Sec. 66-4. - Unlawful requests of city employees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to require or request any employee of the city engaged in the collection of refuse to do more than return the empty container to the designated point on the property. 
(Code 1977, § 10-4; Code 1995, § 66-4)  
Sec. 66-5. - Disposal—Generally. 
It is unlawful for any person to deposit or place, or to cause to be deposited or placed, in or on any public street, sidewalk, or alley within the corporate limits of the city any trash, rubbish, empty boxes, garbage, refuse or any obstruction of any kind whatsoever such that it obstructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1977, § 10-5; Code 1995, § 66-5) 
State Law reference— Dumping litter prohibited, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-11-700.  
Sec. 66-6. - Disposal—Residences. 
(a)  At all dwelling houses and residential premises in the city all trash, rubbish and refuse is hereby required to be placed and piled at such premises and at such places thereon as shall be accessible and convenient for removal and disposal by the trucks of the city streets and sanitation division. 
(b)  It is hereby required that at each and every dwelling house or building or apartment house or mobile home occupied as a residence in the city, a city determined and approved receptacle, dumpster or rollaway cart shall be paid for and provided by the homeowner, in the case of owner occupied property, and the landlord shall be responsible for providing each rental unit owned by the landlord an approved receptacle, dumpster or rollaway cart. 
(Code 1977, § 10-7(b); Code 1995, § 66-6; Ord. of 1-8-1990(4); Ord. of 8-1-1994; Ord. of 3-7-2005)  
Sec. 66-7. - Commercial garbage collection and fee. 
(a)  It is hereby required that every commercial establishment provide a container for collection of garbage, refuse, and/or trash, not to include cellulosic or yard debris. The establishment may choose dumpster or roll-out container service. 
(b)  The commercial establishment may choose to use a private sector dumpster service if volume is greater than 55 gallons per week. 
(c)  Commercial establishments who generate small volumes of garbage may choose to use one or two 55-gallon roll-out containers to be serviced by the city or the city's contractor. The container must be purchased from the city department of public works at the current price. 
(d)  The director of public works or the office of inspections and planning shall have the authority to specify which type container shall be used and where the container shall be located. 
(e)  Charges for services provided by the city shall be periodically set by the city council at the recommendation of the city manager. The fee shall apply to each container to all businesses, public bodies, and all nonprofit groups and/or institutions, but to exclude churches' property. 
(f)  Proper maintenance, odor control, and cleanliness of the container and around the container shall be the responsibility of the container service company. The business for which the container is provided may be required to disinfect the container immediately upon notification by the inspections and planning office, and/or the offending container shall be removed within 24 hours of notification of the container service provider. Upon discontinuation of service, for whatever reason, by the container service company, the container, contents, and all debris around the container shall be removed by the container service company within 48 hours. 
(Code 1977, § 10-28; Code 1995, § 66-7; Ord. of 10-6-1997, § 1; Ord. of 8-3-1998)  
Sec. 66-8. - Depositing in streams, bodies of water and other properties. 
No person shall throw or deposit any garbage or refuse in any stream, dry streambed or other body of water or other properties in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 10-8; Code 1995, § 66-8)  
Sec. 66-9. - Depositing, sweeping in manner so that refuse is carried by elements onto streets, public places, occupied premises. 
No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the city any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place, or into any occupied premises within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 10-9; Code 1995, § 66-9)  
Sec. 66-10. - Unauthorized accumulations. 
Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. 
(Code 1977, § 10-10; Code 1995, § 66-10)  
Sec. 66-11. - Industrial byproducts prohibited. 
The city shall not pick up any manufacturing and processing byproducts. 
(Code 1977, § 10-11; Code 1995, § 66-11)  
Sec. 66-12. - Burning in bulk containers. 
It shall be unlawful to burn trash in any bulk container. 
(Code 1977, § 10-12; Code 1995, § 66-12)  
Sec. 66-13. - Disposal of large objects. 
Those persons generating large objects of trash shall be required to first reduce the size of such objects before placing them in the bulk container for disposal. Large objects shall include, but not be limited to, cardboard boxes, paper containers, wooden boxes and crates, and other such objects larger than 18 inches in width, depth or height. 
(Code 1977, § 10-13; Code 1995, § 66-13)  
Sec. 66-14. - Open containers prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for containers required by this chapter to remain open except while being serviced. Users of containers, whether owners or lessees, shall be responsible for keeping containers closed. 
(Code 1977, § 10-14; Code 1995, § 66-14)  
Sec. 66-15. - Refuse outside containers. 
Refuse set outside containers shall not be collected. 
(Code 1977, § 10-15; Code 1995, § 66-15)  
Sec. 66-16. - Number of pickups. 
The number of additional pickups shall be determined by the head of the streets and sanitation division. 
(Code 1977, § 10-16; Code 1995, § 66-16)  
Sec. 66-17. - Maintenance of garbage containers. 
All garbage containers shall be maintained in good condition. 
(Code 1977, § 10-17; Code 1995, § 66-17)  
Sec. 66-18. - Removal of refuse incident to building operations. 
Every contractor, carpenter, builder, tenant or homeowner who constructs, repairs, alters or demolishes a building in the city shall remove all refuse incident to such construction, repairs, alterations or demolitions at his own expense and no part thereof shall be deposited or left on the sidewalks or adjacent thereto. 
(Code 1977, § 10-20; Code 1995, § 66-20)  
Sec. 66-19. - Removal of refuse incident to contract work. 
Every contractor who cuts, trims or removes trees, bushes and like vegetation shall remove all refuse incident to such work at his own expense and no part thereof shall be deposited or left on the sidewalks or adjacent thereto. Normally, the city shall not collect any refuse generated by contract work in the clearing or cleanup of property. However, usual lawn or garden care by the commonly referred to "hired man" that generates normal household quantities of lawn and yard trimmings shall be collected at curbside by city crews. 
(Code 1995, § 66-21; Ord. of 9-14-1987(1))  
Sec. 66-20. - Containers for transportation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, by himself or by an agent, to transport refuse through the streets or public places of the city except in containers closed with tightfitting covers which will prevent the contents from being spilled. 
(Code 1977, § 10-21; Code 1995, § 66-22)  
Sec. 66-21. - Condition of transporting vehicles and containers. 
All vehicles used to transport containers for refuse, as provided in section 66-20, shall at all times be clean and free from spilled garbage. Such containers shall at all times be clean and free from spilled garbage on the outside. 
(Code 1977, § 10-22; Code 1995, § 66-23)  
Sec. 66-22. - Depositing on or adjacent to park, parkway, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit or place, or allow to be dumped, deposited or placed, any refuse of any kind or nature upon or immediately adjacent to any parkway, park or park space in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 10-25; Code 1995, § 66-24)  
Sec. 66-23. - Removal of construction waste. 
Each contractor shall be responsible for the removal of all refuse resulting from his activities and no such refuse shall at any time be placed or permitted to remain on any street, roadway or sidewalk. 
(Code 1977, § 10-26; Code 1995, § 66-25)  
Sec. 66-24. - Use of certain containers within city by nonresidents prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person living outside the corporate limits of the city to deposit or place his garbage in the receptacle or container provided and maintained by a mercantile or business establishment within the city or containers provided and maintained by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 10-27; Code 1995, § 66-26)  
Sec. 66-25. - Leaf, brush and manmade materials collection. 
(a)  The city will collect leaves and yard waste once per week on a scheduled route. 
(b)  Yard waste shall not be mixed with manmade materials. 
(c)  Household garbage shall not be mixed with leaves, brush or manmade materials. 
(d)  No limbs greater than six inches in diameter at the butt end or longer than four feet shall be collected. 
(Code 1995, § 66-27; Ord. of 1-8-1990(3))  
Chapter 70 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authorization to grant special property tax assessments for rehabilitated historic properties, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 4-8-195, 5-21-140. 
 
Sec. 70-1. - Special tax assessment created. 
A special tax assessment is created for the following two types of eligible rehabilitated historic properties: 
(1)  For owner-occupied property, an assessment for two years equal to four percent of the appraised value of the property at the time certification is made, and for eight years equal to the greater of 40 percent of four percent of the appraised value after rehabilitation, or the original assessment of uncertified property. 
(2)  For income-producing rehabilitated property, an assessment for two years equal to six percent of the appraised value of the property at the time of certification, and an assessment for eight years equal to the greater of 40 percent of six percent of the appraised value of the property after rehabilitation or the original assessment on the uncertified property. 
(Code 1995, § 70-1; Ord. of 12-3-1990(3); Ord. of 3-7-1994, § I)  
Sec. 70-2. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to: 
(1)  Encourage the restoration of historic properties; 
(2)  Promote community development and redevelopment; 
(3)  Encourage sound community planning; and 
(4)  Promote the general health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(Code 1995, § 70-2; Ord. of 3-7-1994, § II)  
Sec. 70-3. - Eligible properties. 
(a)  Certification. Historic properties must be certified by the city council as eligible to receive the special tax assessment under this chapter. To receive certification, owners of property must meet all requirements of this chapter, and the regulations of the state department of archives and history. The owner shall receive a certification form, approved by the local government, indicating all requirements have been met. 
(b)  Requirements. To be certified as eligible, properties must: 
(1)  Be listed on the National Register of Historic Places, either individually or as a contributing property in a district; or 
(2)  Be 50 or more years old and have been designated as historic by the city council, either individually or a contributing property in a local historic district. 
(c)  Designation. The city council may designate a property or district as historic if it is more than 50 years old and meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Has significant inherent character, interest or value as a part of the development or heritage of the community, state or nation; 
(2)  Is the site of an event significant in history; 
(3)  Is associated with a person who contributed significantly to the culture and development of the community, state or nation; 
(4)  Exemplifies the cultural, political, economic, social, ethnic or historic heritage of the community, state or nation; 
(5)  Individually, or as a collection of resources, embodies distinguishing characteristics of a type, style, period or specimen in architecture or engineering; 
(6)  Is the work of a designer whose work has influenced significantly the development of the community, state or nation; 
(7)  Contains elements of design, detail, materials or craftsmanship which represent a significant innovation; 
(8)  Is part of or related to a square or other distinctive element of community planning; 
(9)  Represents an established and familiar visual feature of the neighborhood or community; 
(10)  Has yielded or may be likely to yield information important in history or prehistory. 
(d)  Moved properties. The moving of historic buildings from their original site is generally discouraged. If such property is moved as part of a rehabilitation project, it may be eligible for the special tax assessment if: 
(1)  It has been locally designated as historic but will retain, on the new site, the characteristics that made it eligible for historic designation on the former site. 
(2)  It has not yet been designated historic but will meet designation criteria on its new site. 
(3)  It is listed on the National Register of Historic Places and the movement meets all standards and procedures of the U.S. Department of the Interior and state department of archives and history. 
(e)  Removal of historic designation. A designated property may be removed from the list of eligible properties if it no longer possesses the qualities that made it eligible for designation, provided that: 
(1)  The property has been removed from the National Register of Historic Places and has not been designated under the local criteria included in subsection (c) of this section. 
(2)  Owners of property proposed for removal of designation shall be given 30 days' notice prior to such action and are given opportunity to present evidence why such removal should not be conducted. 
(Code 1995, § 70-3; Ord. of 3-7-1994, § III)  
Sec. 70-4. - Eligible rehabilitation. 
(a)  Standards for rehabilitation. To be eligible for the special tax assessment under this chapter, historic rehabilitations must be conducted according to the following standards: 
(1)  A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the building and its site and environment. 
(2)  The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The removal of historic materials or alterations or features and spaces that characterize each property shall be avoided. 
(3)  Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development shall not be undertaken. 
(4)  Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved. 
(5)  Distinctive features, finishes and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property should be preserved. 
(6)  Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new features should match the old features in design, color, texture and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing feature shall be substantiated by documentary, physical or pictorial evidence. 
(7)  Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, as appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means possible. 
(8)  Significant archeological resources affected by a project shall be protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken. 
(9)  New additions, exterior alterations or related new construction shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the historic property and its environment. 
(10)  New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired. 
(b)  Value of rehabilitation. The rehabilitation work conducted pursuant to this chapter must have expenditures: 
(1)  Exceeding 50 percent of the appraised value for owner-occupied building; or 
(2)  Exceeding the appraised value of the building for income-producing property. 
(c)  Scope. The special tax assessment may apply to the following: 
(1)  Property that is rehabilitated; 
(2)  Real property surrounding the building; 
(3)  Structures that are significant to the rehabilitated property, as determined by the city council. 
(d)  Time limits. To be eligible for the special tax assessment, rehabilitations must be completed within two years after approval of submitted plans, pursuant to section 70-5. 
(Code 1995, § 70-4; Ord. of 3-7-1994, § IV)  
Sec. 70-5. - Process. 
(a)  Fee required. There is a fee of $100.00 for each application for review of rehabilitation work conducted pursuant to this chapter. No application shall be processed without payment of the fee. Cashier's checks should be made payable to the state department of archives and history. 
(b)  Plan required. Property owners seeking approval of rehabilitation work are encouraged to complete a rehabilitated historic property application with supporting documentation and application fee prior to beginning work. Rehabilitation work conducted prior to approval of the application is done so at the risk of the owner. 
(c)  Preliminary approval. Upon receipt of the completed application, the department shall determine if the project is consistent with the standards for rehabilitation and shall notify the owner in writing. Upon receipt of this determination: 
(1)  If the application is approved, the owner may begin rehabilitation. 
(2)  If the application is not approved, he may revise such application in accordance with comments provided by the department. 
(3)  If the application is not approved, he may appeal the decision. 
(d)  Substantive changes. Once preliminary approval is granted to an application, substantive changes must be approved in writing by the department. Unapproved substantive changes are conducted at the risk of the property owner. 
(e)  Final approval. Completed projects may be inspected by the department or its designee to determine if the work is consistent with the standards for rehabilitation. The department shall issue final approval when the completed work meets the standards for rehabilitation. 
(f)  Additional work. After the department's final approval has been issued, the property owner shall notify the department of any additional work, other than ordinary maintenance, before the ten-year expiration of the special property assessment. The department shall notify the property owner in writing if the overall project is consistent with the standards for rehabilitation. If the additional work is found to be inconsistent with the standards for rehabilitation, the department shall notify the owner in writing of its decision to rescind approval within 30 days. The property owner may withdraw his request and cancel or revise the proposed additional work. 
(g)  Decertification. The date of any of the following shall be considered the date of the end of the special tax assessment: 
(1)  Written notice from the owner to the county requesting removal of the referential assessment. 
(2)  Sale or transfer of ownership during the ten-year period, except in the course of probate proceedings. 
(3)  Removal of the historic property designation by the city council. 
(4)  Recession of the approval of rehabilitation by the department of archives and history. 
(h)  Notification. The city shall, upon certification of a property as historic, notify the county assessor, auditor and treasurer that such property has been duty certified and is eligible for the special tax assessment. 
(i)  Annual application. Owners of properties certified as historic under this chapter shall make application to the county auditor to begin the special assessment and shall annually make such application for each year the assessment shall be in effect. 
(j)  Fiscal year. To be eligible for the special tax assessment, a property must be certified as historic before April 1 of the year it intends to receive this treatment. 
(Code 1995, § 70-5; Ord. of 3-7-1994, § V)  
Chapter 74 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate streets, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-30; putting foreign substances on highways, S.C. Code 1976, § 57-7-20; obstructions in highways, S.C. Code 1976, § 57-7-210. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 74-1. - Spitting prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to spit or expectorate upon any sidewalk of the city or upon any paved walk within the railroad yard, courthouse square, or other public place, or upon the floor of any railway station or public building of any sort in the city. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1977, § 23-1; Code 1995, § 74-1)  
Sec. 74-2. - Creating obstruction with merchandise, boxes, etc. 
It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any street or sidewalk in the city by placing thereon any merchandise, barrels, boxes or other things. 
(Code 1977, § 23-2; Code 1995, § 74-2)  
Sec. 74-3. - Congregating, creating obstruction. 
It is unlawful for any persons to congregate on any of the sidewalks or streets of the city whereby the same are obstructed. 
(Code 1977, § 23-3; Code 1995, § 74-3)  
Sec. 74-4. - Dumping trash, refuse, etc., on streets and sidewalks. 
No person shall dump or leave any trash, refuse or garbage on any highway, street or sidewalk, and, in addition to any other penalties, any person violating the provisions of this section may be required to remove from the highway any such trash, refuse or garbage dumped or left on the highway. 
(Code 1977, § 23-4; Code 1995, § 74-4)  
Sec. 74-5. - Permission to use streets required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, maintain or operate in, on, above or under any street or public place under control of the city, any line, pipe, cable, pole, structure or facility for utilities, communications, cablevision or other purposes without a consent agreement or franchise agreement issued by the city council by ordinance which prescribes the term, fees and conditions for use. 
(Code 1995, § 74-5; Ord. of 6-1-1998)  
Sec. 74-6. - Consent or franchise fee. 
The annual fee for use of streets or public places authorized by a consent agreement or franchise agreement shall be set by the ordinance approving the agreement and shall be based on gross revenues derived from activities in the city, the length of lines installed in streets and public places, or other formula deemed appropriate by the city council. No consent fee or franchise fee shall be construed to be in lieu of a business license tax based on gross revenue unless specifically provided by ordinance. Credits for business license taxes paid may be applied to fees set by ordinance granting consent or a franchise when specifically authorized by ordinance. 
(Code 1995, § 74-6; Ord. of 6-1-1998)  
Secs. 74-7—74-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STREETS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 74-31. - Depositing glass, other injurious substances on streets. 
(a)  No person shall place, throw or deposit upon any highway or city street any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such highway or city street. 
(b)  Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. 
(c)  Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the highway from such vehicle. 
(Code 1977, § 23-18; Code 1995, § 74-31)  
Sec. 74-32. - Obstruction of roads, drainage ditches. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct ditches and drainage openings along roads, to place obstructions upon roads, or to throw or place on roads any objects likely to cut or otherwise injure vehicles using same. 
(Code 1977, § 23-19; Code 1995, § 74-32)  
Sec. 74-33. - Protection of plants, shrubs and trees along highway. 
(a)  Whenever the lands adjoining any public road or highway in this city shall be beautified by the planting or maintaining of flowers or ornamental trees or shrubs on the lands adjoining the same by any agreement of the landowners adjoining such road or by their permission, such stretch of road shall be marked at either end by the road authorities of the city by some suitable sign showing that the stretch of road between such signs has been beautified. 
(b)  When any stretch of road has been so designated and marked by the road authorities of the city it shall be unlawful for any person to dig, pull up, gather, remove, cut, maim, break or injure in any way, including any injury done by fires intentionally set, any wild, cultivated or ornamental plants, shrubs and trees situated on or along any such marked stretch of public road or highway, or any public or privately owned land lying along such road; provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply where the acts hereby prohibited are done by or under the instructions of the proper authorities lawfully in charge of such public roads, highways or lands or by or with the permission of the owner of any privately owned lands. 
(Code 1977, § 23-20; Code 1995, § 74-33)  
Sec. 74-34. - Hauling earth, garbage, etc., over streets. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any cart, truck or other vehicle employed in removing or carrying any dirt, sawdust, shavings, sand, coal, waste paper or matter, cans, garbage, any material liable to be blown by the wind, glass, or any manure or filth or offensive matter of any kind or description, along or over any of the streets of the city, without having and keeping the same in such tight and secure condition that such matter shall not be scattered or suffered to fall on any of the streets of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 23-21; Code 1995, § 74-34)  
Sec. 74-35. - Painting on pavements. 
It is unlawful for any person to paint, write, lay or paste any advertising matter or device on the paved streets or sidewalks or rights-of-way or any property belonging to or under the control of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 23-22; Code 1995, § 74-35)  
Sec. 74-36. - Breaking or destroying curbing and sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to break or destroy the curbing or sidewalk of any street within the city or otherwise to deface the same, or to construct any entrance into property on any of the paved streets owned and maintained by the city without the approval of the public works department. 
(Code 1977, § 23-24; Code 1995, § 74-36)  
Sec. 74-37. - Driving over streets under construction or repair. 
It is unlawful for any person to drive, or to have driven, any vehicle over or across or through any street in the city while the same is being paved or is closed to traffic for purposes of improvement. 
(Code 1977, § 23-25; Code 1995, § 74-37)  
Sec. 74-38. - Interference with barricade. 
It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, destroy or remove any barricade or lights or lantern or other traffic control devices used in blocking off or protecting from traffic any street in the city while the same is closed for the purpose of improvement. 
(Code 1977, § 23-26; Code 1995, § 74-38)  
Sec. 74-39. - Erection of poles restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any poles in the streets or rights-of-way of the city without permission from the director of public works. 
(Code 1977, § 23-27; Code 1995, § 74-39)  
Sec. 74-40. - Utility companies required to pay annual street use fee. 
(a)  The annual fee for the use of the public streets shall be paid on or before April 15 of each year until such time as this section is amended and shall be computed as follows: 
(1)  Water companies shall pay three percent of total revenues received in the prior calendar year from residential and commercial service billed to customers located within the city. 
(2)  Electric companies shall pay three percent of total revenues received from that service area in the prior calendar year from residential and commercial service billed to customers located within the city. 
(3)  Telephone companies shall pay to the city a sum equal to three percent of the recurring local service revenues, less uncollectibles, received from customers within the municipal boundaries for services originating therein and which are required to be reported, on January 1, 1984, to accounts 500 through 506 of the uniform system of accounts for telephone companies, exclusive of independent company settlements. Such payments shall be transmitted monthly to the office of the city clerk/treasurer and shall be based upon a calculation of the moneys booked to such accounts during the preceding month's period with the first payment to be made April 15, 1984. 
The payment of moneys hereunder shall be in lieu of all occupation, license, gross receipts, excise, franchise and all other levies, assessments, fees or taxes of whatsoever kind, regardless of designation, and the payment of moneys hereunder shall be the full and complete payment of any such demands and charges except ad valorem taxes. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, as defined by this Code, and subject to the provisions of this section, to use the public streets or public places within the city for purposes of placing and maintaining poles, wires or equipment, above or below the ground surface, with or without a written franchise, unless such person has first agreed in writing filed with the city clerk/treasurer to pay the use fees established hereby and unless the use fees are paid when due. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense for which the chief operating officer of the utility located within the city shall be subject to prosecution. 
(Code 1977, § 23-28; Code 1995, § 74-40)  
Sec. 74-41. - Alleys redesignated as streets. 
All city roads named as alleys are redesignated as streets. All street signs shall be changed as such on these city roads. 
(Code 1995, § 74-41; Ord. of 6-5-1995)  
Secs. 74-42—74-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - EXCAVATIONS 
 
Sec. 74-71. - Permit required. 
No person shall cut, excavate or bore in any street or road within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of laying, or repairing pipes for sewer, water, gas or steam, or for any other purpose unless he shall have previously obtained from the director of public works permission to cut or excavate in such street or road. 
(Code 1977, § 23-34; Code 1995, § 74-51)  
Sec. 74-72. - Work in rights-of-way; location of utilities; inspection. 
(a)  No work of any type shall begin on city street rights-of-way without application to the department of public works for an encroachment permit. 
(b)  The department of public works and utilities locating service shall be contacted and location of utilities requested no less than three days prior to commencing excavation. 
(c)  The department of public works shall be notified upon completion of work for the purpose of inspection. 
(Code 1977, § 23-35; Code 1995, § 74-52)  
Sec. 74-73. - Maintenance of excavation. 
Any person cutting and excavating or boring a street or road pursuant to permission granted by the department of public works shall maintain the excavation in good condition until such time as the upkeep of the same is assumed by the city. All traffic control devices and procedures will be in compliance with state department of transportation guidelines. 
(Code 1977, § 23-36; Code 1995, § 74-53)  
Sec. 74-74. - Barricades; lights. 
Any person cutting or excavating in a street or road pursuant to permission granted by the director of public works under this division shall place adequate lights and barriers at such excavation as per state department of transportation guidelines. 
(Code 1977, § 23-38; Code 1995, § 74-55)  
Sec. 74-75. - Excavator responsible for damages. 
All work involved in cutting, excavating or boring in streets or roads pursuant to the permission granted by the director of public works under this division shall be planned and executed in such a manner that there shall be no injury to public sewer lines, water lines or electric lines. In event of such injury the person making the excavation shall be responsible therefor and shall pay to the city the entire cost of repairing the same. 
(Code 1977, § 23-39; Code 1995, § 74-56)  
Sec. 74-76. - Backfilling; site restoration. 
(a)  Any person cutting or excavating in a street or road pursuant to permission granted by the director of public works under this division shall complete the same promptly, shall backfill the earth and thoroughly tamp the same. When any person is cutting or excavating in a street or road pursuant to permission granted by the director of public works, the manner of excavating, laying pipes, backfilling the earth over them, and thoroughly tamping shall be subject to the approval of the public works department. 
(b)  Backfill material shall be flowable fill/fly ash concrete. 
(c)  Any pavement or site restoration by the city will be billed directly to the responsible agency. 
(Code 1977, § 23-40; Code 1995, § 74-57)  
Sec. 74-77. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this division shall not apply to or extend to cutting or excavations in state streets or roads which are under the supervision of the state department of transportation. 
(Code 1977, § 23-41; Code 1995, § 74-58)  
Secs. 74-78—74-97. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS 
 
Sec. 74-98. - Overhanging awnings. 
It is unlawful for any person to allow any awning to hang nearer than seven feet to the surface of any sidewalk. 
(Code 1977, § 23-53; Code 1995, § 74-81)  
Sec. 74-99. - Bicycles, coasters, skateboards, etc. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to ride any bicycle, skateboard or skates upon any sidewalk within the city so as to interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(b)  No person upon coasters, skateboards, etc., or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a street on a crosswalk or at an intersection, and except upon streets set aside as play streets when and as authorized by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 23-55; Code 1995, § 74-82; Ord. of 7-13-1992)  
Secs. 74-100—74-126. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ASSEMBLIES, PARADES AND PROCESSIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate processions on highways, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-710(3). 
 
Sec. 74-127. - Enforcement. 
Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the authority of any police officer to arrest a person engaged in any act or activity granted a permit under this article, if the conduct of such person violates the laws of the state, provisions of this Code or other ordinances of the city, or unreasonably obstructs the public streets and sidewalks of the city, or engages in acts that cause, or would tend to cause, a breach of the peace. 
(Code 1977, § 23-67; Code 1995, § 74-106)  
Sec. 74-128. - Permit—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to organize or hold or participate in any parade, meeting, assembly or procession of persons and/or vehicles on the streets or sidewalks of the city, unless such activity shall have first been authorized by a written permit therefor. 
(Code 1977, § 23-68; Code 1995, § 74-107)  
Sec. 74-129. - Permit—Application. 
Any person desiring a permit required by the provisions of this article shall make application therefor to the city manager, which application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and address of the person the applicant represents. 
(3)  The exact time and date of commencement and termination of each act or activity desired. 
(4)  The purpose, location and route of such act or activity, if applicable. 
(5)  The person, group, association or body to be authorized under the permit to do such act or activity and the number of persons to participate. 
(6)  Such other relevant information as the city manager may require for the investigation of the applicant. 
(Code 1977, § 23-69; Code 1995, § 74-108)  
Sec. 74-130. - Permit—Contents. 
Upon issuance of a permit required by this article, the same shall contain therein all information contained in the application therefor and be signed by the city manager and a signed copy of the same shall be kept with the application, both on file in the office of the city manager. 
(Code 1977, § 23-70); Code 1995, § 74-109  
Sec. 74-131. - Matters considered in determining issuance of permit. 
In deciding whether to issue a permit under the provisions of this article, the city manager shall consider: 
(1)  The number of persons to participate. 
(2)  The anticipated traffic conditions at the time and date proposed for the activity. 
(3)  The schedule of other similar activities for which permits may have been issued. 
(4)  The adequacy of adult supervision for any minor scheduled to participate. 
(5)  The availability of city personnel whose presence on duty may be required by the activity and by the necessity to protect the general public. 
(6)  The adequacy of public facilities in the location proposed for the activity to accommodate the proposed activity and the normal public use of public facilities in the proposed location. 
(Code 1977, § 23-71; Code 1995, § 74-110)  
Sec. 74-132. - Permit issuance. 
The permit required by the provisions of this article shall be issued by the city manager upon application therefor; provided, however, such permit may be denied or refused if it shall appear that the applicant therefor or the act or activity requested by such application shall be violative of any applicable provision of this Code, state law or other city ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 23-72; Code 1995, § 74-111)  
Sec. 74-133. - Deviation from permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person participating in any act or activity for which a permit has been granted under the provisions of this article to deviate from or alter any of the terms or contents of such permit. 
(Code 1977, § 23-73; Code 1995, § 74-112)  
Sec. 74-134. - Display of permit. 
Every person having a permit issued under the provisions of this article shall have such permit in his possession during the activity permitted thereby and shall display such permit upon the request of any law enforcement officer. Failure to display such permit shall be deemed a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1977, § 23-74; Code 1995, § 74-113)  
Secs. 74-135—74-151. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL EVENTS AND LICENSING 
 
Sec. 74-152. - Enforcement of other laws. 
Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the authority of any police officer to arrest a person engaged in any act or activity granted under this article, if the conduct of such person violates the laws of the state, provisions of this Code, or other ordinances of the city, or unreasonably obstructs the public streets and sidewalks of the city, or if such person engages in acts that cause or would tend to cause a breach of the peace, or undue disturbance, interference, or molestation of other persons making lawful use of the space in a peaceful manner. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2018, § 1)  
Sec. 74-153. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Block party means a private outdoor gathering on a public street which involves the closure of a street and may include live or taped music and the distribution of food and beverages. 
Event means any festival, concert or other announced public gathering upon any public street, right-of-way or property of the city. 
Filming means any filming of movies, commercials, documentaries and other motion pictures, video projects, or commercial photographs upon any public street, right-of-way or property of the city. 
Open event means any event which primarily promotes, entertainment, arts, dining, athletic competition, political activity and is generally advertised as open to the public at large without the necessity to enter by prior invitation or purchase of a ticket; events are presumed to be open events. 
Parade means any parade, march, foot race, bicycle race, ceremony, pageant or procession of any kind moving upon any public street or sidewalk of the city which does not comply with normal traffic regulations. 
Performance means any public presentation, exhibition, fireworks display or appearance upon any public street, right-of-way, plaza or property of the city. 
Picketing and pickets include demonstrating and demonstrators, and other related First Amendment activity. 
Private event means a wedding, commitment ceremony, fundraiser, block party in a residential neighborhood, and filming event; social activities requiring limited admission for sponsors or invited guests may be treated as private events; events requiring paid admission or tickets may be treated as private events; events involving a state, national, or international official who has special security details may be treated as a private event for the limited purpose of assuring security. 
Street performance means acting, singing, playing one or more musical instruments, dancing, miming, juggling, unicycling, stilt walking, doing magic tricks, reciting, imitating statues, and engaging in similar acts of entertainment when done on a city-owned or city-controlled sidewalk, plaza, park, or similar public space. 
Street performer means someone who engages in street performances. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2018, § 2)  
Sec. 74-154. - Permit required; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall engage or participate in, aid, form or start any parade, event, block party, performance, or filming unless a permit is obtained from the office of the city manager. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Funeral processions supervised by a licensed mortuary. 
(2)  A parade, event or performance that is under the control of the city and is conducted on city property. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2018, § 3)  
Sec. 74-155. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Generally. A person seeking the issuance of a parade, event, block party, performance or filming permit shall file an application with the office of the city manager. The city manager may authorize a city official to enforce this section. Upon receipt of the application, the city official shall notify the appropriate staff members, who will make a recommendation to the city manager as expeditiously as possible. 
(b)  Filing period; processing fee. An application and processing fee for any permit required by this section shall be made to the city manager's office based on the event, detailed on the event application. The manager, where good cause is shown, shall have the authority to consider any application which is filed less than the 30 days before the date sought. 
(c)  Contents. The application shall be signed by the applicant, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the individual submitting the application on behalf of the person, group, or organization seeking to conduct such parade, event, block party, performance or filming; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible head of such organization; 
(3)  The date when the proposed parade, event, block party, performance, or filming is to be conducted; 
(4)  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point, or the area sought to be used or closed off for the parade, event, block party, performance or filming; 
(5)  The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles participating, and the types of animals and a description of the vehicles; 
(6)  The time when the parade, event, block party, performance or filming will start and terminate; 
(7)  The location, by streets, of any assembly area and the time of such assembly for parades; or the location of such street, plaza, park, or other public area where persons will gather for an event, ceremony, or performance for events other than parades; 
(8)  Provisions for sanitation facilities, crowd, noise and traffic control, security and parking as pertinent for the event; 
(9)  A description of food and beverages to be sold or distributed, and if beverages containing alcohol are to be sold, then evidence of a state permit, if needed, having been issued or applied for, and a limitation of such beverages to beer and wine; and 
(10)  The individuals or entity that will benefit, if revenue is anticipated to be generated by the activity. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2018, § 4)  
Sec. 74-156. - Issuance of permit; conditions. 
(a)  Criteria for issuance. The city manager shall issue a permit for a proposed parade, event, block party, performance or filming unless he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade, event, block party, performance or filming will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)  The conduct of the parade, event, block party, performance or filming will require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and of contiguous areas that adequate police protection cannot be provided to the remainder of the city; 
(3)  The concentration of persons, animals, equipment or vehicles at assembly points or other areas will substantially interfere with adequate fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas near such areas, or will hinder the movement of firefighting equipment; 
(4)  The conduct of the parade, event, block party, performance or filming is reasonably likely to result in violence to persons or property, causing serious harm to the public; 
(5)  The parade, event, block party or performance is to be held for the primary purpose of advertising a product, goods or services, and is designed to be held primarily for profit; 
(6)  The route has been requested recurringly in the past year and is too disruptive to residents or businesses; or 
(7)  Any proposed use of public property, right-of-way or facilities will unduly interfere with the normal use of the property, right-of-way or facility by the city or the general public. Consideration shall be given to the number of people expected to be in attendance, the primary purpose of the space, other previously permitted events nearby or in the same space and occurring close in time to the proposed time. The appropriateness of the size of space requested for the type of activity proposed will be assessed so that limited space will not be expected to hold a large number of people or large space is not set aside for a limited number of people. 
(b)  Liability insurance. The city manager may require proof of public liability insurance in an amount equal to the city's liability under the Government Tort Claims Act of the state, and require the execution of a hold harmless agreement to indemnify the city in the event it is held liable for any injuries or damage as a result of the event. 
(c)  Notification of city agencies of issuance of permit. Upon issuance of a permit, a copy shall be sent to the fire chief, the traffic engineer, the chief of police, economic development, and any other department affected. 
(d)  Compliance with other laws. The granting of any permit required by this article shall not eliminate: 
(1)  Requirements for any business license or any other permits which may be prescribed by any other federal, state or local statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations; 
(2)  Compliance with any other applicable federal, state or local statutes, ordinances, rules or regulations; or 
(3)  Compliance with regulations regarding the concentration of persons, animals, equipment or vehicles at assembly points or other areas which substantially damages planting or landscaping on public or private property. Adequate cleanup and sanitation must be provided. 
The city manager is authorized to develop rules and regulations in order to further the purposes of this article. 
(e)  Private events. Private events will be exempted from the requirement that the activity be open to the public at large, but may be restricted to those who have paid for admission, been invited, or otherwise secured admission from the permittee, or the permittee's authorized agent. 
(f)  Open events. Open events must be open to all persons desiring to attend and conducting themselves without undue disturbance of the event's purpose. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2018, § 5)  
Sec. 74-157. - Notice of action on application. 
The city manager shall act upon the application for a permit required by this article as expeditiously as possible, notifying the applicant by mail of the decision. If the application is disapproved, the reasons therefor shall be set out in writing. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2018, § 6)  
Sec. 74-158. - Approval of permit under alternative date, time, route or conditions. 
The city manager, in denying an application for a permit under this article, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade, event, block party, performance or filming on a date, at a time, or over a route and under different conditions from that requested by the applicant. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2018, § 7)  
Sec. 74-159. - Duties of permittee. 
(a)  Generally. A permittee under this article shall comply with all permit directions and conditions. 
(b)  Display or carrying of permit. The applicant, individual, or any representative of the organization shall display the permit or carry it upon his person during the parade, event, performance or filming. 
(c)  Special event vendor's permits. No event which features businesses or organizations providing goods or services for compensation shall be issued an event permit, unless the permittee under this article shall obtain for each such business or organization a special event vendor's permit from the city in accord with such measures as the city manager shall prescribe. Each permittee must designate an individual who will be responsible for identifying all vendors and for collecting on behalf of the city all fees as provided in this section. The special event vendor's permit shall be valid for no longer than the duration of the permitted event, up to a maximum period of two months. The fee charged for the special event vendor's permit shall be in accord with any fee schedule which may be adopted and amended from time to time by the council. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2018, § 8)  
Sec. 74-160. - Public conduct. 
(a)  No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade, event, performance or filming, or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in the event. 
(b)  No driver of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles are in motion and are conspicuously designated as parade, nor shall any driver drive around or through any event or properly designated or barricaded area. 
(c)  The city manager shall have the authority to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or area properly designated or posted for a parade, event, performance or filming; and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. 
(d)  No glass bottles, containers or cans may be sold or distributed on the public right-of-way, and no patron may carry a glass bottle, container or can on the public right-of-way during a parade, event, performance or filming. It shall be unlawful for any vendor to sell beverages in glass containers for off-premises consumption at parades or events. 
(e)  Prohibited novelties. Aerosol/spray plastic/foam string and fireworks to include those known as "poppers" or "snaps" are prohibited on parade routes and city permitted events, unless specifically permitted by the city. It shall be unlawful for vendors to sell or distribute prohibited novelties during parades, events, block parties, performances, filming, picketing and similar events. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2018, § 9)  
Sec. 74-161. - Payment of costs of services and equipment provided by the city. 
(a)  The city manager may impose reasonable fees and requirements upon the applicant as necessary to cover the costs of public services and equipment provided by the city for the event. 
(b)  A bond may be required to cover the cost of labor and equipment if the event fails to take place without cancellation of 24 hours' notice. Forfeiture of the bond will not apply in event of inclement weather, disaster or other unforeseen event not in the permittee's control. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2018, § 10)  
Sec. 74-162. - Security. 
The applicant must provide adequate security for the event as directed by the police department. The applicant may be required to hire sworn off-duty law enforcement officers to provide security and ensure public safety. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2018, §11)  
Sec. 74-163. - Food, beverage, and litter control. 
(a)  No glass containers or cans will be permitted on city property or streets. Beverages must be served clear plastic containers. 
(b)  Procedures and logistics for serving alcoholic beverages must be submitted with the permit application. They shall include, but are not limited to: location, hours of operation, locations with site diagram, security procedures (volunteer and uniform staffing, ID checking, and dispensing operations), enclosure requirements, parking locations for beer trucks, etc. The service of and consumption of alcoholic beverages must comply with all state alcohol beverage control commission regulations. The city reserves the right to revoke the permit or require the applicant to discontinue alcohol sales whenever the consumption of alcohol by participants becomes excessive, or when over a period of time participants regularly demonstrate obnoxious, loud, abusive, or other inappropriate behavior following events. 
(1)  The applicant must post signs stating the alcoholic beverages prohibited beyond the approved permitted area and underage drinking is prohibited. 
(2)  All participants consuming alcohol must wear an armband to identify that they are of legal drinking age. 
(3)  All alcohol sales must end 30 minutes before the permittee's ABC license expires or the conclusion of the event, whichever comes first. 
(c)  Arrangements must be made with the public services department by the permittee for trash containers and procedures to clean the streets. Cleanup must begin immediately at the conclusion of the event. 
(d)  Vendors must obtain the appropriate licensees and permits from city hall, building codes department and DHEC and observe all regulations. 
(e)  Parking on parade route or event location. The city manager shall have the authority to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or area properly designated or posted for a parade, event, performance or filming, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. 
(f)  Glass containers. No glass bottle, containers or cans may be sold or distributed on the public right-of-way, and no patron may carry a glass bottle, container or can on the public right-of-way during a parade, event, performance or filming. It shall be unlawful for any vendor to sell beverages in glass containers for off-premises consumption at parades or events. 
(g)  Restaurants inside of the event barricades can serve beer and wine on the sidewalks during events in clear plastic containers. Patrons are not allowed to leave the area with the beverage and must be wearing an arm band as proof of ID. 
(h)  No CWP carries nor weapons are allowed in the alcohol area of the event. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2018, § 12)  
Sec. 74-164. - Payment of costs of services and equipment provided by city. 
The city manager may impose reasonable fees and requirements upon the applicant as are necessary to cover the cost of public services and equipment provided by the city for the event. The applicant or sponsor shall be responsible for cleanup after an event. A bond may be required. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2018, § 13)  
Sec. 74-165. - Picketing. 
(a)  Conduct of picketing; penalty. For purposes of this section, picketing means an organized effort to express publicly a point of view at a given place with signs, oral statements, or the like in a systematic manner, which involves walking or standing in the same area for a prolonged period of time. Peaceful picketing in the furtherance of a lawful purpose shall be allowed in the city in public places without a permit being required, provided the picketing is done under the following conditions: 
(1)  Picketing may be conducted only on the sidewalks or other city-owned areas or right-of-way normally used or reserved for pedestrian movement, and may not be conducted on the portion of a street used primarily for vehicular traffic. 
(2)  Such picketers may carry written or printed placards or signs, provided the placards and staffs or poles to which they are attached do not interfere with the free use of the sidewalk by other pedestrians. Such placards, with reasonable use, shall be deemed to comply if they do not exceed 20 inches by 30 inches or 600 square inches. Such staffs and poles, with reasonable use, shall be deemed to comply if they are made of wood, do not exceed 40 inches in length, are not more than one inch in diameter, and are blunt at each end. Placards, staffs and poles exceeding these dimensions, and staffs and poles having pointed ends, are presumed threats to safety. 
(3)  Such picketers must march single file and not congregate so as to block the sidewalk or any driveway. 
(4)  If picketers without permits who are promoting different objectives desire to use the same area for picketing, the police department shift commander shall allot time to each group of picketers for the use of the same or nearby area on an equitable basis, provided reasonable accommodation is made for picketing for the other group in close proximity to the preferred location, and each group shall be permitted to picket at the preferred location, subject to the provisions of this section, in alternating four-hour time periods. 
(5)  Picketing done contrary to this section shall be unlawful, and each individual in violation shall be subject to a fine of up to $50.00 for the first offense, and a fine of up to $100.00 for the second and subsequent offenses within a period of two years. 
(b)  Interference with pickets. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere physically with such pickets in the use of the sidewalk or address profane, indecent, abusive or threatening language to or at such pickets or others to breach the peace. 
(c)  Crowd dispersal. A shift commander or supervisor of the police department of the city may, in the event of the assemblage of persons in such numbers as to tend to intimidate picketers pursuing their lawful objective through numbers alone or through use of inflammatory words or threatening gestures that are ordinarily used to intimidate people, direct the dispersal of persons so assembled, and any police officer may arrest any person who fails to leave the place of assemblage when so directed by the police. 
(d)  Restrictions. Persons engaging in picketing activity cannot do so inside an area designated as an event area for which a permit has been granted to another individual or group under this article, if the picketing behavior has the effect of interfering with, hampering, hindering, or getting in the way of those participating in the permitted event in accordance with its purposes or with the general public making use of the space for its ordinary and customary purposes. Whenever any police officer or municipal employee charged with monitoring or supervising event activity determines the picketing behavior is interfering with, hampering, hindering, or getting in the way of others as provided in this section, then the officer or employee may direct the picketers to relocate to other public space in reasonable proximity where such conduct can continue, if lawful, so long as the picketing does not interfere with, hamper, hinder, or get in the way of persons participating in the event for its intended purposes or of members of the general public making use of the public space for its ordinary and customary purposes. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2018, § 14)  
Sec. 74-166. - Street performances. 
(a)  Street performances authorized. A street performer may engage in a street performance on city-owned or city-operated sidewalks, plazas, parks and other public places, other than vehicular areas in streets and motor vehicle parking lots, so long as the street performer obtains a street performance permit pursuant to this section and complies with the provisions of this section. A street performer acting in compliance with this section does not need any other permit required under this article and is not subject to rules and regulations applicable to other special events as provided for in this article. 
(b)  Permit requirements. No street performer may engage in street performances without first obtaining a street performance permit from the city manager or the city manager's designee, in accordance with reasonable administrative procedures established by the city manager. The information required on a permit application shall be that which reasonably relates to the performer's identity and current contact information and which specifies the type of performance activities the performer intends to provide. Each applicant must also submit a criminal records check from the city police department. The city reserves the right to deny a permit with a conviction for an act that would represent a potential threat to public safety or security for a viewing audience. Each street performance permit applicant must complete a permit application at least 24 hours prior to the first street performance of the permit's term. 
(c)  Permit term. The permit shall be valid from the time of issuance until the same date the next year. Thereafter, the permit may be renewed on or before each annual date upon the completion of a new application and payment of the standard permit fee. 
(d)  Permit fee. The city manager shall from time to time set a standard fee adequate to cover or offset the administrative costs of processing a permit application, issuing a permit, maintaining a file on current and inactive permits, and assuring compliance. The permit and the permit fee under this section are in lieu of any other license, permit, tax, or fee, otherwise required by the city for the conduct of performances or the receipt of revenue for performances. 
(e)  Permit appearance and display. Each permit shall include a current photograph, which shall be passport size, as submitted by the street performer applicant in the most recent application. The permits shall be numbered and contain the name of the permitted street performer. The city shall laminate permits at the time of issuance. Street performers shall keep the permits prominently displayed on their persons, or at the place of performance, during the time of performance. 
(f)  Nontransferable. Permits are issued to individuals only, even if two or more permittees perform as a group. No permittee may transfer an issued permit to another person. 
(g)  Excluded areas. Street performances are not permitted within 50 feet of the structure which is a school, hospital, funeral home, or court house and which is designated as such. No performance may occur within 50 feet of the property line of a cemetery. No performance shall occur within an encroachment area for dining on a public sidewalk. No performance activity shall interfere with or impede the flow of pedestrian traffic at a crosswalk, building entrance, private patio, curb cut, or entrance into an encroachment area for dining. No performance activity shall be allowed in a special event area permitted by the city without the express written authorization of the event sponsor. No street performer may perform within 50 feet of another street performer; however, this provision shall not preclude street performers who are performing together from performing in close proximity to one another. In addition, the city, after at least ten days' published notice in a newspaper of general circulation and a posting of notice at or near the proposed site, may hold a public hearing to receive comments on whether to exclude additional sites at which street performances shall be excluded. Persons may also submit written comments. The city manager shall assess such information thereby developed and may exclude additional sites for good cause related to public safety, public health, public peace, or the peaceful enjoyment of nearby premises. 
(h)  Excluded performances. Performances with flames or fireworks are excluded unless the performer first obtains a written authorization from the fire marshal setting forth the conditions of authorization, if any is to be granted, for the time, place, and manner of the performance. Performances with knives, daggers, swords, and like sharp instruments are excluded unless written authorization is first obtained from the police department setting the conditions of authorization, if any is to be granted, for the time, place, and manner of the performance. Performances with chalk drawings on sidewalks are excluded unless the performer first obtains the written authorization, if any is to be granted, from the public works director, setting conditions for the time, place and manner of the performance. The use of animals is excluded. Where written authorizations are required under this subsection, the performer shall maintain the animals at the location of the performance at all times during the performance. 
(i)  Times of performance. Permitted street performances may occur between 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. all days of the week. 
(j)  Gratuities. No performer may solicit payment from any individual before, during, or after a performance. However, a performer may invite a group as a whole to show appreciation for the performance at the end of a performance by placing money in a designated receptacle of any reasonable size that it does not block pedestrian traffic at the performance site. The receptacle may remain open before, after, and during the performance and may have with it a sign which invites gratuities, provided the sign is no larger than 12 inches by 18 inches. The use of such open receptacles evidencing intent to receive money is prohibited unless a street performance is in preparation, underway, or just concluded. 
(k)  Sound level and amplification. All street performers in conducting street performance activities shall be subject to the city's noise ordinance contained in chapter 50, article II. Performances with sound amplification are excluded unless the city manager or the city manager's designee issuing permits determines that the amplification is necessary or proper for the musical or other sound component of a performance and that reasonable steps are being taken as described in the permit to avoid the likelihood of undue public disturbance. Necessary or proper amplification includes, but is not limited to, background musical accompaniment for dancing, juggling, singing, or the like, as well as amplification for flute, piccolo, and other low volume wind instruments needing amplification to be heard outside. 
(l)  Disturbance and interference. No person shall willfully and maliciously interfere with or disturb a permitted street performer engaged in a street performance. No street performer shall engage in acts that would disturb a person of normal sensibilities. Nothing in this provision shall be interpreted to preclude benign or jovial interaction between street performers and members of the audience. 
(m)  Sidewalk blockage. Whenever the audience gathering around a street performance is of such size or configuration as to block or unduly impede safe pedestrian movement on sidewalks, plazas, parks, or similar public space, then a police officer may direct members of the audience to keep space open for pedestrians or, if necessary, direct the performer to move to a nearby location where there is less likely to be an undue interference with the movement of pedestrians. 
(n)  The sale of goods. No street performer may sell or offer for sale t-shirts, toys, CDs, or any other goods, unless the goods so sold relate to the performer's authorized activities under the street performer's permit. All street performers electing to offer such goods for sale shall obtain a street vendor's license and abide by the terms of the license. However, a street performer is not required to rent a cart, select a specific site, or pay for space rental. 
(o)  Insurance. Based on the character of the permitted performances, the city may determine that liability insurance is needed to address claims of injury and damage sustained by members of the public at large, owners and occupants of real property, and the city. Such policies by certificate shall name the city as an additional insured. 
(p)  Violations. Any person violating this section shall be subject to section 1-14, the general penalty clause. In addition, and separate from any proceeding in the municipal court, the city may suspend or revoke the permit of any permitted street performer determined by the city manager to have violated this section two or more times within a six-month period. Such suspension or revocation must be preceded with written notice sent to the address listed on the current permit's completed application or hand delivered to the recipient by a law enforcement officer. Such notice must provide at least ten days' notice of a hearing before the city manager or a hearing officer appointed by the city manager. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2018, § 15)  
Chapter 78 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Taxation, S.C. Code 1976, title 12; municipal power to levy taxes on all property not otherwise exempted by general law, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 5-7-30, 5-21-110; authority of local governments to assess taxes and fees, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-1-300 et seq.; collection of delinquent ad valorem taxes by municipalities, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-300; alternative procedure for collection of property taxes, S.C. Code 1976, § 12-51-40 et seq.; municipal authority to exempt certain manufacturing establishments from ad valorem taxation, S.C. Const. art. X, sec. 3(g); property tax levies shall be uniform, S.C. Const. art. X, sec. 6; any tax levied shall distinctly state the public purpose for which tax proceeds will be applied, S.C. Const. art. X, sec. 5. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 78-1. - Public works fee. 
(a)  Public works fee established. There is hereby established the public works fee of the city. The public works fee shall be charged annually to each owner of real property for each tax parcel constituting real property. The public works fee shall appear as a separate line item on the ad valorem property tax bill (or, if applicable, the bill for fees-in-lieu of ad valorem property taxes) of all owners of one or more tax parcels constituting improved real property. The amount of the public works fee for each tax parcel shall be set at $20.00 per parcel per year paid in the same manner as the payment of property taxes are made on said property. The proceeds from the collection of such fees shall be deposited into the public works fee account. The proceeds of such fund shall be specifically used to maintain and improve the provision of sanitation services by funding the following: 
(1)  Costs of acquisition, construction, renovation or repair of facilities, improvements to real property, fixtures, equipment, including vehicles and other property; 
(2)  Costs of acquisition of all lands, properties, rights and easements required for the provision of the services; 
(3)  A reasonable reserve of working capital; and 
(4)  Lease payments, finance charges and cost of issuance of, and principal and interest payments on, leases for capital equipment associated with the provision of sanitation services. Any interest earned on these funds shall accrue to this account. Funds not used in any fiscal year shall be carried forward and used for the services outlined above. 
(b)  Violation. Any person, firm, corporation or agent, who shall violate the provisions of this section shall constitute a violation punishable as set forth in section 1-14. Each such person, firm, corporation or agent shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this section is committed or continued. 
(c)  Refund of fee. In the event the auditor orders a refund of property tax pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, § 12-37-2725, as amended, a refund of the public works fee shall be issued in a timely manner. 
(Ord. of 4-2-2018, app. A)  
Secs. 78-2—78-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY TAXES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 78-21. - Annual statement of valuation and property ownership. 
The city clerk/treasurer shall, annually, prior to November 1, receive statement of the assessed valuation of all the property, real or personal, within the corporate limits of the city and by whom such property is owned. Such statement shall include the assessment of taxes. 
(Code 1977, § 24-16; Code 1995, § 78-26)  
Sec. 78-22. - Use of county assessment books. 
The city clerk/treasurer shall receive the books from the auditor of the county, the assessment of valuation thereon found and shall use the same as a basis of assessment of taxes for municipal purposes. 
(Code 1977, § 24-17; Code 1995, § 78-27)  
Sec. 78-23. - Assessed valuation entered on tax books. 
The city clerk/treasurer shall enter the assessed valuation so fixed upon his tax books. 
(Code 1977, § 24-18; Code 1995, § 78-28)  
Sec. 78-24. - Annual tax levy. 
The council shall impose by ordinance an annual tax at such rate, in its discretion, as will yield an amount necessary for the general purposes of the city not exceeding the limit permitted by law, exclusive of any tax levied with respect to any outstanding bond issues. Such tax shall be levied by the council on the property within the corporate limits as assessed for taxation for county and state purposes as provided in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 24-19; Code 1995, § 78-29) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to levy taxes, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-21-110.  
Sec. 78-25. - Due date. 
All taxes for the year shall be due and payable between September 30 and January 15 after their assessment in each year. 
(Code 1995, § 74-30; Ord. of 4-6-1998) 
State Law reference— Paying taxes, S.C. Code 1976, § 12-45-70.  
Sec. 78-26. - Tax liens—Paramount to all other liens; exceptions. 
All taxes, assessments, license taxes and penalties legally assessed shall constitute a lien on the property upon which the same were made until paid in full, which lien shall be paramount to all other liens, except liens for county and state taxes. 
(Code 1995, § 74-31; Ord. of 4-6-1998)  
Sec. 78-27. - Tax liens—When effective. 
As soon as any property within the city is listed with the auditor of the county for taxation, such tax assessment shall immediately become a lien on such property. 
(Code 1995, § 74-32; Ord. of 4-6-1998)  
Sec. 78-28. - Tax exemption for new facilities for research and development activities and additions to such facilities. 
(a)  Eligibility. Effective January 1, 2017, all facilities of new enterprises engaged in research and development activities located in the city and all additions to such facilities satisfying the requirements of S.C. Code 1976, § 12-37-220(B)(34), as amended, as in effect for the applicable year, shall be exempt from municipal ad valorem taxes for a period of five years from the time of establishment, construction, or being placed in service. 
(b)  Administrative compliance. The owner of any property seeking to obtain exemption from such ad valorem taxes shall comply with all requirements of state law and the state department of revenue for the exemption to apply. The determination of the state department of revenue that such new enterprises engaged in research and development and additions to such facilities qualify for the exemption set forth in S.C. Code 976, § 12-37-220(B)(34), as amended, shall constitute a determination that such establishment is exempt from municipal ad valorem taxes under the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. of 7-3-2017)  
Secs. 78-29—78-59. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURE FOR COLLECTION 
 
Sec. 78-60. - Time for paying taxes; manner of collection; receipts for payment; delegation of collection of taxes. 
The town shall use relevant state statutory law for payment and collection of taxes.  
Chapter 82 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles, S.C. Code 1976, title 56; Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, local authority, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-30; general rules regarding maximum speed limits, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-1520; alteration of speed limits by local authorities, signs and approval by state, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-1540; powers of local authorities concerning traffic laws, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-710; local authority to regulate standing or parking of vehicles, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-710(1); municipalities with marked parking spaces must designate spaces for disabled persons, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-3-1965; local authority to regulate operation of bicycles, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-710(8); power of local authorities to require strict pedestrian compliance with traffic control signals, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-3120; municipality may by ordinance require drivers involved in accidents to file report with designated city department, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-1360. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 82-1. - Adoption of state law. 
There is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter, as if set out in full in this section, those provisions of state law known as the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways. 
(Code 1995, § 82-1) 
State Law reference— Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, S.C. Code 1976, title 56.  
Sec. 82-2. - Careless operation of motor vehicles. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle without care and caution and full regard for the safety of persons and/or property. Any person failing to do so shall be guilty of careless driving. The operation of any vehicle when the same or any of its parts are not in proper or safe condition shall be prima facie evidence of careless driving. Speeding, failure to obey a traffic control device or other acts or careless operation of a motor vehicle as described in S.C. Code 1976, §§ 56-5-1 through 56-22-1 et seq., shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1995, § 82-2; Ord. of 4-6-1992)  
Secs. 82-3—82-22. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate parking, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-710. 
 
Sec. 82-23. - Authority to regulate parking. 
The city reserves the right to dictate and regulate the method of parking (i.e., parallel, angle, front-end, rear-end, etc.) on streets and highways within the city limits as provided for under S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-710. 
(Code 1995, § 82-25; Ord. of 2-3-1992)  
Sec. 82-24. - Fine for time limit parking violations. 
A fine of $25.00 is levied for all time limit parking violations uptown over three times in a given year. First three time limit parking violations uptown in a given year will remain $3.00 each. 
(Code 1995, § 82-26; Ord. of 6-3-1991(1))  
Sec. 82-25. - Prohibited in specified places. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway or so near thereto as to interfere with the unobstructed use of such driveway. 
(3)  Within an intersection. 
(4)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant. 
(5)  On a crosswalk. 
(6)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
(7)  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located on the side of a roadway. 
(8)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless indicated for a different length by official signs or markings. 
(9)  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing. 
(10)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station or on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of such entrance. 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(13)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel. 
(14)  Adjacent to any curb marked with yellow paint or in any cross-hatched area on a public street or parking lot. 
(15)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(Code 1977, § 15-219; Code 1995, § 82-27) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-2530.  
Sec. 82-26. - Parking during restricted hours. 
When signs are erected giving notice of prohibitions on parking during certain hours at certain places, no person shall park a vehicle at such places between the hours so designated. 
(Code 1977, § 15-220; Code 1995, § 82-28)  
Sec. 82-27. - Overtime parking. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for a longer period than the period stated in the signs. 
(Code 1977, § 15-221; Code 1995, § 82-29)  
Sec. 82-28. - Parallel parking required; exception. 
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a street or road other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of traffic, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the edge of the roadway, except that, upon those streets which have been marked or signed for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at an angle to the curb indicated by such marks or signs. 
(Code 1977, § 15-222; Code 1995, § 82-30)  
Sec. 82-29. - Outside of business or residence districts. 
(a)  Upon a highway outside of a business or residence district, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon a paved or main traveled part of the highway when it is practicable to stop, park or so leave such vehicle off such part of such highway, but in every event an unobstructed width of the highway opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles and a clear view of such stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each direction upon such highway. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on the paved or main-traveled portion of a highway in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position. 
(Code 1977, § 15-223; Code 1995, § 82-31) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-2510.  
Sec. 82-30. - Authority to remove illegally stopped vehicles. 
(a)  Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in violation of any of the provisions of this article such officer is hereby authorized to move such vehicle, or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or main traveled part of such highway. 
(b)  Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any bridge or causeway or in any tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, such officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety. 
(c)  When any vehicle shall be standing or parked in any street in the city in violation of any of the ordinances of this city regulating the standing or parking of vehicles, any police officer of this city may take possession of such vehicle and cause the same to be removed from the street or placed in a position where it will not interfere with traffic and to retain possession of such vehicle until the same can be returned to the owner thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 15-224; Code 1995, § 82-32) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-2520.  
Sec. 82-31. - Truck parking prohibited on certain streets. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a motor truck, passenger bus, truck tractor, trailer, semitrailer or pole trailer on North Broad Street or on South Broad Street in the city, except while such vehicle is being actively loaded or unloaded. 
(Code 1977, § 15-225; Code 1995, § 82-33)  
Sec. 82-32. - Responsibility of vehicle owner for illegal parking. 
No person shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name to stand or park on any street in the city in violation of any of the ordinances of this city regulating the standing or parking of vehicles. 
(Code 1977, § 15-226; Code 1995, § 82-34)  
Sec. 82-33. - Unattended motor vehicles. 
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key, and effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. 
(Code 1977, § 15-227; Code 1995, § 82-35)  
Sec. 82-34. - Downtown parking restricted to two hours, 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
All parking of motor vehicles in the spaces designated for parking on the public streets in the downtown area of the city shall be restricted and subjected to a two-hour parking limit, with such restriction to be enforced and in effect between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(Code 1977, § 15-228; Code 1995, § 82-36)  
Chapter 84 - TREES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 84-1. - Purpose and intent of chapter. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance and removal of public trees, and the abatement of certain public nuisances within the city. 
(b)  It is the intent of the city council that the terms of this chapter shall be construed as to promote: 
(1)  The planting, maintenance, restoration, protection and survival of desirable public trees, shrubs and other woody plants; and 
(2)  The protection of community residents from personal injury and property damage, and the protection of the city from property damage, caused or threatened by damaged, diseased or hazardous trees or by the improper or indiscriminate planting, alteration, treatment or removal of public trees.  
Sec. 84-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alteration means the removal of any part or portion of any tree, shrub or other woody plant, including, but not limited to, any stem, trunk, limb, branch, twig, leaf, bark or root. 
ANSI A300 standards refers to voluntary industry consensus standards for managing trees, shrubs and woody plants. ANSI (American National Standards Institute) A300 standards are divided into multiple parts (part 1, part 2, etc.) each focusing on a specific aspect of woody plant management (pruning, fertilization, etc.). ANSI requires that approved standards be developed according to accepted principles, and that they be reviewed and, if necessary, revised every five years. 
City-owned property means property within the city limits and: 
(1)  Owned by the city in fee simple absolute; or 
(2)  Implicitly or expressly dedicated for public use, accepted and maintained by the city. 
Community forest management plan means a written plan, developed and maintained by the forester and the tree commission, which prescribes a program of systematic management for the city's public trees. 
Community forestry program means all of those city resources, time and efforts directed toward the development and maintenance of a safe, healthy, aesthetically pleasing and fully stocked population of public trees. 
Dripline means a vertical line extending from the outermost edge of the crown of a tree straight down through the surface of the ground beneath the tree. 
Forester means the actual individual, or his agent, appointed to administer the provisions of this chapter. 
Property owner means the record owner or contract purchaser of any parcel of land. 
Public tree means any street tree, or any tree originating on city-owned property. 
Street tree means any tree, shrub or other woody plant growing within the city limits and originating within the current right-of-way of a public roadway. 
Treatment means the application, introduction or installation of any substance or material to any tree, shrub or other woody plant, either by direct application to the tree or by application to the soil or roots, including, but not limited to, fertilizers, other elemental nutrients, pesticides, growth-inhibiting agents, soaps, oils, chemicals, cabled or threaded bolt or other type of support systems, lightning protection systems or cavity fillers.  
Sec. 84-3. - Violations; penalty; recovery of damages for injured public trees. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to any one or all or a combination of the penalties authorized in this section, in the case of damaged public trees, each individual tree damaged shall constitute a separate violation. 
(1)  Criminal penalties. Any person who knowingly and willfully violates any provision of this chapter shall have committed a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-14. Each individual public tree affected shall constitute a separate violation. The requirement of knowing and willful conduct shall mean that the actor was aware of the probable consequences of his actions and not an awareness of the detailed contents of this chapter. 
(2)  Recovery of damages. 
a.  The forester shall institute recovery of damages for injured public trees by providing written notice to the person responsible for such injured public trees by personal delivery, mail, or any method permitted by Rule 4, South Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure, for the service of civil process. Such notice shall contain a copy of these provisions, a description of the damage or injury, and a statement for the costs of correction. If the costs of correction are not paid within 60 days after receipt of a statement from the city, the matter shall be referred to the city attorney for institution of a civil action in the name of the city for recovery of the costs of correction and all consequential damages. 
b.  In establishing the monetary value of damaged public trees, the forester or his agent may use the current edition of the standard evaluation formula published by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers and the International Society of Arboriculture or a private appraisal conducted by an ISA certified arborist. 
c.  All damage-related tree work performed under this section shall conform to ANSI A300 standards. 
d.  A nonmonetary penalty, in the form of tree planting requirements, may be imposed in addition to any monetary penalties prescribed under this chapter.  
Sec. 84-4. - Applicability of chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to public trees and trees which constitute a public nuisance within the corporate limits of the city.  
Sec. 84-5. - Interference with forester. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the forester or his agent while engaged in the lawful execution or enforcement of this chapter. This shall not be construed as an attempt to prohibit the pursuit of any legal or equitable remedy in a court of competent jurisdiction for the protection of personal or property rights by any property owner within the city.  
Sec. 84-6. - Emergency work. 
In the event of emergencies involving, but not limited to, hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, severe ice storms or snowstorms, floods, freezes, fires, lightning or other disasters, the requirements of this chapter may be temporarily waived by the city manager during the emergency period so that the requirements of this chapter will in no way hamper private or public work to restore order and safety in the city. This shall not be construed to be a general waiver of the intent or application of this chapter.  
Sec. 84-7. - Non-liability of city. 
Nothing in this chapter is intended to or shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the city or upon any of its officers or employees, or to relieve the owner and occupant of any private property from the duty to keep trees and shrubs upon private property under his control in a safe condition.  
Secs. 84-8—84-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 84-31. - Forester. 
(a)  Office established; appointment. 
a.  There is hereby established the position of forester. 
b.  The forester shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(b)  Authority. 
a.  The forester shall have exclusive jurisdiction and supervision over all public trees. This shall not be construed as to relieve any person of such person's duties or responsibilities under this chapter. 
b.  The forester shall have the authority to supervise all work performed under any permit or contract issued under this chapter. 
c.  The forester shall have the authority to seek the abatement of public nuisances as described in article IV of this chapter. 
d.  In accordance with section 84-3 the forester shall have the authority to institute the recovery of damages for injured public trees as described in section 84-63. 
(c)  Duties. 
a.  The forester, with the assistance of the tree commission, shall develop and maintain appropriate policies for community forest management in accordance with this chapter. 
b.  The forester shall issue such permits as are required by this chapter. The forester shall have the right to inspect all work performed pursuant to such permits, to revoke permits in cases of noncompliance, and to enforce the provisions of section 84-62.  
Sec. 84-32. - Tree commission. 
(a)  Established. The City of Clinton Tree Commission is hereby established. 
(b)  Composition; appointment of members. The tree commission shall be composed of five members consisting of the following: 
(1)  Two members of the planning commission, of which one will be the current chairman and the other selected by the majority of the current members of the planning commission to serve a one-year term. 
(2)  Two members of the design review board, of which one will be the current chairman and the other selected by the majority of the current members of the design review board to serve a one-year term. 
(3)  One member at-large appointed by the city council in accordance with standard city procedures regarding boards and commissions to serve a three-year term. 
(c)  Officers. 
(1)  Chairman. The chairman of the planning commission shall serve as the chairman of the tree commission. 
(2)  Vice-chairman. The chairman of the design review board shall serve as the vice-chairman of the tree commission. 
(d)  Duties. 
(1)  The tree commission shall adhere to the adopted rules of procedure and bylaws for the city planning commission for regular and special meetings to fulfill its obligations under this chapter. 
(2)  The tree commission shall advise the city council based on an annual reevaluation of experience under this chapter. 
(3)  The tree commission shall provide leadership in the development of understanding of the objectives and methods of the urban forestry program, and shall assist the forester in the development and maintenance of the community forest management plan. 
(4)  The tree commission shall serve as appeal board for the administration of this chapter.  
Sec. 84-33. - Appeals. 
(a)  If a person disagrees with the determination of noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter, he may, within ten days of receipt of written notice thereof, provide the forester and the city manager with a written description of the particulars of disagreement and issues requiring review. A quorum of the tree commission shall consider such particulars. 
(b)  The scope of review of the tree commission shall be limited to a review of facts bearing on whether the person is or is not in compliance with this chapter, and the tree commission shall not have the discretionary authority to waive or relax the standards set forth in this chapter. Within ten days after receipt of the application for review, the tree commission shall cause to be served on the person a report of findings of compliance or noncompliance. In the event of a finding of noncompliance by the tree commission, the report shall specify a number of days, no less than five, from receipt of the report within which the prohibited condition must be brought into compliance. Failure to bring such condition into compliance in the specified time shall result in abatement and correction by the city as provided in section 84-62 and in article IV of this chapter and shall be subject to general penalties as described in section 84-3.  
Secs. 84-34—84-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC TREES 
 
Sec. 84-61. - Duties of private owners. 
It shall be the duty of any person planting or growing a public tree to: 
(1)  Place no tree so as to be, in the opinion of the forester, a traffic hazard or an interference with overhead or underground public utilities. 
(2)  Prune trees so as not to cause a hazard and so that the minimum clearance of any overhanging portion is eight feet above any sidewalk and 14 feet above any street. 
(3)  Comply with the permit required in section 83-62. 
(4)  Treat, alter or remove any tree so diseased or insect-infested as to constitute a hazard to other trees or plants.  
Sec. 84-62. - Permit requirements for actions affecting public trees. 
(a)  Actions requiring permit. It shall be unlawful for any person except the forester, an agent of the forester, or a contractor under the jurisdiction and supervision of the forester to perform any of the following acts or contract with another person to perform any of the following acts without first obtaining a permit, except as otherwise provided in this section: 
(1)  Remove, alter or treat any public tree. 
(2)  Plant or transplant any public tree. 
(3)  Attach any sign, poster or any other manmade object to any public tree. 
(4)  Tunnel or trench on city-owned property within ten feet of the base of any public tree. This provision shall not be construed to apply where tree roots do not ordinarily exist under previously established and properly paved surfaces. Boring type, directional or blind, must be indicated on the permit. It is the responsibility of the permittee to ensure that no public utilities are damaged during boring. 
(5)  Within the dripline of a public tree, stockpile soil or other material, operate heavy equipment or machinery, change the soil grade, or engage in any other activity which damages tree roots, compacts soil or otherwise impedes the normal biological functions of tree roots for a period of time sufficient to cause a decline in tree health, vigor or structural integrity. 
(b)  Issuance. The forester shall issue or deny in writing a permit to perform any of the acts for which a permit is required. A permit shall be issued whenever all the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The applicant agrees to perform the work for which the permit is sought in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the ANSI A300 standards. 
(2)  An application has been signed by the applicant and submitted to the forester detailing the location, number, size and species of trees, shrubs or other woody plants that will be affected by such acts, setting forth the purpose of such acts and the methods to be used, and presenting any additional information that the forester may find reasonably necessary. 
(3)  Such acts are not inconsistent with ANSI A300 standards. 
(c)  Liability for violations. The person performing the work and the person contracting for the performance shall be jointly and severally liable for any penalties or other enforcement action imposed pursuant to this chapter or other provisions of law on account of work performed in violation of this chapter. 
(d)  Compliance with chapter; enforcement. If the work performed pursuant to such permit is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or with ANSI A300 standards, the forester shall provide written notice to the permit applicant by personal delivery or mail. Such notice shall be sufficient if served by any method permitted by Rule 4, South Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure, for the service of civil process. The notice shall contain a copy of these provisions, and an estimate of the cost to correct such noncomplying work, and: 
(1)  The permit shall thereafter be nullified and shall be void; 
(2)  The forester may issue a written order that the permit applicant cease and desist all work for which the permit was required; 
(3)  The permit applicant shall be subject to penalty under the terms of this chapter; and 
(4)  The forester may take steps necessary to correct the results of the noncomplying work, and the reasonable costs of such steps shall be charged to the permit applicant. Such costs shall be collected in the manner described in section 84-3. 
(e)  Public utility right-of-way maintenance; roadway construction and right-of-way maintenance. 
(1)  Public utilities and persons who install or maintain public utilities, including their agents and contractors, shall comply with ANSI A300 standards and the provisions of this chapter when performing work that affects public trees within the corporate limits of the city or within the jurisdiction of this chapter, unless otherwise required by law. Permits for routine pruning and trenching shall be applied for on an annual basis; provided, however, that a permit shall be implicit for contracted or in-house tree crews under the supervision of the forester, so long as their work is performed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and ANSI A300 standards. 
(2)  Persons who construct or maintain public roadways, including their agents and contractors, shall comply with ANSI A300 standards and the provisions of this chapter when performing work that affects public trees within the corporate limits of the city or within the jurisdiction of this chapter, unless otherwise required by law. Permits for routine pruning and trenching shall be applied for on an annual basis. 
(3)  Failure to comply with ANSI A300 standards shall be unlawful except under the following conditions: In lieu of strict compliance with ANSI A300 standards, a set of written specifications for pruning and trenching operations may be submitted for approval by the forester. Upon approval of these specifications, a permit shall be issued, effective for the remainder of the year, for routine pruning and trenching operations affecting public trees. 
(4)  Permits for removal of public trees shall be handled on an individual basis. 
(5)  In the event of minor emergencies which necessitate the alteration of public trees in order to safely repair dangerously damaged or malfunctioning public utilities, the requirement of a permit is temporarily waived until public safety has been restored. The utility shall then provide the forester with sufficient information to make a complete report of the pruning or removal of all public trees which were altered as a result of such emergency. 
(f)  Permit length. Permits shall remain valid for 12 months from the date of issue or until the permitted work is completed, whichever occurs earlier.  
Sec. 84-63. - Injuring public trees. 
(a)  Liability for damages. Persons who cause injury to any public tree shall be liable for the cost of tree damages, including assessment, repair or replacement of the damaged tree. 
(b)  Latent injury. It shall be unlawful for any person to take actions or cause actions to be taken which may cause damage or latent injury to any public tree. Actions which cause latent injury include any activity within the dripline of a public tree which damages tree roots, compacts soil or otherwise impedes the normal biological functions of tree roots for a period of time sufficient to cause decline in tree health, vigor or structural integrity. Persons who perform such actions without a permit or in violation of the terms of a permit shall be liable for the cost of tree damages. 
(c)  Malicious injury. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or willfully cause injury or damage to any public tree or portion thereof. This provision shall be construed to include any action which may induce or cause a decline in tree health, vigor or structural integrity. 
(d)  Vandalism. It shall be unlawful to vandalize any public tree. This provision shall be construed to include theft of public trees. 
(e)  Harmful attachments. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach or cause to be attached any wire, nail, sign, poster or other object to any public tree without a permit.  
Secs. 84-64—84-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - NUISANCE TREES 
 
Sec. 84-91. - Duty of property owners to maintain trees. 
It shall be the responsibility of every property owner or occupant to maintain the trees, shrubs and other woody plants on the owner's property in a safe and healthy manner, and to keep trees properly pruned and trimmed so as to avoid hazards to persons, property and other vegetation.  
Sec. 84-92. - Nuisance trees defined. 
The following are hereby declared to be public nuisances under this chapter: 
(1)  Any tree for which the following two conditions exist: 
a.  A structural defect which predisposes the tree to failure; and 
b.  A target (including, but not limited to, a building, structure, street, roadway, sidewalk, walkway or other area frequently used by people) where there may be people or property that could be reasonably expected to sustain damage should the tree fail. 
(2)  Any otherwise healthy tree or shrub which harbors insects or diseases which reasonably may be expected to injure or seriously harm other valuable trees or shrubs. 
(3)  Any tree or portion thereof which by reason of location or condition constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety or welfare of the general public. 
(4)  Any tree or portion thereof which obstructs the passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or is not maintained at a minimum clearance of eight feet over sidewalks and 14 feet over roadways.  
Sec. 84-93. - Right of entry. 
The forester or his agent, after reasonable notice to the owner, shall have the authority to enter onto private property whereon there is located a tree, shrub or portion thereof that is suspected to be a public nuisance.  
Sec. 84-94. - Abatement. 
(a)  Upon finding that any tree or portion thereof is in such condition as to constitute a public nuisance and that an imminent danger exists to persons, property or other valuable vegetation, the forester shall, by order of abatement served on the owner, direct the property owner to remove, alter or treat the tree in such a manner as to cause abatement of the condition. 
(b)  The method of service by such order shall be by personal delivery, registered mail, or any method permitted by Rule 4, South Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure, for the service of civil process. 
(c)  The order shall set forth the action required to abate the condition and the time limit for compliance, which shall depend on the degree of danger created by the condition, but shall in no case exceed 30 days. In cases of extreme danger, the forester shall have the authority to require immediate compliance. 
(d)  If, at the end of the time period set forth in the order, the action required by the order has not been taken or the tree has not been removed, altered or treated in such a manner as to cause abatement of the condition, it shall be declared a public nuisance and the forester shall take the action required to cause the abatement of the condition. The cost of this service, including labor, equipment and materials, shall be assessed to the property owner. 
(e)  If the costs of abating the condition are not paid within 120 days after receipt of a statement from the city, the account shall become a lien on the property and shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes against such property.  
Chapter 86 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to purchase, construct system, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-21-50; authority to improve existing system, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-21-80; "system" defined, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-21-40; authority to establish municipal sewerage system, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-31-810; authority to enact relevant ordinances concerning sewerage system, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-31-900; enumerated municipal powers regarding schedule of sewer service and connection fees, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-31-2030; development of subdivision water supply, sewage treatment and disposal systems, S.C. Code Reg. 61-57; onsite wastewater systems, S.C. Code Reg. 61-56. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 86-1. - Combined system. 
The municipally owned waterworks, sanitary sewerage, storm sewerage and electrical systems of the city are hereby combined and consolidated into a single combined utilities system. 
(Code 1977, § 25-1; Code 1995, § 86-1)  
Sec. 86-2. - Connections restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tap or take water or electric current from, or in any manner to tamper with the street mains, water or sewer pipes or electric wires or meters or other appurtenances in the systems. Any person whose meter seal is found cut or otherwise damaged shall pay a cut seal charge as determined by the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 25-2; Code 1995, § 86-2)  
Sec. 86-3. - Annexation of property prior to rendering service. 
The city requires that property contiguous to its corporate limits must first be annexed before the city will provide water and/or sanitary sewer service to the property. This would include even those contiguous properties that may already have a city utility but wish to tie onto water and/or sanitary sewer. Further, the city requires that property not contiguous to its corporate limits must first agree, by contract, to annex whenever the properties become contiguous in order for the city to provide water and/or sanitary sewer service. This would also include even those noncontiguous properties that may already have a city utility but wish to tie onto water and/or sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1995, § 86-4; Ord. of 6-3-1991(2))  
Sec. 86-4. - Conveyance of easements for utility lines. 
Upon approval of an application of a subdivision or other area being developed, either residential or commercial, the owner shall convey to the city the strips of land proposed as easements for water, sewer and electric power lines as the city may require, the acceptance by the city of such conveyance not to be made until the following have been completed: 
(1)  The water, sewer and/or electrical power lines have been constructed and have a right-of-way of 25 feet; have been properly inspected and approved by any governmental entity, other than the city, which has regulating responsibility over such activities; and meet the requirements of the building and/or related codes or ordinances in effect at the time the approval is sought. 
(2)  Installation of the sewer or water system, required of the owner, so as to connect with and be served by the city's systems. 
(Code 1977, § 25-4; Code 1995, § 86-5)  
Sec. 86-5. - Separate water and electric meters and sewer services required for each occupancy, when. 
(a)  Separate water and/or electric meters and sewer services shall be required for a structure and/or for each residence and/or business within a structure, except as provided for in subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)  Present customers on batch meters shall be grandfathered until such time as the building or mobile home park becomes unoccupied, at which time separate utility meters shall be installed for each building or park and/or for each residence and/or business within the building or park before they can again receive utility service. 
(c)  All batch meter accounts, if they are not now established as such, shall be placed in the landlord's name. 
(d)  The city manager shall have the discretion to exempt buildings and/or facilities from the requirement to install separate utility meters, if physical barriers make such installments impractical. 
(Code 1977, § 25-5; Code 1995, § 86-6)  
Secs. 86-6—86-28. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RATES AND CHARGES 
 
Sec. 86-29. - Connections to system. 
(a)  For each initial connection to the utility system of the city, there shall be a service charge as set by the city council from time to time per customer per connection. 
(b)  For all other connections to the utility system of the city there shall be a service charge as set by the city council from time to time per customer per connection. 
(Code 1977, § 25-17; Code 1995, § 86-31)  
Sec. 86-30. - Sewer taps. 
The tapping fees for taps or connections onto the city's sanitary sewer system shall be reviewed as needed and set by the city council. A schedule of such fees shall be maintained in the city clerk/treasurer's office. 
(Code 1977, § 25-18; Code 1995, § 86-32)  
Sec. 86-31. - Water taps. 
The tapping fees for taps or connections onto the city's water system shall be reviewed as needed and set by the city council. A schedule of such fees shall be maintained in the city clerk/treasurer's office. 
(Code 1977, § 25-19; Code 1995, § 86-33)  
Sec. 86-32. - Sewer charges for water customers other than industrial. 
A sewer charge per 1,000 gallons of water received from the combined utility system of the city shall be reviewed as needed and set by the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 25-20; Code 1995, § 86-34)  
Sec. 86-33. - Electricity rates. 
The city shall charge to all power customers of the combined utility system rates as periodically set by the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 25-23; Code 1995, § 86-36)  
Sec. 86-34. - Water rates for residential users within corporate limits and wholesale users. 
Water charges as set by the city council from time to time per 1,000 gallons of water received from the combined utility system of the city are hereby adopted for all users. Also, a base charge per month shall be charged to all such users. 
(Code 1977, § 25-24; Code 1995, § 86-37)  
Sec. 86-35. - Billing procedures generally; effect of nonpayment. 
(a)  All bills for electric, water and sewage collection service furnished by the city shall be rendered monthly, and shall be due and payable from and after the date such bills are rendered, at the office of the city clerk/treasurer, or other designated person, during the regular hours of business. 
(b)  A customer receiving utilities service shall be billed monthly for the total amount on one bill, and shall pay accordingly, without preference or priority of one service over the other. 
(c)  If any bill for utilities service shall be unpaid beyond the specified bill's due date, an additional charge of ten percent thereof shall be added thereto. 
(d)  If any bill for utilities service shall be unpaid by the fifth day after the bill's specified due date, utilities service to such customer shall be disconnected and shall not be reconnected until all past-due bills are paid in full, together with a reconnection charge. 
(Code 1977, § 25-25; Code 1995, § 86-38)  
Sec. 86-36. - No reconnection service or new service to customer indebted to city. 
The city shall not restore any interrupted utility services nor provide new services to any person indebted to the city for any utility service of any kind, such service either being secured in the person's name or in the name of someone with whom the person resided and from which the person received the benefit for such service. Such person shall not secure, in the person's name, service that would benefit another individual indebted to the city for any utility service of any kind. Should it be determined that the person does in fact owe the city for past utility service, or has secured for someone else so indebted, then such fact shall be sufficient cause to terminate any and all services. 
(Code 1977, § 25-26; Code 1995, § 86-39)  
Secs. 86-37—86-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to establish sewerage system, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-31-810. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 86-61. - Sewer system. 
The sanitary sewer collection system is owned by the city and operated as part of the combined utility system of the city. The combined utility system is supervised by a public works director under the management of the city manager. 
(Code 1977, § 25-37; Code 1995, § 86-61)  
Sec. 86-62. - Inspection. 
The building official of the city shall examine all applications for connections, issue all plumbing permits and inspect all connections to the sanitary sewer system. 
(Code 1977, § 25-38; Code 1995, § 86-62)  
Sec. 86-63. - Owners to terminate inflow of groundwater and surface water into sanitary sewer system. 
All inflow and infiltration of groundwater and/or surface water and roof runoff entering into the sanitary sewer system of the city from the land of individual, commercial, joint or corporate landowners shall be discontinued and terminated at the expense of the landowner owning the property from which the discharge is made. 
(Code 1977, § 25-39; Code 1995, § 86-63)  
Sec. 86-64. - Infiltration of groundwater. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for persons to permit groundwater or roof or other surface water runoff to infiltrate the city's sewer system and such persons will, within 60 days of such time as they are given notice, repair or replace any sewer or other lines upon their property that prove to be a source of infiltration of groundwater into the sewer system of the city. 
(b)  Should any person or organization not repair or replace the lines as hereinabove referred to, such person or organization shall be subject to a penalty as set by the city council from time to time per day for such time as the defective condition continues to exist. 
(Code 1977, § 25-40; Code 1995, § 86-64)  
Secs. 86-65—86-86. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTIONS 
 
Sec. 86-87. - When required. 
(a)  It is unlawful for the owners or occupants of premises used for ordinary business purposes in the city, within 100 yards of any established line of sewers in the city, to maintain, use or permit to remain on such premises within 100 yards of sewer lines any cesspool, privy vault or other arrangement for the reception of drainage or human excrement, except such receptacles as are connected with the sewers of the city. 
(b)  It is unlawful for the owners or occupants of premises used for ordinary residence or domestic purposes within the city to maintain, use or permit to remain on such premises, within 100 yards of any sewer line of the city, any cesspool, privy vault, or other receptacles for the reception of drainage or human excrement, except such receptacles as are connected with the sewers of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 25-46; Code 1995, § 86-76)  
Sec. 86-88. - Separate connections required for each house or building; exceptions. 
Every house or building to be connected with the public sewer shall be separately connected unless a special permit is granted for combined connections in extraordinary cases and the granting of such a permit shall not establish a precedent for subsequent permits. 
(Code 1977, § 25-47; Code 1995, § 86-77)  
Sec. 86-89. - Compliance with division required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any connection to the sanitary sewer system of the city without having first complied with all the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1977, § 25-48; Code 1995, § 86-78)  
Sec. 86-90. - Conformance to regulations. 
All connections with the public sewers, either sanitary or storm sewers, and the plumbing in connection therewith, shall conform to the rules, regulations and specifications as made by the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 25-49; Code 1995, § 86-79)  
Sec. 86-91. - Permit required; application, fee. 
Any person proposing to make a connection to the sanitary sewer system of the city shall, not less than seven days prior to the time such connection is proposed to be made, apply to the city clerk/treasurer for a permit to make such connection, stating the location of the proposed connection and the name of the licensed plumber or general contractor who will make the connection and paying to the city clerk/treasurer a fee as provided in article II of this chapter for each such connection. 
(Code 1977, § 25-50; Code 1995, § 86-80)  
Sec. 86-92. - Unlawful connections. 
No person shall directly or indirectly connect an open gutter, cesspool, privy vault or rainwater conductor with the sanitary sewers, and no steam shall be either directly or indirectly discharged into any sewer. 
(Code 1977, § 25-55; Code 1995, § 86-85)  
Sec. 86-93. - Enforcement of connections. 
(a)  Upon the service of any order or direction, or a copy thereof, from the department of public works or health officer of the city, upon the owner or occupant of any premises described in section 86-87 to connect the drainage as aforesaid with the sewers of the city or to fill up and destroy any cesspool, privy vault or other arrangement for the reception of human excrement, within 100 yards of the sewer line, such owner or occupant shall comply with such order or direction within ten days from the date of such service, exclusive of the date of service. 
(b)  In case the owner or occupant of such premises, to whom such order or direction shall be directed, and upon whom it shall have been served, shall neglect or refuse to comply therewith within ten days after the service thereof upon him as aforesaid, such owner or occupant shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-14, for each subsequent 24 hours during which he shall neglect or refuse to comply therewith, and in case such neglect or refusal shall continue for 60 days after the service of such order or direction as aforesaid the city council may cause any cesspool, privy vault or other arrangement for the reception of human excrement maintained, used or permitted to remain on the premises of such owner or occupant in violation of the terms of this division to be filled up and destroyed, and such owner or occupant shall pay the cost thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 25-56; Code 1995, § 86-86)  
Sec. 86-94. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person found guilty in the municipal court of making connection to the sanitary sewer main of the city without having first obtained an official permit therefor from the city clerk/treasurer or of making such connection without having the director of public works or his representative present at the time of making such connection and making the same according to the instructions of such director of public works or representative, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1977, § 25-57; Code 1995, § 86-87)  
Secs. 86-95—86-116. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FATS, OIL AND GREASE INTERCEPTION 
 
Sec. 86-117. - City acceptance of county water and sewer commission regulations. 
(a)  The city, as a satellite collection system of the Laurens County Water and Sewer Commission, hereby adopts for enforcement the LCWSC's previously adopted sewer use and pretreatment regulations and a sanitary sewer and pretreatment enforcement response plan to control, restrict and limit, in the interest of public health and safety, the discharge or deposit of certain substances, materials and flow into any sanitary sewer line which, in turn, discharges into any sanitary sewer line or treatment plant owned and/or maintained by the LCWSC. The adopted regulations and plan comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403) together with the South Carolina Pollution Control Act. 
(b)  Further, the city, as a satellite collection system of the LCWSC, hereby adopts for enforcement the LCWSC's previously adopted fats, oils and grease control program. 
(c)  The fats, oils and grease control program is intended to clarify the applicable portions of the regulations and enforcement response plan for commercial and institutional users that are likely to discharge fats, oils or grease. 
(Ord. of 4-4-2011)  
Sec. 86-118. - Prohibition of oil and grease discharge. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described water or wastes either directly or indirectly into the sewerage facilities of the city: 
(1)  Any wastewater containing more than 100 parts per million by weight of total fats, wax, grease or oil, whether emulsified or not, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at a temperature between 32 degrees and 160 degrees Fahrenheit (0 degrees and 71 degrees Celsius). The use of chemical or biological agents, physical methods, or any other means to dissolve, liquefy, suspend, disperse, emulsify, entrain, or otherwise cause any oil, grease, or other similar material to flow through the sewer collection system is prohibited. 
(2)  Any substance which will cause interference; i.e., contribute to the treatment plant violating its NPDES permit or the water quality standards of the receiving stream or any other federal or state permit regulating the operation of the treatment plant. 
(3)  Any materials which form excessive amounts of scum or foam which may interfere with the operation of the sewerage facilities of the city or cause undue additional labor or expense in the operation of same. 
(4)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants or wastewater except as specifically authorized by the city and the LCWSC. 
If the city determines to its satisfaction, that any prohibited discharge has taken place, the city shall notify the LCWSC and employ whatever enforcement actions it deems necessary. 
(Ord. of 4-4-2011)  
Sec. 86-119. - Requirements for oil and grease traps or interceptors. 
(a)  City approved grease, oil and sand traps or interceptors shall be provided for food service establishments or operations, vehicular service facilities and car washes when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling and control of wastewater being discharged to public sewers containing grease, oil or sand in excessive amounts. Such traps or interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units, but may be required for industrial or commercial establishments, public eating places, hospitals, hotels, abattoirs, car washes or other institutions. Such traps or interceptors shall be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection and shall be maintained by the owner at his expense and in continuous efficient operation at all times. 
(b)  Whenever an inspection of existing traps or interceptors results in a written notice, the owner shall complete the requested action within the compliance period granted by the city. 
(c)  When retained or trapped material (including, but not limited to, oil, grease, sand, grit, etc.) must be removed from grease, oil and sand traps or interceptors, such material shall be removed by pumping or other physical means and shall be hauled away for disposal in accordance with applicable federal, state, and local regulations. 
(d)  No such retained or trapped material in any form shall be allowed to pass from the trap or interceptor into the sewer collection system. The use of chemical or biological agents, physical methods, or any other means to dissolve, liquefy, suspend, disperse, emulsify, entrain, or otherwise cause retained or trapped material to flow from the trap or interceptor into the sewer collection system is prohibited. The owner shall provide the city, upon request, with accurate information as to the ultimate disposal method and location of the material pumped or otherwise removed from the trap or interceptor. 
(Ord. of 4-4-2011)  
Sec. 86-120. - Acceptance of hauled waste containing oil and grease. 
The LCWSC accepts waste originating from within the county from septic tank and grease trap cleaning operators licensed by the state department of health and environmental control (DHEC). The city shall keep records concerning each tank load to indicate origin, type, and volume of waste. Waste will be accepted only from: 
(1)  Wastewater of domestic origin from human sources (those generated from normal human activities) from septic tanks; and 
(2)  Grease traps containing oil and/or grease of animal and vegetable origin from restaurants, hotels, or any other source which prepares food for retail sales for direct human consumption on the premises. Only grease in a liquid form such that it can pass through a one-inch mesh screen will be accepted. 
(Ord. of 4-4-2011)  
Sec. 86-121. - Enforcement authority. 
(a)  If a user fails to comply with the fats, oils and grease control program or any provision of the LCWSC's sewer use and pretreatment regulations, the city will take enforcement action pursuant to the guidelines established in the LCWSC's sanitary sewer and pretreatment enforcement response plan. The enforcement response plan is a document developed by the LCWSC, based on federal and state regulations and guidance, which provides the city personnel as well as LCWSC personnel with guidelines for appropriate enforcement responses for various types and degrees of violations. The remedies provided in this section are not exclusive. The city shall have the right, at its discretion, to take any, all, or any combination of these actions against any noncompliant user. 
(b)  It is the city's intent that enforcement for violations will be pursuant to the LCWSC's sanitary sewer and pretreatment enforcement response plan. However, the city reserves the right to take any other action, either more or less stringent, that the city determines to be appropriate against any user for any violation of any provision of the LCWSC's sewer use and pretreatment regulations, wastewater permit or authorization, or orders issued. 
(Ord. of 4-4-2011)  
Sec. 86-122. - Provision for recovery of costs. 
Any nondomestic user, whether or not classified as significant, shall be billed by the city for all costs associated with an enforcement action in which the city identifies the user as being in violation of any discharge permit or discharge authorization limit, or any other requirement of the LCWSC's sewer use and pretreatment regulations. Costs may include, but are not limited to: monitoring at the user's discharge point, in the city and/or LCWSC's collection system, or at the LCWSC's facilities which the LCWSC deems necessary to investigate and/or identify the user as the source of a pollutant; costs of city and/or LCWSC personnel time and materials used in conducting any monitoring or investigation which the city and LCWSC deem necessary to the enforcement action, or in any remedial efforts which the city and/or LCWSC deem necessary to mitigate or correct the impact on any city and/or LCWSC facilities or processes of a user's violation; costs of outside laboratories or consultants utilized by the city and/or LCWSC in the investigation or in any remedial efforts which the city and/or LCWSC deem necessary to mitigate or correct the impact on any city and/or LCWSC facilities or processes of a user's violation; any fines or penalties imposed on the city and/or LCWSC as the result of violation of any NPDES or other permit condition, any state or federal regulation, or any law; any attorneys' fees incurred by the city and/or LCWSC in connection with a violation of the LCWSC's sewer use and pretreatment regulations. 
(Ord. of 4-4-2011)  
Secs. 86-123—86-142. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DROUGHT RESPONSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority for local drought response ordinances, S.C. Code 1976, § 49-23-90; development of drought response plans and ordinances, S.C. Code Reg. 121-11.12. 
 
Sec. 86-143. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aesthetic water use means water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools and waterfalls. 
Commercial and industrial use means water use integral to the production of goods and/or services by any establishment having profit as its primary aim. 
Conservation means reduction in water use to prevent depletion or waste of the resource. 
Customer means any person, company or organization using finished water owned or supplied by the city. 
Domestic water use means water use for personal needs or for household purposes such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation or for cleaning a residence, business, industry or institution. 
Drought alert phases means there are four drought alert phases to be determined by the drought response committee for the state. The four phases are: 
(1)  Incipient drought. 
(2)  Moderate drought. 
(3)  Severe drought. 
(4)  Extreme drought. 
Drought response committee means a committee composed of state and local representatives created for the purpose of coordinating responses to water supply shortages within drought management areas and making recommendations for action to the state department of natural resources and/or the governor. The committee is composed of state agency representatives from the state emergency management division of the office of the adjutant general, state department of health and environmental control, state department of agriculture, state forestry commission, and state department of natural resources, as well as local committees representing counties, municipalities, public service districts, private water suppliers, agriculture, industry, domestic users, regional councils of government, commissions of public works, power generation facilities, special purpose districts and soil and water conservation districts. 
Drought response management areas means there are four drought management areas corresponding to the major river basins in the state. The four areas are: 
(1)  West or Savannah. 
(2)  Central or Santee. 
(3)  Northeast or Pee Dee. 
(4)  Southern or Ashepoo, Combahee, and Edisto. 
In order to prevent overly broad response to drought conditions, drought response measures shall be considered within individual drought management areas or within individual counties, as applicable. 
Essential water use means water used specifically for firefighting, maintaining in-stream flow requirements and to satisfy federal, state or local public health and safety requirements. 
Finished water means water distributed for use after treatment. The terms "water use," "water user," and "water customer" refer to finished water use unless otherwise defined. 
Institutional water use means water used by government, public and private educational institutions, churches and places of worship, water utilities, and organizations within the public domain. 
Irrigation water use means water used to maintain gardens, trees, lawns, shrubs, flowers, athletic fields, rights-of-way and medians. 
Non-essential water use means categories of water use other than essential water use. Examples of non-essential water use include landscape irrigation and the washing of buildings, parking lots, automobiles, etc. 
SC Dept. of Natural Resources means the state agency with primacy to implement the provisions of the drought response act. 
Water supply shortage means lack of adequate, available water caused by drought to meet normal demands. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § II)  
Sec. 86-144. - Declaration of policy and authority. 
(a)  The objective of this article is to establish authority, policy and procedure by which the city will take the proper actions to manage water demand during a drought-related shortage. This article satisfies the requirements of the Drought Response Act of 2000 and has the goal of achieving the greatest public benefit from limited supplies of water needed for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection and of allocating water for other purposes in an equitable manner. 
(b)  This article outlines the actions to be taken for the conservation of water supplied by the city. These actions are directed both towards an overall reduction in water usage and the optimization of supply. 
(c)  To satisfy these goals, the city hereby adopts the following regulations and restrictions on the delivery and consumption of water. This article is hereby declared necessary for the protection of public health, safety and welfare. 
(d)  If it becomes necessary to conserve water in its service area due to drought, the city is authorized to issue a proclamation that existing conditions prevent fulfillment of the usual water-use demands. The proclamation is an attempt to prevent depleting the water supply to the extent that water-use for human consumption, sanitation, fire protection, and other essential needs becomes endangered. 
(e)  Immediately upon issuance of such a proclamation, regulations and restrictions set forth under this article shall become effective and remain in effect until the water supply shortage has ended and the proclamation rescinded. 
(f)  Water uses that are regulated or prohibited under this article are considered to be non-essential and continuation of such uses during times of water supply shortages is deemed to constitute a waste of water, subjecting the offender to penalties. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § III)  
Sec. 86-145. - Moderate drought phase. 
Upon notification by the drought response committee that a moderate drought condition is present and is expected to persist and/or upon determination by the city that a moderate water supply shortage exists based on trigger levels, the city will seek voluntary reductions from its customers in the use of water for all purposes and voluntary reductions on using water during certain peak water demand periods. Specifically, the goal during this phase is to achieve a reduction of 20 percent in residential water use and 15 percent in other water uses such as commercial, industrial, institutional and irrigation; and a reduction in overall water use of 15 percent. To accomplish this goal, the city will take the following actions: 
(1)  Issue a proclamation to be released to local media, city customers and to the state department of natural resources drought information center that moderate drought conditions are present. 
(2)  Provide written notification to the state department of natural resources drought information center and routinely publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the service area of the water system the voluntary conservation measures that the customers are requested to follow during moderate drought conditions, including: 
a.  Reduce residential water use to 75 gallons per person per day and a maximum of 300 gallons per household per day; 
b.  Eliminate the washing down of sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts and other hard surfaced areas; 
c.  Eliminate the washing down of buildings for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
d.  Eliminate the flushing of gutters; 
e.  Eliminate the domestic washing of motorbikes, boats, cars, etc.; 
f.  Eliminate the use of water to maintain fountains, reflection ponds and decorative water bodies for aesthetic or scenic purposes, except where necessary to support aquatic life; 
g.  Reduce watering of lawns, plants, trees, gardens, shrubbery and flora on private or public property to the minimum necessary. Encourage outdoor watering to be done during off-peak hours. 
h.  Reduce the amount of water obtained from fire hydrants for construction purposes, fire drills or for any purpose other than fire-fighting or flushing necessary to maintain water quality; and 
i.  Limit normal water use by commercial and individual customers including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Stop serving water in addition to another beverage routinely in restaurants; 
2.  Stop maintaining water levels in scenic and recreational ponds and lakes, except for the minimum amount required to support aquatic life; 
3.  Cease water service to customers who have been given a ten-day notice to repair one or more leaks and have failed to do so. 
(3)  Intensify maintenance efforts to identify and correct water leaks in the distribution system. 
(4)  Cease to install new irrigation taps on the water system. 
(5)  Continue to encourage and educate customers to comply with voluntary water conservation. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § III)  
Sec. 86-146. - Severe drought phase. 
Upon notification by the drought response committee that a severe drought condition is present and is expected to persist and/or upon determination by the city that a severe water supply shortage exists based on trigger levels, the city will seek voluntary reduction in the use of water for all purposes and mandatory restrictions on non-essential usage and restrictions on times when certain water usage is allowed. Specifically, the goal during this phase is to achieve a reduction of 25 percent in residential water use, 20 percent in all other water use categories, and a reduction in overall water use of 20 percent. To accomplish these goals, the city will take the following actions: 
(1)  Issue a proclamation to be released to the local media, city customers and to the state department of natural resources drought information center that severe drought conditions are present. 
(2)  Provide written notification to the state department of natural resources drought information center and routinely publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the service area of the water system the voluntary conservation measures and mandatory restrictions to be placed on the use of water supplied by the utility, including: 
a.  Voluntary reduction of residential water use by the utility's customers to 65 gallons per person per day and a maximum of 250 gallons per household per day. 
b.  Control landscape irrigation by the utility's customers by staggering watering times. 
c.  Mandatory restrictions on the use of water supplied by the utility for activities including: 
1.  Eliminate the washing down of sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts and other hard surfaced areas; 
2.  Eliminate the washing down of buildings for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
3.  Eliminate the flushing of gutters; 
4.  Eliminate domestic washing of motorbikes, boats, cars, etc.; 
5.  Eliminate the use of water to maintain fountains, reflection ponds and decorative water bodies for aesthetic or scenic purposes, except where necessary to support aquatic life; 
6.  Eliminate filling or maintaining public or private swimming pools; 
7.  Eliminate obtaining water from fire hydrants for construction purposes, fire drills or any purpose other than fire-fighting or flushing necessary to maintain water quality. 
d.  Limit use of water by commercial and individual customers including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Stop serving water in addition to another beverage routinely in restaurants; 
2.  Stop maintaining water levels in scenic and recreational ponds and lakes, except for the minimum amount required to support aquatic life; 
3.  Limit irrigating golf courses and any portion of its grounds; 
4.  Cease water service to customers who have been given a ten-day notice to repair one or more leaks and have failed to do so; and 
5.  Limit expanding commercial nursery facilities, placing new irrigated agricultural land in production or planting or landscaping when required by site design review process. 
(3)  Intensify maintenance efforts to identify and correct water leaks in the distribution system. 
(4)  Continue to cease installation of new irrigation taps on the water system. 
(5)  Publicize widely the penalties to be imposed for violations of mandatory restrictions and the procedures to be followed if a variance in the restrictions is requested. 
(6)  Expand the use of education and public relations efforts and emphasize the penalties associated with violating the mandatory restrictions. 
(7)  Provide written notification monthly to the state department of natural resources drought information center regarding the success of the voluntary and mandatory restrictions. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § III)  
Sec. 86-147. - Extreme drought phase. 
Upon notification by the drought response committee that an extreme drought condition is present and is expected to persist and/or upon determination by the city that an extreme water supply shortage exists based on the trigger levels, the city will impose mandatory restrictions in the use of water for all purposes and on the times when certain water usage is allowed. Specifically, the goal during this phase is to achieve a reduction of 30 percent in residential water use, 25 percent in all other categories of water uses and a reduction in overall water use of 25 percent. To accomplish these goals, the city will take the following actions: 
(1)  Issue a proclamation to be released to the local media, the city customers and to the state department of natural resources drought information center that extreme drought conditions are present; 
(2)  Provide written notification to the state department of natural resources drought information center and routinely publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the service area of the water system the mandatory restrictions to be placed on the use of water supplied by the utility, including: 
a.  Limiting residential water use to 55 gallons per person per day and a maximum of 225 gallons per household per day. 
b.  Eliminate landscape irrigation by the utility's customers. 
c.  Mandatory restrictions on the use of water supplied by the utility for activities including: 
1.  Eliminate the washing down of sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts and other hard surfaced areas; 
2.  Eliminate the washing down of buildings for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
3.  Eliminate the flushing of gutters; 
4.  No domestic washing of motorbikes, boats, cars, etc.; 
5.  Eliminate the use of water to maintain fountains, reflection ponds, and decorative water bodies for aesthetic or scenic purposes, except where necessary to support aquatic life. 
6.  Eliminate filling or maintaining public or private swimming pools; 
7.  Eliminate obtaining water from fire hydrants for construction purposes, fire drills, or any purpose other than firefighting or flushing necessary to maintain water quality; and 
d.  Limit normal water use by commercial and individual customers including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Stop serving water in addition to another beverage routinely in restaurants; 
2.  Stop maintaining water levels in scenic and recreational ponds and lakes, except for the minimum amount required to support fish and wildlife; 
3.  Limit irrigating golf courses and any portion of their grounds; 
4.  Cease water service to customers who have been given a ten-day notice to repair one or more leaks and have failed to do so; and 
5.  Limit expanding commercial nursery facilities, placing new irrigated agricultural land in production, or planting or landscaping when required by site design review process. 
(3)  Intensify maintenance efforts to identify and correct water leaks in the distribution system. 
(4)  Continue to cease installation of new irrigation taps on the water system. 
(5)  Outline other conservation measures, examples are: 
a.  Place a moratorium on the issuance of all new water service connections and contracts for all new water main extensions. As part of the public information process, provide notice to developers of the moratorium; 
b.  Encourage all residential water customers to voluntarily reduce overall monthly water usage to 70 percent of the customer's monthly average. If voluntary reduction of usage is not successful, the city may, at its option, implement the following excessive use rate schedule for water: 
Tier I 	0—2,000 gallons/month 	Regular rate 
Tier II 	2,001—4,000 gallons/month 	2 times regular rate 
Tier III 	Over 4,000 gallons/month 	3 times regular rate 
 
c.  Impose a drought surcharge per 1,000 gallons of water that increases with higher usage. The general principle behind the drought surcharge is that the fee is imposed on water use in excess of 70 percent of normal monthly use. The drought surcharge is a temporary fee imposed during the current water supply shortage and is not a cost-based rate. The drought surcharge is temporary and will be terminated at such time as the city determines the water supply is above the trigger levels; 
d.  If the conservation measures of this article or plan prove inadequate to mitigate the effects of the drought conditions or water supply availability, the city may take additional actions including, but not limited to: 
1.  Decreasing the gallon limits in the different tiers; and 
2.  Reduction of water system pressure as needed. 
(6)  Publicize widely the penalties to be imposed for violations of mandatory restrictions and the procedures to be followed if a variance in the restrictions is requested. 
(7)  Expand the use of education and public relations efforts as conducted under the moderate and severe drought phase and emphasize the penalties associated with violating the mandatory restrictions. 
(8)  Provide written notification monthly to the state department of natural resources drought information center regarding the success of the mandatory restrictions. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § III)  
Sec. 86-148. - Rationing. 
If a drought threatens the protection of public health and safety, the city is hereby authorized to ration water. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § III)  
Sec. 86-149. - Enforcement of restrictions. 
If any customer of the city fails to comply with the mandatory water use restrictions of this article, the customer shall be given a written notice of such failure to comply, which cites the date of said violation, and shall be assessed surcharges in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  First violation. A $50.00 surcharge shall be added to the customer's water bill; 
(2)  Second violation. An additional $100.00 surcharge shall be added to the customer's water bill; 
(3)  Third violation. The customer's water service shall be terminated and restored only after payment of a surcharge of $150.00 in addition to all previously assessed surcharges. 
Law enforcement agencies and other authorized agencies or designated employees in the respective jurisdiction, which is being supplied water by the city shall diligently enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § III)  
Sec. 86-150. - Variances. 
Customers, who in their belief are unable to comply with the mandatory water use restrictions of this article, may petition for a variance from restrictions by filing a petition with the city within ten working days after the issuance of the proclamation requiring water use restrictions. 
(1)  All petitions for variance shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and address of the petitioner; 
b.  Purpose of water usage; 
c.  Special provision from which the petitioner is requesting relief; 
d.  Detailed statement as to how the curtailment declaration adversely affects the petitioner; 
e.  Description of the relief desired; 
f.  Period of time for which the variance is sought; 
g.  Economic value of the water use; 
h.  Damage or harm to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with this article; 
i.  Restrictions with which the petitioner is expected to comply and the compliance date; 
j.  Steps the petitioner is taking to meet the restrictions from which the variance is sought and the expected date of compliance; and 
k.  Other information as needed. 
(2)  In order for the variance to be granted, the petitioner must demonstrate clearly that compliance with this article cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage without having an adverse impact upon the best interests of the community. The city is authorized to grant the request for variance. 
(3)  In addition, the city is authorized to grant temporary variances for existing water uses otherwise prohibited under this article if it is determined that failure to grant such variances could cause an emergency condition adversely affecting health, sanitation and fire protection for the public. No such variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this article occurring prior to the issuance of the variance. Variances granted by the city shall include a timetable for compliance and shall expire when the water supply shortage no longer exists, unless the petitioner has failed to meet specified requirements. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § III)  
Sec. 86-151. - Status of this article. 
(a)  If any portion of this article is held to be unconstitutional for any reason, the remaining portions of this article shall not be affected. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall prevail and control in the event of any inconsistency between this article and other rules and regulations of the city. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be deemed to invalidate or be interpreted in a manner inconsistent with any covenants now in effect and given as security to holders of bonds secured by revenues of the system. 
(Ord. of 7-7-2003, § III)  
Secs. 86-152—86-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - LAWN IRRIGATION SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 86-171. - New construction. 
All new low hazard irrigation systems shall include a residential dual check valve backflow prevention device. The initial device will be installed by the city in conjunction with the water meter installation. The device shall subsequently be replaced by the owner at his expense at ten-year intervals, unless the device becomes defective, at which time it shall be replaced immediately. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2005, § V(1))  
Sec. 86-172. - Existing systems. 
All existing low hazard irrigation systems shall be retrofitted to include a residential dual check valve backflow prevention device. Installation shall be by the owner at his expense. The device shall subsequently be replaced by the owner at his expense, at ten-year intervals, unless the device becomes defective, at which time it shall be replaced immediately. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2005, § V(2))  
Sec. 86-173. - High hazard residential lawn irrigation systems. 
Any proposed or existing residential lawn irrigation system that includes chemical additions shall be considered a high hazard cross connection and must meet the requirements of the requirements in "Reduced Pressure Back Flow Prevention." The device shall be tested on an annual basis as prescribed in those provisions. Installation and testing shall be at the owners' expense. 
(Ord. of 12-5-2005, § V(3))  
Chapter 90 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 90-1. - Failure to pay fare. 
It is unlawful for any person to fraudulently evade, or attempt to evade, the payment of any fare lawfully established and charged for the carrying of passengers by taxicab, bus, train, or other public conveyance, by whatever name, by giving a false answer to the collector of the fare, by travelling beyond the point to which a fare has been paid, or by otherwise riding, or attempting to ride, without paying such fare, or by riding without permission on trains that do not carry passengers, or by concealing himself or themselves upon or about any such taxicab, bus, train or other public conveyance with intent to evade the payment of the lawful fare. 
(Code 1977, § 26-1; Code 1995, § 90-1)  
Sec. 90-2. - Public service vehicle must transport and passenger must pay charges. 
No driver or person in charge or control of a taxicab, bus or any public service vehicle shall refuse to transport a passenger up to the seating capacity of his vehicle while the same is in operation in the corporate limits of the city, or fail to keep an engagement to transport a passenger without good and sufficient reason; and no person who has accepted transportation in or engaged or requested the attendance of a taxicab, or other public service vehicle, shall fail or refuse to pay the lawful charge or fare therefor. 
(Code 1977, § 26-2; Code 1995, § 90-2)  
Secs. 90-3—90-22. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 
 
Sec. 90-23. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Driver means any person who drives a taxicab. 
Owner means any person to whom a certificate of public convenience and necessity for the operation of a taxicab has been issued. 
Person means any individual, partnership, association, corporation or other organization owning or operating or proposing to operate any taxicab within the city. 
Taxicab means any motor vehicle used in the call and demand transportation of passengers for hire from point to point, as designated by the passenger, when at least one of such points is within the city, and/or any motor vehicle used for transportation of passengers for hire on a fixed schedule, except where the same operate under a permit or franchise issued by the city or by a state agency. 
(Code 1977, § 26-17; Code 1995, § 90-31)  
Sec. 90-24. - Depot required. 
No taxicab shall operate in the city unless the owner thereof maintains a place of business or depot on private property, and no taxicab shall be permitted to use the streets of the city, except for the purpose of transporting, loading and unloading of passengers and their baggage, and for the purpose of returning to such taxicab depot or terminal by the most direct route. 
(Code 1977, § 26-21; Code 1995, § 90-32)  
Sec. 90-25. - Prerequisites to issuance of business licenses—Registration and return for tax purposes. 
No taxicab shall be licensed to operate in the city unless the same is registered with the state highway department in the County School District No. 56 and in the city, and unless such taxicab is returned for property taxes in such school district and in the city, and unless all city property taxes assessed thereon have been paid. 
(Code 1977, § 26-23; Code 1995, § 90-33)  
Sec. 90-26. - Prerequisites to issuance of business licenses—Payment of city ad valorem tax. 
No license shall be issued by the city for operation of any taxicab business unless with the application for such license there is submitted satisfactory evidence of the payment of the ad valorem tax of the city upon any vehicle to be operated thereunder, if any has been assessed against such vehicle. If no such tax has been assessed against any such vehicle, there must be submitted satisfactory evidence that the vehicle was not properly assessable for taxation by the city. In the latter event, evidence of the payment of taxes assessed against any other vehicles for which the unassessed vehicle may have been substituted must be submitted before a license may be issued. 
(Code 1977, § 26-24; Code 1995, § 90-34)  
Sec. 90-27. - Prerequisites to issuance of business licenses—Insurance. 
Before the issuance of any business license for a taxicab, the applicant for such license shall first file with the city clerk/treasurer a policy of insurance issued by a company doing business in the state, covering such taxicab for liability in amount of not less than $10,000.00 for injury to one person and in the amount of not less than $20,000.00 for injury to more than one person injured in one accident, and in an amount of $5,000.00 for damage to property of any person. Such insurance shall be of a type and in a company approved by the city council and shall be maintained in full force at all times during the term of the license issued thereunder, and it shall be unlawful for any taxicab to be operated in the city at any time without having such insurance in full force and effect. 
(Code 1977, § 26-25; Code 1995, § 90-35)  
Secs. 90-28—90-57. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - USE OF WRECKER SERVICES BY POLICE 
 
Sec. 90-58. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Wrecker services applies to both conventional wrecker trucks and rollbacks. 
(Code 1995, § 90-56; Ord. of 1-10-1994)  
Sec. 90-59. - Owner's right to select wrecker; police officers not to recommend. 
(a)  Unless the owner or driver of a vehicle is incapacitated or unavailable, the owner or driver of a wrecked or disabled vehicle shall have the right to the wrecker service of his choice. Before calling any wrecker service to tow a wrecked or disabled vehicle, the investigating officer on the scene shall, if practical, determine the owner's or driver's preference of wrecker services and the wrecker service designated by the owner or driver shall be called. 
(b)  In no event shall any police officer recommend any wrecker service to the owner of a wrecked or disabled vehicle nor shall any police officer ever recommend the services of a particular wrecker service in the performance of his duties. 
(Code 1995, § 90-57; Ord. of 1-10-1994)  
Sec. 90-60. - Rotation list. 
(a)  A wrecker rotation list shall be prepared by the police department. No wrecker service may have its name placed on the rotation list unless it has first secured a current city business license. 
(b)  The wrecker rotation list shall be administered fairly and in a manner designed to ensure that all wrecker services on the list have an equal opportunity to the towing business arising from the rotation list. 
(c)  Wrecker services shall be called from the rotation list in the order in which they appear on the list on a wreck-by-wreck basis. If a particular wrecker service is unavailable when called, it shall be passed over and the next wrecker service on the list shall be called to the scene. Selection of a wrecker service by the owner or driver of the wrecked or disabled vehicle shall not affect the order of the rotation for those wrecker calls by police authority; under this condition, the wrecker service not called shall remain on the top of the rotation list. 
(d)  The wrecker service must have a wrecker of sufficient size and strength to handle the job. The police department shall have the right not to call a wrecker service which in its opinion fails to meet this qualification. Under these conditions, the wrecker service not called shall remain on the top of the rotation list. The police department shall maintain written certification of the size and strength of the wreckers of wrecker services on the rotation list, updated the certification annually. 
(e)  Wreckers shall respond only upon request of the proper police authority. Response under any other condition may result in removal from the wrecker list. Response upon being requested by the police for wrecker service shall be provided to the scene within a reasonable period of time. 
(f)  When a wrecker service or wrecker driver is unable to answer a call, the police department shall be promptly notified of that fact and the reason for unavailability. 
(g)  Any complaints from wrecker services regarding any incident involving the police department or its operation of the wrecker rotation list must be received within 30 days of the alleged incident. 
(h)  Wrecker services shall be available to the police department and to the public on a 24-hour basis. 
(Code 1995, § 90-58; Ord. of 1-10-1994)  
Sec. 90-61. - Removal or suspension from rotation list. 
Wrecker services shall comply with all state and federal motor carrier laws where applicable. Failure of any wrecker service to comply with the regulations as stated may result in its removal or suspension from the police department's rotation list. The following procedure shall be followed if a wrecker service is removed or suspended from the rotation list. 
(1)  When the police chief receives a complaint against a wrecker service on the rotation list, he shall immediately investigate the complaint and report his findings to the city manager. If, in the opinion of the city manager, the complaint has merit, and he determines that action should be taken against the wrecker service, then the manager shall notify the wrecker service in writing of the complaint, his determination and the sanctions to be imposed. The letter shall give a date upon which the sanction will begin that is no earlier than 15 days from the date of the letter. 
(2)  Provided that upon receipt of a written request, from the wrecker service in question to the city manager's office, no later than ten days after the date of the manager's letter, the wrecker service shall be provided a review by the city manager for the purpose of showing cause why the wrecker service should not be removed from the rotation list. Upon such review, the manager shall either uphold the above sanctions, rescind the sanctions, or good cause appearing therefor, may continue, modify or extend the sanctions against the wrecker service. Should the wrecker service fail to request a review as described above, the sanctions shall be effective as rendered. 
(Code 1995, § 90-59; Ord. of 1-10-1994)  
Sec. 90-62. - Financial interest. 
No city police officer or police employee shall hold any financial interest or any form of ownership interest in any wrecker service which operates within the jurisdiction of the city police department. 
(Code 1995, § 90-60; Ord. of 1-10-1994)  
Sec. 90-63. - Insurance. 
(a)  Any wrecker service on the rotation list shall carry liability insurance on its wreckers and its premises in an amount as required by the state highway patrol for wrecker services used by the patrol. 
(b)  Any wrecker service on the rotation list shall carry garage keeper's liability insurance covering customer's vehicles in an amount as required by the state highway patrol for wrecker services used by the patrol. 
(Code 1995, § 90-61; Ord. of 1-10-1994)  
Sec. 90-64. - Signs; equipment; towing log. 
(a)  Each wrecker service on the rotation list must place a sign on the door of each of its wreckers indicating the company name, address and telephone number. This sign shall be painted on the door of the wrecker or otherwise permanently affixed to the door. The letters of the sign must be no less than two inches high. If the wrecker is registered in a name other than that of the wrecker service, the owner's name must also appear on the door in letters no less than one inch high. All lettering on wreckers shall be plainly visible, in good repair and shall be in a color which contrasts to that of the wrecker. 
(b)  All wreckers shall be equipped with legally authorized lighting and other safety equipment to protect the motoring public. Such equipment shall be maintained in good working order. 
(c)  Equipment such as broom, shovels, etc., must be carried on all wreckers whereby to remove glass and other debris from the highway/street. The highway/street shall be cleaned by the wrecker service prior to leaving the scene of any accident. 
(d)  Each wrecker owned by any wrecker service on a vehicle rotation list shall be equipped with a towing log. The towing log shall be maintained by the wrecker service and shall accurately reflect all towing done by the wrecker service at the request of the police department. The wrecker log format shall be designed by the police department. Each wrecker service owner shall be responsible for producing this towing log. 
(Code 1995, § 90-62; Ord. of 1-10-1994)  
Sec. 90-65. - Conduct; personal property; charges. 
(a)  Wrecker operators must conduct themselves in a proper manner at all accident scenes and in a proper manner when dealing with the public. 
(b)  Wrecker services and operators shall be familiar with and shall comply with the laws regarding solicitation from the highway/street. 
(c)  Each wrecker service shall be responsible for securing personal property in a vehicle at an accident scene as best it can and the wrecker service shall be responsible for reasonably attempting to preserve personal property in a vehicle which is about to be towed from an accident scene. In no event, however, shall a wrecker service be responsible for personal items which do not come into the possession of the wrecker service. 
(d)  Charges for work performed must be reasonable. 
(e)  Wrecker service may secure assistance from another wrecker service if upon response and/or arrival at a job, the wrecker service finds it necessary to use another service to complete and/or handle the job. Only one bill is to be submitted to the owner or operator for the work performed. 
(Code 1995, § 90-63; Ord. of 1-10-1994)  
Sec. 90-66. - Storage area. 
The wrecker service shall maintain a safe storage area for all vehicles towed. This may be a locked building or a secured fenced-in area where the stored vehicles and other property shall not be accessible to the public. 
(Code 1995, § 90-64; Ord. of 1-10-1994)  
Sec. 90-67. - Unclaimed vehicles. 
A wrecker service shall notify the police department if a towed vehicle has been unclaimed by the owner five days after the towing. The police department will then assist the wrecker service in locating the responsible party. 
(Code 1995, § 90-65; Ord. of 1-10-1994)  
Appendix A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the zoning ordinance of the city. Any amendments to the original ordinance are or will be indicated by parenthetical history notes following the amended sections. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Zoning powers of municipality, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-710 et seq.; zoning districts, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-720; board of zoning appeals, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-780. 
 
CHAPTER 1. - PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY 
 
Sec. 1.1. - Authority. 
This ordinance is hereby adopted under the authority and provisions of the South Carolina Local Government Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act of 1994.  
Sec. 1.2. - Purpose. 
After careful review of the existing development and development patterns in Clinton, the planning commission recommended that regulations concerning health, safety, use, and aesthetics be implemented to protect the residents of the city. The purpose of this ordinance is not merely to provide the minimum regulations necessary to facilitate safe and orderly growth, but also to ensure that growth becomes an integral part of the community and existing developments; increasing collective security and community identity to promote civic awareness and responsibility and enhancing the quality of life for the entire city. In addition, the ordinance works to ensure the greatest possible economic and social benefits for all residents, as described in the comprehensive plan. 
Following the provisions of the South Carolina Local Government Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act, the zoning ordinance has been drafted with consideration for the following: 
1.  To provide for adequate light, air, and open space; 
2.  To prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population, and to lessen congestion in the streets; 
3.  To facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive, and harmonious community; 
4.  To protect and preserve scenic, historic, or ecologically sensitive areas; 
5.  To regulate the density and distribution of populations and the uses of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, conservation, airports, and approaches thereto, water supply, sanitation, protection again floods, public activities, and other purposes; 
6.  To facilitate the adequate provision or availability of transportation, police and fire protection, water, sewer, parks, and other recreational facilities, affordable housing, disaster evacuation, and other public services and requirements; 
7.  To protect from fire, flood, and other damages; and 
8.  To further the public welfare in any other regard specified by a local governing body.  
Sec. 1.3. - Title. 
This ordinance is officially titled as "City of Clinton Zoning Ordinance," and shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance." The official map designating the various zoning districts shall be titled, "City of Clinton Official Zoning Map," and shall be known as the "Zoning Map."  
Sec. 1.4. - Jurisdiction. 
These regulations govern the development and use of all land and structures within the corporate limits of the City of Clinton.  
Sec. 1.5. - Severability. 
Should any portion of this ordinance be found illegal by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the ordinance shall remain in effect.  
Sec. 1.6. - Effective date. 
These regulations shall become effective [in accordance with the provisions of the original zoning ordinance].  
CHAPTER 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 2.1. - Intent. 
For the purpose of interpreting this ordinance, certain words, concepts, and ideas are defined. Except as defined herein, all other words used in this ordinance shall have their everyday dictionary definition.  
Sec. 2.2. - Interpretation. 
2.2.1.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
2.2.2.  Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural number include the singular. 
2.2.3.  The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, corporation, trust, and company as well as an individual. 
2.2.4.  The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel" or "tract." 
2.2.5.  The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
2.2.6.  The word "structure" shall include the word "building." 
2.2.7.  The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
2.2.8.  Any word denoting gender includes the female and the male.  
Sec. 2.3. - Definitions. 
Access: A way or means of approach to provide vehicular or pedestrian physical entrance to a property. 
Access point: The location of the intersection of a highway or street or driveway with the highway. 
Accessory use: An incidental and subordinate use that is customarily associated with the principal use of a lot or building located upon the same lot as the principal use. 
Acre: A measure of land area containing 43,560 square feet. 
Adult uses: Adult uses include any establishment or use which, as one of its principal purposes, sells, displays, or exhibits materials, including books, magazines, movies, tapes, photographs, etc., which appeal to prurient interests, contain patently offensive depictions of sexual conduct, and have no serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. (See also Sexually oriented business. ) 
Alteration: Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members of an existing building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, or interior partitions, as well as any change in doors, windows, means of ingress or egress, or any enlargement to or diminution of a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or the moving of a building or structure from one location to another. This excludes normal repairs and maintenance of the structure. 
Animal shelter, commercial: Any structure or premises in which animals are kept, boarded, bred or trained for commercial gain, and any establishment in which four or more domestic animals are housed. This definition does not include veterinary clinics, where the boarding of animals is enclosed or pet shops. 
Animal shelter, domestic: A pen, shelter, or structure where no more than three dogs or small domestic animals, not to include horses, cows, goats, swine including pot-bellied pigs, sheep, ponies, grazing animals and fowl of any kind, are boarded or kept. 
Annexation: The incorporation of a land area into an existing community with a resulting change in the boundaries of that community. 
Applicant: The owner(s) of record or the legally authorized agent of the owner(s) of record. 
Bed and breakfast inn: Any owner occupied dwelling or portion thereof offering five or fewer guest rooms to transient lodgers in return for compensation, with or without meals. If meals are served, they shall be restricted to breakfast only. The use of a dwelling as a bed and breakfast inn shall not be considered as an accessory use nor a customary home occupation. 
Berm: A mound of earth or the act of pushing earth into a mound. Berms are usually two to six feet high and are used to shield, screen, and buffer undesirable views and to separate incompatible land uses. They also provide visual interest, decrease noise, control the direction of water flow, and act as dams. 
Board of zoning appeals: A quasi-judicial board appointed by the Clinton City Council which hears and decides on variances to the zoning ordinance and land development ordinance of the City of Clinton. 
Buffer: Open spaces, landscaped areas, fences, walls, berms, or any combination thereof used to physically separate or screen one use or property from another so as to visually shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances. 
Building, accessory: A subordinate structure on the same lot as the principal or main building or use occupied or devoted to a use incidental to the principal use. Included in this definition are private garages, storage sheds, workshops, animal shelters, pool houses, etc. when detached from the principal dwelling, and carports attached to the principal building when at least 75 percent open or unenclosed. 
Building, alteration: Any act or process that changes one or more of the exterior architectural features of a structure, including, but not limited to, the construction, reconstruction, or removal of any structure. 
Building of historical value: A building within the City of Clinton which is listed on the National Register, or constituting historic to the citizens of the City of Clinton due to age, architectural design, or historic events. 
Building height: Building height shall be measured vertically from the highest point of the structure, to the ground level of the grade where the walls or other structural elements intersect with the ground. The height limitations shall not apply to; chimneys, spires, belfries, cupolas, and domes provided that they are not intended for human occupancy, do not exceed 60 square feet in size, do not exceed seven feet in total height, and are enclosed by an entry door. 
Building inspector: The individual designated by the appointing authority to enforce the provisions of the building code. 
Building permit: A permit obtained from the City of Clinton which sets the inspection schedule and construction techniques for a project. 
Building, principal: Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, fowl, or property of any kind. 
Business, wholesale: Establishments selling commodities in large quantities to retailers, including wholesalers for all types of retail products, bulk stations for gasoline, kerosene, fuel oil, bottled gas, etc., and warehouses. 
Caliper: The diameter of a tree trunk. See Figure 1. 
 
Canopy tree: A deciduous tree that forms the top layer of vegetation in a forest. Examples of such trees include oaks, hickories, maples, poplars, and others. 
Certificate of occupancy: A document allowing the occupancy or use of a building and certifying that the structure or use has been constructed or will be used in compliance with all applicable provisions of this ordinance and the Building Code. 
Change in use: Any use that substantially differs from the previous use of a building or land. 
Church: A structure or group of structures providing housing for religious worship, religious education, and charitable activities as may be prescribed by the tenets and practices of a particular religious body. 
Club, private: An organization catering exclusively to members and their guests including buildings and grounds with commercial activities serving the membership only. 
Cluster home development: A development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas on the site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, and preservation of environmentally sensitive features. It permits a reduction in lot area and bulk requirements, provided there is no increase in the number of lots permitted under a conventional subdivision and the resultant land area is devoted to open space. 
Commercial, general: Use pertaining to the exchange of cash, goods, services, or any other remuneration for goods, services, lodging, meals, entertainment in any form, or the right to occupy space over a period of time. 
Condominium: A unit in a multi-unit structure owned by an individual who has use of all common areas associated with that structure. 
Day care services: Child care services included in any home, center, agency, or place, however styled, where children not related to the operator are received for custodial care, apart from their parents, whether for compensation, reward, or otherwise during part or all of the day or night and upon any number of successive days. 
Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of land developed or used for residential purposes. Unless otherwise clearly stated, density requirements in this ordinance are expressed in dwelling units per net acre; that is, per acre of land devoted to residential use and common open space exclusive of land utilized for streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, or other public uses. 
Developer: An individual, partnership, or corporation (or agent therefor) that undertakes the activities covered by these regulations. 
Development: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
District: A section, zone, or geographic area within the municipality within which certain zoning or development regulations apply. 
Drainage system: The system through which water flows from the land, including all water courses, water bodies, and wetlands. 
Driveway: A paved or unpaved area used for ingress and egress of vehicles, and allowing access from street to a building or other structure or facility. 
Dwelling, attached: A one-family dwelling attached to two or more one-family dwellings by common vertical walls. 
Dwelling, detached: A dwelling that is not attached to any other dwelling by any means. 
Dwelling, duplex: A building containing two dwelling units that share a common wall, not including units that are located one over the other. 
Dwelling, group occupied: A dwelling unit occupied by four or more individuals unrelated by blood, marriage, adoption, or guardianship living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
Dwelling, multifamily: A building containing three or more dwelling units on the same lot, including units that are located one over the other. 
Dwelling, patio house: A single-family detached or semi-detached dwelling unit. It is built on a small lot generally enclosed by walls which provide privacy. The term can be synonymous with zero lot line dwellings. 
Dwelling, single-family: A one-family dwelling unit located on a separate lot. 
Dwelling unit: One or more rooms, designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as a separate living quarter, with cooking sleeping, and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single-family maintaining a household. 
Dwelling, zero lot line: A zero lot line dwelling is a single-family detached unit which instead of being centered on a lot, is placed against at least one of the side lot lines. The term can be synonymous with patio home. 
Easement: A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use of private land for a public or quasi-public purpose and within which the owner of the property shall not erect any structures. 
Existing use: The use of a lot or structure at the time of the enactment of a zoning ordinance or amendment thereof. 
Facade: The exterior walls of a building exposed to public view or that wall viewed by persons not within the building. 
Family: One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, or guardianship, and not more than three persons not so related, except that mentally and physically handicapped persons for whom care is provided on a 24-hour basis shall be construed a family, in accord with the provisions of state law. 
Fence: An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose, screen, or separate areas. 
Garage: A structure, either attach or detached, that is accessory to a residential building and that is used for the parking and storage of vehicles owned and operated by the residents thereof. 
Home occupation: Any activity carried out for gain by a resident and conducted as a customary, incidental, and accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit. 
Impervious surface: Any material that prevents absorption of stormwater into the ground. 
Improvement: Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration on any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not include either any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions, or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
Industrial park: A tract of land that is planned, developed, and operated as an integrated facility for a number of individual industrial uses, with consideration to transportation facilities (rail and highway), circulation, parking, utility needs, aesthetics, and compatibility. 
Kennel: A commercial establishment in which dogs or domesticated animals are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold, all for a fee or compensation. 
Lot frontage: The length of the front lot line measured at the street right-of-way line. 
Manufactured housing (mobile home): A residential dwelling unit that is composed of one or more components, each of which was assembled in a manufacturing plant and designed to be transported to the home site on its own chassis. 
Manufactured housing park: A lot or parcel with space, improvements and utilities for the long-term parking of two or more manufactured homes which may include services and facilities for the residents. 
Manufacturing: Establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products, including the assembling of component parts, the creation of products, and the blending of materials, such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins, or liquors. 
Mini-warehouse: Building or group of buildings in a controlled-access and fenced compound that contains individual, compartmentalized and controlled access stalls or lockers for the storage of customers goods and wares. 
Modular structure: A manufactured building, assembled on site, to be used with a permanent foundation and distinguishable from other types of manufactured buildings or homes in that the standards to which it is built do not include provisions for mobility on some sort of chassis. When meeting the requirements of the Modular Buildings Construction Act (S.C. Code 1976, § 23-43-10), said building unit or structure may be located in any of the city's several zoning districts. 
Nonconforming lot: A lot, the area, dimensions, or location of which were lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of the zoning ordinance, but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
Nonconforming structure or building: A structure or building, the size, dimensions, or location of which lawfully existed prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment to the zoning ordinance, but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
Nonconforming use: A use or activity that was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
Office: A use or location primarily used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry, or government or like activity. 
Operator: Any person who has charge, care, or control of premises or a part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge and consent of the owner, or any person, individually or jointly, entitled to possession regardless of whether the premises are actually occupied or not. 
Outdoor storage: The keeping in an unenclosed area, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours. 
Pedestrian oriented development: Development which accommodates the needs of the pedestrian. Such development will have parking to the side or rear of a building, will mix uses and provide them in proximity to one another, will allow the pedestrian the option or choice of not having to use a car to travel between uses, and will provide a variety of interesting and detailed streetscapes which balance the needs of pedestrian and vehicular traffic equally. 
Pedestrian scale: The proportional relationship between an individual and his or her environment. The relationship between the person and his or her environment, whether natural or created, is comfortable, intimate, and contributes to the individual's sense of accessibility. 
Performance guarantee: Any security that may be accepted by the city as a guarantee that the improvements required as part of an application for a subdivision are satisfactorily completed. 
Permitted use: Any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district. 
Planned development: An area of a minimum contiguous size, as specified by ordinance, to be planned, developed, operated, and maintained according to a master plan as a single entity and containing one or more structures with appurtenant common areas. 
Public hearing: A meeting announced and advertised in advance and open to the public, with the public given an opportunity to talk and participate. 
Recreational vehicle: A vehicular type portable structure without permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled, or driven and primarily is designed as temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping, and travel use and including but not limited to travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers and self-propelled motor homes. 
Retail, general: Establishment engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. 
Salvage vehicle: Any unlicensed and/or inoperative vehicle which is unused, dismantled, wrecked, or kept for spare parts or the re-sale of parts. This does not include used cars in operable condition, vehicles awaiting repair at a licensed repair business, or vehicles awaiting sale at a licensed dealer. 
Scale: The relationship of a particular building, in terms of building mass, to other nearby and adjacent buildings. 
Services, business: Establishments primarily engaged in rendering services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis, such as advertising and mailing; building maintenance; employment services; management and consulting services; protective services; equipment rental and leasing; commercial research; development and testing; photo finishing; and personal supply services. 
Services, manufacturing: Construction establishments engaged in the construction, repair, or demolition of buildings, streets, water and sewer systems, bridges, and similar construction, including but not limited to buildings. 
Services, personal: Establishments primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or his or her personal goods or apparel. Personal services usually include the following; laundry, including cleaning and pressing service, linen supply, diaper service, beauty shops, barbershops, shoe repair, funeral services, steam baths, reducing salons and health clubs, clothing rental, locker rental, porter service, and domestic services. 
Setback: The mandatory distance between a lot line and a building wall. 
Sexually oriented business: An establishment consisting of, including, or having the characteristics of any or all of the following: 
•  Adult bookstore: An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines, publications, tapes, or films that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to sexual activities or anatomical genital areas. 
•  Adult cabaret: 
(1)  An establishment devoted to adult entertainment, either with or without a liquor license, presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to sexual activities or anatomical genital areas; 
(2)  A cabaret that features topless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers for observation by patrons. 
•  Adult motion picture theater: An enclosed building used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to sexual activities or anatomical genital areas. 
Sign: Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof situated outdoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images (excluding national or state flags, window displays athletic scoreboards, or the official announcements or signs of government). 
Sign, animated or moving: Any sign or part of a sign that changes physical position or light intensity by any movement or rotation or that gives the visual impression of such movement or rotation (excepting time or temperature indicators). 
Sign, awning or canopy: A sign that is mounted, painted, or attached to an awning or canopy. 
Sign, banner: Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is permanently mounted to a pole or a building by a permanent frame at one or more edges. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners. 
Sign, directory: A sign listing the tenants or occupants of a building or group of buildings and that may indicate their respective professions or business activities. 
Sign face: The area or display surface used for the message. 
Sign, flashing: Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign that exhibits changing natural or artificial light or color effects by any means whatsoever. 
Sign, freestanding: Any nonmovable sign not affixed to a building. 
Sign, ground: Any sign, other than a pole sign, in which the entire bottom is in contact with or is close to the ground (less than three feet) and is independent of any other structure. 
Sign, political: A temporary sign announcing or supporting political candidates or issues in connection with any national, state, or local election. 
Sign, portable: A sign that is not permanently, affixed to a building, structure, or the ground. 
Sign, projecting: A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a building for support and that projects more than 12 inches from such building. 
Sign, roof: A sign erected upon or which extends above the roof of the building to which it is attached. 
Sign, temporary: A sign that is used only for a short period of time and is not permanently mounted. 
Sign, wall: A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the background surface of, the sign and that does not project more than 12 inches from such building or structure. 
Sign area: The entire face of a sign, measured by calculating the height by the length of the smallest rectangle that can be drawn to include all sign elements. 
Street: Any thoroughfare (drive, avenue, boulevard) or space more than 18 feet in right-of-way width which has been dedicated, deeded, or designed for vehicular traffic, public or private. 
Street, major arterial: Includes all state primary and federal aid highways and streets that serve to circulate traffic on to, out or around the city, having signals at important intersections and stop signs on side streets and/or one having controlled access and channelized intersections. 
Street, major collector: A street that collects traffic from minor streets and connects with major arterials, but also may provide direct access to abutting properties. 
Street, minor: A street designed principally to provide access to property abutting the street. 
Structure: Anything constructed or built, an edifice or building of any kind, constructed of parts joined together in a definite manner. 
Transportation: Ground establishments providing for the interchange of passenger and freight including, but not limited to, bus passenger and parking terminals, truck terminals, railroad passenger and freight terminals, railway express freight terminals, and taxicab stands and yards. 
Tree, grand: Tree measuring 24 inches or greater DBH. 
Tree, large maturing: Trees that grow to a minimum height of 30 feet. 
Tree, protected: Tree measure eight inches or greater DBH. 
Tree, small maturing: Trees that grow to a minimum height of 15 feet. 
Understory tree: A small deciduous tree that forms the layer of vegetation under the canopy trees. Examples of such trees include dogwoods, sourwoods, fruit trees, and others. 
Variance: A modification of the area regulations of this ordinance, granted by the board of zoning appeals, where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest, and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship, and where such modification will not authorize a principal or accessory use of the property which is not permitted within the zoning district in which the property is located. 
Yard: An open space that lies between the principal or accessory building or buildings and the nearest lot line. Such yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be specifically provided by this ordinance. 
Yard, front: A yard extending the full width of the front of a lot between the front street right-of-way line or property line and the front building line. 
Yard, rear: A yard extending the full width of the lot in the area between the rear lot line and the rear building line. 
Yard, required: That part of a yard between a lot line and the minimum required building setback line, within which no structure shall be located except as provided by this ordinance. 
Yard, side: A yard extending the full length of the lot in the area between the side lot line and a side building line. 
Zoning administrator: The person designated by the city to be responsible for the administration of this ordinance. 
Zoning permit: Written permission issued by the City of Clinton for the construction, or enlargement of a structure, including signs, or the grading or excavation of a site in preparation of construction or for the installation of underground utilities.  
CHAPTER 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 3.1. - Applicability. 
The following provisions shall apply throughout the jurisdiction of this ordinance, regardless of the underlying regulating district.  
Sec. 3.2. - Compliance to ordinance for increases on improvements of existing uses. 
3.2.1.  All general and district requirements shall apply to an existing conforming use increasing in parking area and/or building area by at least ten percent, especially landscaping, parking, and fence standards.  
Sec. 3.3. - Fence and wall standards. 
Except as otherwise noted in this ordinance, fences or walls are permitted in the various districts subject to the following regulations: 
3.3.1.  Residential use. 
A.  Rear yard fences and walls. 
1.  Max. height : Eight feet. 
B.  Side and front yard fences and walls. 
1.  Max. height: Eight feet. 
3.3.2.  Commercial and industrial use. 
A.  Rear yard fences and walls. 
1.  Max. height : Eight feet. 
2.  Materials: Brick, stucco, chain link (barbed wire is permitted for rear yard fences not visible from a street), wrought iron, stone, wood, concrete, or combinations of the above. When combination of two or more materials is used, the heavier material shall be below. 
B.  Side and front yard fences and walls. 
1.  Max. height: Eight feet (exceptions: required screening for the affected district). 
2.  Materials: Brick, stucco, chain link (barbed wire is permitted for side yard fences not visible from a street), wrought iron, stone, wood, concrete, or combinations of the above. When combination of two or more materials is used, the heavier material shall be below. 
 
3.3.3.  Civic and institutional use. 
A.  Fences and walls in all yards. 
1.  Max. height: Eight feet. 
2.  Materials: Brick, stucco, wrought iron, stone, wood, concrete, or combinations of the above. When combination of two or more materials is used, the heavier material shall be below.  
Sec. 3.4. - Temporary structures. 
3.4.1.  [Permitted.] Temporary structures and uses, when in compliance with all applicable provisions of the ordinance, and all other ordinances of the City of Clinton shall be allowed. The following temporary structures and uses shall be permitted: 
3.4.2.  Construction trailers and storage trailers. Trailers used in conjunction with construction projects provided that the following conditions are met: 
A.  Such construction trailers may be located at a building site where there is a valid building permit for the construction project, or, in the case of a residential subdivision, a valid building permit for at least one of the residential units being constructed. 
B.  All construction trailers shall be located at least ten feet off any street right-of-way and not be placed in any required rear or side yard setbacks. 
C.  All construction trailers shall be removed within one month of the completion of the project or issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
D.  All other uses of trailers, including using them as permanent on-site storage, are prohibited. 
3.4.3.  Temporary sales or events. 
a.  Uses requiring utilities more than 15 days in duration and/or held no more than three times per year at any particular location which would not otherwise be permitted in a particular zoning district may be issued a temporary permit as herein provided. 
1.  Upon completion and submittal of an application, the zoning administrator may grant a zoning permit for the following temporary uses: 
a.  Fireworks sales not to exceed 30 days; 
b.  Food and beverage sales not to exceed 120 days and subject to SC DHEC review and approval; 
c.  Open lot sales of Christmas trees in the C-3 and I-1 districts not to exceed 45 days; 
d.  All other temporary sales not to exceed seven days and not located within the following areas: 
i.  Central Commercial District (C-2); 
ii.  Any residential district (R-1, R-2, R-3, and RMH); 
iii.  At a major intersection within the City of Clinton. 
e.  Exceptions. The following are considered as exceptions to the required permitting and time limitations: 
i.  Produce vendors, provided the vendor personally grew all produce being sold. 
3.4.4.  Other temporary uses. All other such temporary uses not otherwise listed may be granted a temporary zoning permit only after the zoning administrator has made the following determinations: 
A.  The proposed use shall not materially endanger the public, health, welfare, and safety; and 
B.  The proposed use shall not have a substantial negative effect on adjoining properties. 
C.  Temporary permits shall be applied for ten days in advance of the event or function. 
D.  A separate permit shall be obtained for each event. 
In approving such a temporary permit, the zoning administrator may authorize conditions regarding duration of the use, hours of operation, signage, lighting, etc., and such conditions shall be made part of the permit issued. Violations of such conditions shall be considered a violation of this ordinance. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2007, § 5)  
Sec. 3.5. - Bed and breakfast inns. 
Bed and breakfast inns may be allowed under the following conditions: 
3.5.1.  Such uses shall be allowed only in older residential structures that are recognized as architecturally, historically, or culturally significant and that through renovations and use as a bed and breakfast, will contribute significantly to the ambiance, character, or economic revitalization of the neighborhood. 
3.5.2.  The architectural integrity and arrangement of existing interior spaces must be maintained, except as may be required to meet health, safety, and sanitation requirements. 
3.5.3.  Minimal outward modifications of the structure or grounds may be made only if such changes are compatible with the character of the area or neighborhood.  
Sec. 3.6. - Vibration, light, noise, and odor. 
3.6.1.  Vibration. No inherent and recurring generated vibration shall be perceptible without instruments at the property line. 
3.6.2.  Light. The source of exterior lighting shall not be arranged in such a manner as to be detrimental to adjacent properties or the traveling public. 
3.6.3.  Noise. No persistent noise shall be detectable beyond the property line in excess of the average level of street and traffic noise generally heard at the point of observation, and no noise below such level shall be objectionable with respect to intermittence, beat, frequency, or shrillness. 
3.6.4.  Odor. No objectionable odor shall be detectable beyond the property line and the emission of odors, regardless of type shall not be such as to be detrimental to the value and use of adjacent property.  
Sec. 3.7. - Recycling facilities. 
3.7.1.  Such facilities shall be in wholly enclosed buildings except for incidental storage, or within an area enclosed on all sides by an opaque fence or wall not less than eight feet in height and landscaped on all street frontages. 
3.7.2.  All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers or enclosures which are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition, or shall be baled or palletized. 
3.7.3.  The site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, shall be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis and shall be secured from unauthorized entry and removal of materials when attendants are not present. 
3.7.4.  Space shall be provided on site for the anticipated peak load of customers to circulate, park, and deposit recyclable materials. If the facility is open to the public, space shall be provided for a minimum of ten customers or the peak load, whichever is higher, except where the zoning administrator determines that allowing overflow traffic is compatible with surrounding business and public safety. 
3.7.5.  Where a facility is to be located within 500 feet of property in a residential zone, it shall not be in operation between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
3.7.6.  Any containers provided for afterhours donation of recyclable materials shall be at least 50 feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use; shall be sturdy, rust resistant construction; shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected; and shall be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of materials. 
3.7.7.  Donation areas shall be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material. The containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited. The facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers.  
Sec. 3.8. - Accessory apartments. 
3.8.1.  The principal structure (dwelling) must be owner-occupied. 
3.8.2.  The apartment, whether attached or detached, cannot exceed 50 percent of the gross floor area of the principal dwelling, or contain more than two bedrooms. 
3.8.3.  The apartment must be a complete living space, with kitchen and bathroom facilities separated from the principal unit. 
3.8.4.  An accessory apartment may be accessory only to a single-unit dwelling, and not more than one apartment shall be allowed per dwelling or lot. 
3.8.5.  The lot size shall be at least 50 percent greater where an accessory apartment is proposed in the R-1 district. 
3.8.6.  The apartment shall meet all yard setback requirements and, where detached from the principal dwelling, shall be set back not less than ten feet from the principal dwelling. 
3.8.7.  Evidence of the accessory apartment should not be apparent from the street in the R-1 district. 
3.8.8.  A third off-street parking space shall be required.  
Sec. 3.9. - Adult uses SIC 7299. 
Owing to the potentially objectionable operational characteristics of sexually oriented or adult uses, and the deleterious effect of such uses on existing businesses and/or residential areas around them, the location of such uses shall be tempered by the supplemental siting criteria of this section. 
No such use shall be located within 1,000 feet (measured in a straight line) of: 
1)  A residential use; 
2)  A church or religious institution; 
3)  Public or private schools and educational facilities; 
4)  Public parks and recreational facilities; or 
5)  Any other adult or sexually oriented business.  
Sec. 3.10. - Mini-warehouses SIC 4225. 
Due to the need to better integrate mini-warehouses into the urban fabric of the community, the following standards shall be observed: 
A.  Size. Mini-warehousing sites shall not exceed two acres. 
B.  Lot cover. Lot coverage of all structures shall be limited to 50 percent of the total area. 
C.  In/out. Vehicular ingress-egress shall be limited to one point for each side of property abutting any street lot line. 
D.  Storage only. No business activity other than rental of storage units shall be conducted within or from the units.  
Sec. 3.11. - Manufactured homes on separate lots. 
The placement of manufactured homes in subdivisions, and on individual or separate lots, where permitted by this ordinance, shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Only one manufactured home shall be located on each lot. 
B.  The manufactured home and accessory uses shall conform to all applicable district requirements. 
C.  The manufactured home shall be securely underpinned and anchored as required by the Standard Building Code. The securing of the unit must be inspected and approved by the zoning administrator. 
D.  Each manufactured home shall have skirting constructed of bricks, concrete blocks, or other appropriate material which extends from the exterior wall to the ground. The tongue shall be removed where so designed. 
E.  Recreational vehicles are never to be considered a manufactured home.  
Sec. 3.12. - Manufactured home parks or courts. 
Manufactured home parks or courts shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  The park shall be served by municipal water and sewer systems, a system of storm drainage, and refuse disposal facilities, not less than 40 feet from any manufactured home, plans of which shall be approved by appropriate city officials. 
B.  All manufactured home spaces shall abut upon an all-weather surface driveway of not less than 22 feet in width which shall have unobstructed access to a public street. 
C.  A description of the procedures of any proposed home owners association or other group maintenance agreement must be submitted to appropriate city officials. 
D.  All on-site roadway intersections shall be provided with a street light, and interior lights shall be provided at not less than 400-foot intervals. 
E.  Each individual manufactured home site shall be at least 25 feet from any other site and at least 25 feet from the right-of-way of any street or drive providing common circulation. 
F.  Manufactured homes shall be placed on one of the following types of foundations which shall be subject to approval by the zoning administrator: 
(a)  Piers under frame made of masonry construction 
(b)  Curtain wall foundation of solid continuous construction around the entire perimeter of the home, 
(c)  Concrete or masonry footings. Foundations shall be so constructed as to prevent settling and accumulation of water under the home. All manufactured homes placed on a concrete slab foundation or on a concrete or masonry footing foundation shall be provided with appropriate skirting of solid durable material around the entire perimeter. Each manufactured home shall be securely underpinned and anchored in accord with the Standard Building Code. 
G.  Space numbers. Permanent space numbers shall be provided on each manufactured home space and shall be located so as be visible from the street or driveway. Signs identifying space locations shall be provided at each street or driveway intersection. 
H.  License required; revocation. A business license shall be requisite to the opening or operation of a manufactured home park in the City of Clinton. Said license may be revoked by city council for a violation of this ordinance or other applicable ordinance and regulations governing the operations of such uses. 
I.  Recreational vehicles are not to be allowed as permanent residences in a park.  
Sec. 3.13. - Group-occupied dwellings. 
Due to the potential lifestyle conflicts between group-occupied and single-family-occupied dwellings, the need to resolve such conflicts and provide harmonious living conditions, and meet the variant housing needs of the local population, the additional requirements of this section shall apply to the location and use of group occupied dwellings in the City of Clinton. 
A.  A minimum of three off street parking spaces shall be provided, only two of which may be located in the required front or side yards in the R-2 district, plus one space for each bed (over three) in the dwelling. In all other districts, the required off street parking may be provided in all required yards, provided that in the front or side yards the parking shall meet the design standards and include a buffer around all perimeters of the parking area. 
B.  No such use shall be located within 600 feet of an existing group occupied dwelling in the R-2 district, or 400 feet in all other districts (measured in a straight line). 
C.  An agreement executed by the owner of the dwelling shall accompany the request for a permit: 
(1)  To ensure proper maintenance of the yards and dwelling; 
(2)  To ensure the control of litter and noise; 
(3)  To ensure participation by the owner in the communication and enforcement process necessary to accomplish compatibility within the neighborhood; and 
(4)  To ensure that only independently functioning dwelling units are rented on a single lease agreement. 
D.  Compliance and permit requirements. 
(1)  An occupancy permit shall be prerequisite to the use of a dwelling unit for group occupancy. Said permit shall be valid for 12 months. Thereafter group occupancy permits shall be subject to annual review by the zoning administrator to determine continuing compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(2)  Where non-compliance with the provisions of this section or an on-going problem has been determined to exist, the zoning administrator shall notify the owner in writing of the nature and extent of the problem, together with instructions to correct the problem within a reasonable time frame. Failure of the owner to comply fully with an order to correct the situation shall constitute a violation of this ordinance resulting in: 
(a)  Revocation of the occupancy permit; and/or 
(b)  Fines and penalties as determined by the court. 
(3)  An on-going problem shall be determined to exist where written documentation has been compiled over a three month period by the zoning administrator, affected neighborhood associations, or area residents. Copies of the documentation shall be filed with the city and forwarded to the property owner. 
E.  Household occupancy. With the exception of a family, the number of occupants permitted to reside in a dwelling unit in a particular zoning district shall comply with the following table on the condition that for each occupant, one off-street parking space shall be provided. In any dwelling unit, only one family, as defined by this ordinance, may occupy a unit. Additionally, in a dwelling unit occupied primarily by a family, two occupants may reside within the dwelling unit. No additional occupants may be permitted on any single household residential lot which contains a separate apartment unit. 
District 	Number of Occupants 
R-1 	Three 
R-2, R-3, C-2, C-3, A-R 	Four 
PD 	Set by approved plan 
  
Sec. 3.14. - Yard and garage sales. 
Yard, garage, tag, patio, and apartment sales are permitted without a permit and permission of the property owner or leaser of the lot, as an accessory use on any residentially or institutionally developed lot in any district. Such sale shall be limited to no more than two days per calendar month on the same lot.  
Sec. 3.15. - Home occupations. 
A home occupation shall be permitted in any residential district or structure provided that such occupation: 
A.  Is conducted by members of the family residing in the dwelling and are permitted to be engaged in such occupation. 
B.  Is conducted within the principal building; 
C.  Utilizes not more than 25 percent of the total floor area of principal building; 
D.  Produces no alteration or change in the character or exterior appearance of the principal building from that of a dwelling; 
E.  Conducts no retail sales, other than items hand-crafted on the premises, in connection with such home occupation; 
F.  No display of products shall be visible from the street; 
G.  Is not visibly evident from outside the dwelling, except for the permitted sign (see section 3.9 [3.17]: signs.); 
H.  Does not generate traffic in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood. Any need for parking shall be met by off-street parking and other than in a required front yard.  
Sec. 3.16. - Private swimming pools and tennis courts. 
3.16.1.  Pools and tennis courts, including, but not limited to, aprons, walls, and equipment rooms, shall not protrude into any setbacks. 
3.16.2.  This use shall be fenced or otherwise protected against intrusion.  
Sec. 3.17. - Signs. 
3.17.1.  Signs are considered to be structures and the regulations herein shall apply and govern in all zoning districts. No sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is in compliance with this section and the additional requirements for the specific zoning district. 
3.17.2.  A permit shall be required for the erection, alteration, relocation, or reconstruction of permitted signs unless otherwise noted, and shall be issued by the zoning administrator in accordance with chapter 5 of this ordinance. 
3.17.3.  Signs must be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good condition, and not permitted to become dilapidated. 
3.17.4.  Non-conforming signs damaged more than 50 percent of their reasonable replacement cost shall not be repaired or replaced except in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
3.17.5.  Prohibited signs. 
A.  Sign imitating warning signals. No sign or structure shall display flashing or intermittent lights of any type, nor shall any colored lights be utilized for sign purposes that resemble lights utilized on emergency vehicles, including police, fire, EMS, towing, and rescue vehicles; nor shall any sign use the words "Stop," "Danger," or any other that may confuse an automobile or other vehicle driver. 
B.  Signs within street or highway rights-of-way. Except traffic signs and signals, information signs erected by or authorized by a governmental or other public agency, or political signs. 
C.  Certain attached and painted signs. Signs painted on or attached to trees, fence posts, and telephone poles or other utility poles or signs painted on or attached to rocks or other natural features. Also, signs that have been altered from their original use, such as removing the legs from a free standing sign and placing it on a pole. 
D.  Fluttering ribbons and banners. Except the flags of governments and their agencies. 
3.17.6.  Signs for which a permit is not required. 
A.  Traffic, directions, warning, or information signs authorized by any public agency. 
B.  Official notices issued by any court, public agency, or officer. 
C.  Non-illuminated "for sale," "for rent," or "for lease" signs not exceeding 12 square feet. 
D.  One permitted home occupation sign, provided it is non-illuminating, no larger than one square foot, and mounted against a wall of the principal building. 
E.  Non-illuminated signs not exceeding 12 square feet on work under construction, such as non-illuminated signs displaying the contractors, subcontractors, architects, engineers, owners, financial, selling, and development agencies. 
F.  Political signs. These signs shall not be placed more than 45 days before an election and must be removed ten days after the election. 
1.  Notice of violation. Ten days after the election, the zoning administrator shall send notice of the sign violation by registered mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the land or which the sign is located and the violator who is responsible for the sign. Within five days of receipt or refusal of the order, the owner or violator must remove the sign. 
2.  Fines. Failure to comply with the zoning administrator's order shall constitute a civil violation. Admission of liability or finding of liability shall be punishable by a fine of $100.00 for each individual charge. Each day during which the violation is found to have existed shall constitute a separate offense. 
3.17.7.  Removal of signs. Whenever a sign becomes structurally unsafe or endangers the safety of a structure or premises or the public, or is erected or maintained in violation of this ordinance, the zoning administrator shall order such sign to be made safe or comply with ordinance, as the case may be, or be removed. Such order shall be sent to the owner of the land on which the sign is located by registered mail and shall be complied with within 12 days from the date of mailing or such time as the zoning administrator may deem appropriate. Failure to comply shall constitute ground for the zoning administrator to have the sign removed, and the cost thereof shall be added to any fine imposed for violation under this ordinance.  
Sec. 3.17.8. - Outdoor advertising/billboard signs. 
A.  Definitions. 
a.  Official business directional sign means a sign erected and maintained by the state or an entity authorized by the state to indicate to the traveling public the route and distance to public accommodations or commercial services for the traveling public. 
b.  Off-premises sign means a business sign, which directs the attention of the public to a business, activity conducted, or product sold or offered at a location not on the same premises where such business sign is located. For purposes of this article, easements and other appurtenances shall be considered to be outside such platted parcel of land and any sign located or proposed to be located in an easement or other appurtenance shall be considered an off-premises sign. 
B.  Prohibited signs. 
a.  All off-premises signs are prohibited and no permit shall be granted for the construction of any off-premises signs on or after the effective date of this subsection. 
C.  Repair and reconstruction of signs. 
a.  Off-premises signs. Should any sign be damaged by acts of God, weather, unintentional harm or negligence or should any off-premises sign deteriorate due to failure to properly maintain said sign to the point that the cost of repair is greater than 50 percent of its current fair market value or 50 percent of current construction costs, whichever is the lesser, the city shall not grant any permits for the repair or reconstruction of the sign. This prohibition does not apply to signs damaged by vandalism or other criminal acts. 
D.  Severability and conflict. 
a.  Severability. This ordinance and its various parts are hereby declared to be severable. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this ordinance is declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of either this ordinance as a whole or any parts not declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
b.  Conflict. If any part of this ordinance is found to be in conflict with any other ordinance of the City of Clinton, the most restrictive or highest standard shall prevail. 
c.  Highway Advertising Control Act. Nothing herein shall be construed to in any way prohibit or relieve the city or owners of property within the corporate limits of the city from any duties, responsibilities or obligations evolved upon it or them by virtue of the terms of the Highway Advertising Control Act, as codified by S.C. Code 1976, §§ 57-25-10 through and including 57-25-220, as amended. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2007)  
Sec. 3.18. - Common open space. 
3.18.1.  Intent. Common open space is land and/or water bodies used for recreation, amenity or buffer; it shall be freely accessible to all residents of a development, where required by this ordinance. Open space shall not be occupied by buildings or structures, roads, parking, or road right-of-way; nor shall it include the yards or lots or residential dwelling units required to meet minimum lot area or parking area requirements. 
The purpose of this section is to ensure adequate open space for high density residential development; to integrate recreation, landscaping, greenery, and/or natural areas into such projects; to promote health and safety of residents of such projects; and to compensate for the loss of open space inherent in single-family residential properties. 
The following uses/projects consisting of nine or more units shall provide common open space in the amounts prescribed: 
Proposed Uses/Projects 	Common Open Space Ratio (% Lot) 
Cluster developments 	15% 
Townhouse projects 	15% 
Manufactured housing parks 	15% 
Multifamily housing projects 	20% 
 
No new development, building, or structure in connection with the above shall hereafter be erected or used unless common open space is provided in accord with the provisions of this section. No existing development, building or structure in connection with the above shall be expanded or enlarged unless the minimum common open space required by the provisions of this section are provided to the extent of the alteration or expansion. 
Common open space plan. Proposed uses/projects shall submit an open space or landscaping plan as part of the application for a building permit. The plan shall: 
1)  Designate areas to be reserved as open space. The specific design of open space shall be sensitive to the physical and design characteristics of the site. 
2)  Designate the type of open space which will be provided, and indicate the location of plant materials, decorative features, recreational features, etc. 
3)  Specify the manner in which common open space shall be perpetuated, maintained, and administered. 
Types of common open space and required maintenance. The types of common open space which may be provided to satisfy the requirements of this ordinance together with the maintenance required for each are as follows: 
1)  Natural areas are areas of undisturbed vegetation or areas replanted with vegetation after construction. Woodlands and wetlands are specific types of natural areas. Maintenance is limited to removal of litter, dead trees, plant materials, and brush. Natural watercourses are to be maintained as free flowing and devoid of debris. Stream channels shall be maintained so as not to alter floodplain levels. 
2)  Recreational areas are designed for specific active recreational uses such as tot lots, tennis courts, swimming pools, ballfields, and similar uses. Recreational areas shall be accessible to all residents of the development. Maintenance is limited to ensuring that there exist no hazards, nuisances, or unhealthy conditions. 
3)  Greenways are linear green belts linking residential areas with other open space areas. These greenways may contain bicycle paths, footpaths, and bridle paths. Connecting greenways between residences and recreational areas are encouraged. Maintenance is limited to a minimum of removal and avoidance of hazards, nuisances, or unhealthy conditions. 
4)  Landscaped areas, lawns, and required buffer areas, including creative landscaped areas with gravel and tile, so long as the tile does not occupy more than two percent of the required open space. Lawns, with or without trees and shrubs shall be watered regularly to ensure survival, and mowed regularly. Landscaped areas shall be trimmed, cleaned, and weeded regularly. 
Preservation of open space. Land designated as common open space may not be separately sold, subdivided, or developed. Open space areas shall be maintained so that their use and enjoyment as open space are not diminished or destroyed. Open space areas may be owned, preserved and maintained as required by this section by any of the following mechanisms or combinations thereof: 
1)  Dedication of and acceptance by the city. 
2)  Common ownership of the open space by a homeowners association which assumes full responsibility for its maintenance. 
3)  Deed restricted, private ownership which shall prevent development and/or subsequent subdivision of the open space land and provide the maintenance. 
In the event that any private owner of open space fails to maintain same, the city may in accordance with the open space plan and following reasonable notice, demand that deficiency of maintenance be corrected, and enter the open space to maintain same. The cost of such maintenance shall be charged to those persons having the primary responsibility for maintenance of the open space.  
Sec. 3.19. - Landscaping. 
3.19.1.  Intent. These regulations are established to protect and enhance the natural landscape of Clinton and ensure the appropriate use of plant material in new construction. It is the intent of these regulations to preserve natural tree cover and establish new tree planting with development in order to: 
A.  Reinforce community identity; 
B.  Reduce visual blight and noise; 
C.  Increase building and property values; 
D.  Prevent soil erosion; 
E.  Reduce storm water runoff; 
F.  Create shade and reduce solar overheating. 
3.19.2.  Landscaping. Landscaping is required as described in chapter 4 for the specific zoning district to provide for buffering of adjacent zones, sound and light abatement, and screening of commercial uses and parking. All required landscaping shall be installed and maintained in compliance to the following general requirements: 
A.  All plant material installed shall be healthy and of the best quality. 
B.  Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with these regulations whenever a building or use is changed or experiences a ten percent enlargement in floor area. 
C.  Landscaping shall not conflict with the visibility at street intersections. 
D.  Wheel stops shall be placed three feet from required landscaping areas. 
E.  Existing vegetation may be used to satisfy portions of the landscaping requirements. 
3.19.3.  Canopy trees. The following is a list intended for general reference and should not be considered all-inclusive. 
Large Maturing Trees: 30'—80' Spread at Maturity 
Common Name 	Growth Rate 	Deciduous or Evergreen 	Remarks 
Ash, White 	Fast 	Deciduous 	Grown best in moist, well-drained soils 
Ash, Green 	Fast 	Deciduous 	Disease resistant; upright form 
Baldcypress 	Medium 	Deciduous 	Suitable in poorly-drained sites 
Cedar, Eastern Red 	Medium 	Evergreen 	Makes an excellent buffer 
Cedar, Deodar 	Fast 	Evergreen 	Pyramidal form requires large planting area 
Elm, Chinese 	Medium 	Deciduous 	Fast-growing and hardy; handsome ornamental with showy bark 
Ginkgo 	Slow 	Deciduous 	May require 20 years to attain mature form 
Hackberry/Sugarberry 	Fast 	Deciduous 	Fast growing and extremely hardy 
Honeylocust (Skyline) 	Medium 	Deciduous 	Thornless and fruitless variety, subject to borers 
Linden, American 	Medium 	Deciduous 	Drought tolerant 
Magnolia, Southern 	Medium 	Evergreen 	Requires high organic content in soil 
Maple, Red 	Fast 	Deciduous 	Protect thin bark on young plants from injury; hardy plant 
Oak, Laurel 
(Darlington) 	Slow 	Evergreen 	Handsome shade tree, widely planted 
Oak, Live 	Medium 	Evergreen 	Broad, spreading canopy 
Oak, Pin 	Fast 	Deciduous 	Hardy, easily transplanted 
Oak, Sawtooth 	Slow 	Deciduous 	Excellent nut producer for urban wildlife 
Oak, Water 	Medium 	Deciduous 	Sensitive to root disturbance 
Oak, White 	Slow 	Deciduous 	Majestic, long-lived specimen 
Oak, Willow 	Medium 	Deciduous 	Excellent multipurpose tree 
Pecan 	Medium 	Deciduous 	Broad, open crown filters sunlight 
Pine, Loblolly 	Fast 	Evergreen 	Tolerates poor soil 
Pine, Longleaf 	Fast 	Evergreen 	Suitable for dry sandy soils 
Planetree, London 	Fast 	Deciduous 	Hardy, tolerant of city conditions 
Sweetgum 	Medium 	Deciduous 	Easily killed by spreading fill dirt around trunk and roots 
Sycamore 	Fast 	Deciduous 	One of the largest eastern hardwoods 
Tulip Poplar 	Fast 	Deciduous 	Protect thin bark from injury 
Willow, Weeping 	Fast 	Deciduous 	Avoid planting near underground pipes 
Zelkova, Japanese 	Medium 	Deciduous 	Short trunk, spreading branches, disease-resistant 
 
3.19.4.  Understory trees. The following is a list intended for general reference and should not be considered all-inclusive. 
Small Maturing Trees: 15'—30' Spread at Maturity 
Common Name 	Growth Rate 	Deciduous or Evergreen 	Remarks 
Althaea 	Medium 	Deciduous 	Showy flowers 
Birch, River 	Fast 	Deciduous 	Interesting peeling bark, lower branches droop 
Cherry, Kwanzan 	Medium 	Deciduous 	Colorful pink flowers 
Cherry, Weeping 	Medium 	Deciduous 	Graceful and airy, pink flowers 
Cherry, Yoshino 	Fast 	Deciduous 	Great flowering, most effective in front of evergreens 
Crabapple, Flowering 	Medium 	Deciduous 	Protect from bark damage 
Crepe myrtle 	Medium 	Deciduous 	Excellent multipurpose specimen 
Dogwood, Flowering 	Medium 	Deciduous 	Protect bark from damage 
Dogwood, Kousa 	Medium 	Deciduous 	White blooms in early summer 
Golden Raintree 	Medium 	Deciduous 	Showy, yellow flowers, requires well-drained soil 
Holly, American 	Slow 	Evergreen 	Berries on female plants 
Holly, "Hume #2" 	Medium 	Evergreen 	Few spines on leaves 
Holly, "Savannah" 	Medium 	Evergreen 	Excellent fruiting 
Holly, "Foster #2" 	Medium 	Evergreen 	Strongly upright form 
Loquat 	Fast 	Evergreen 	Interesting espaliered plant 
Magnolia, Saucer 	Medium 	Deciduous 	White flowers before leaves appear in spring 
Magnolia, Star 	Slow 	Deciduous 	White flowers before leaves appear in spring 
Magnolia, Sweetbay 	Medium 	Deciduous/Evergreen 	Fragrant flowers 
Maple, Japanese 	Slow 	Deciduous 	Grows best in part shade 
Momsa 	Medium 	Deciduous 	Pink flowers, short-lived tree 
Pagodatree, Japanese 	Slow 	Deciduous 	Hardy under city conditions, late summer flower blossoms 
Pine, Japanese Black 	Medium 	Evergreen 	Tolerates drought and windy seaside locations 
Plum, Purpleleaf 	Medium 	Deciduous 	Best grown in full sun 
Redbud, Eastern 	Medium 	Deciduous 	Drought resistant 
Sourwood 	Medium 	Deciduous 	White flowers in mid-summer 
Tallowtree, Chinese 	Fast 	Deciduous 	Dense rounded crown with small poplar-like leaves, grown best in sandy soil 
Vitex 	Fast 	Deciduous 	Showy flowers 
Waxmyrtle 	Slow/medium 	Evergreen 	Combines well with junipers 
Yaupon 	Medium 	Evergreen 	Many red berries, hardy 
  
Sec. 3.20. - Tree protection. 
3.20.1.  Intent. These regulations are established to protect trees by regulating the cutting down, damaging, planting and replacement of trees during development in order to: 
A.  Maintain the environmental and aesthetic benefits that trees provide; 
B.  Improve the appearance of vehicular use areas; 
C.  Protect and conserve property values within the city. 
The provisions herein shall not be interpreted to prohibit or unduly inhibit development of private property. 
3.20.2.  Exemptions. 
A.  Residential exemption. Existing single and small multifamily residential uses are exempt from the requirements of this section unless such use is in the process of being converted into a commercial or industrial use. 
B.  Commercial timber operation exemption. Commercial timber operations shall be exempt from the provisions of this ordinance. The city encourages the retention of a 50 foot buffer of existing trees adjacent to all public rights-of-way. 
3.20.3.  Protection of trees prior to development. On a vacant parcel of land, where a building permit or subdivision approval has not been issued, the destruction, within any five-year period, of more than 25 percent of the protected trees on any one parcel of non-exempt land shall be prohibited The total number of protected trees existing on any one parcel shall not be reduced below a total number equal to 20 protected trees per acre. 
3.20.4.  Protection of trees during development. For parcels of land proposed for development, a minimum number of protected trees (eight inches or greater DBH) on the entire parcel equal to 20 protected trees per acre shall be saved. For parcels containing less than 20 protected trees per acre, the total number of protected trees required to be saved shall equal the total number of protected trees existing on the parcel. Grand trees (24 inches or greater DBH) to be saved may be used to calculate the total number of protected trees to be saved. 
A.  Protective barricades required. Protective barricades shall be placed around all protected trees and grand trees located in development areas, and designated to be saved, prior to the start of development activities, and shall remain in place until development activities are complete or construction in accordance with standards set forth in this section commences. The area within the protective barricade shall remain free of all building materials, dirt or other construction debris, vehicles and development activities. Barricades shall be erected at a minimum distance of ten feet from the base of each protected and grand tree. 
B.  Construction within the protective barricade. Construction of impervious surfaces shall not be permitted within five feet of a protected tree or within 12 feet of the base of a grand tree, unless special construction methods, including but not limited to tree feeders and porous paving materials, are used and certified as acceptable by a reputable tree service or other qualified organization. 
C.  Roots. All roots outside the protective barricade to be removed during development shall be severed clean and a two-inch layer of mulch shall be applied over the surface of exposed roots during development. 
D.  Pruning. All pruning of protected trees and grand trees shall be done according to the National Arborists Association, Pruning Standards for Shade Trees. 
3.20.5.  Standards for removal of protected or grand trees. 
A.  The removal of a protected tree shall be approved if the zoning administrator finds that one or more of the following conditions exist. This section shall not apply to grand trees. 
1.  The protected tree is located where a proposed building or accessory structure is to be placed in accordance with other zoning standards; or 
2.  The protected tree creates unsafe vision on a public street or right-of-way. 
B.  Each protected tree or grand tree that is determined by the zoning administrator to be diseased or injured to the extent it is irreparably damaged shall be approved for removal. Replacement trees shall not be required. 
3.20.6.  Tree removal, relocation, or replacement. 
A.  Tree replacement required. Removal of each protected or grand tree shall require replacement with two same or similar species and at least ten feet in height on the same parcel. Applicant shall submit to the zoning administrator the species and size of replacement trees for approval. 
B.  Relocation of protected trees: Relocation may be accomplished by relocating the tree on land under the same ownership within the city limits or to public land within city limits. 
C.  Tree planting criteria: In the relocation or the replacement of a protected or grand tree, all trees used shall be vigorous, well-shaped, branched and foliated. 
D.  Maintenance: The owner of the parcel shall be responsible for the maintenance of all protected, grand, relocated or replaced trees. 
3.20.7.  Application for a zoning permit. Application for a permit where land development, new construction, or addition in the footprint of a structure is proposed shall require the submission of a site plan or plat which includes the following: 
A.  A tree survey which locates all protected and grand trees identified by DBH and species. Groups of trees in close proximity may be designated as a clump of trees, with the predominant species, estimated number and average diameter indicated. For developments which exceed ten acres, an aerial photograph may be substituted for a tree survey with the approval of the zoning administrator in instances that they would provide the same information as the tree survey. 
B.  Location of all existing and proposed structures, improvements, rights-of-way, and easements on the property and designation of all public rights-of-way and other public lands adjacent to the property. 
C.  Designation of protected trees to be saved and those to be relocated or removed.  
Sec. 3.21. - Parking. 
3.21.1.  General design standards. 
A.  Unless no other practicable alternative is available, any off-street parking area shall be designed so that vehicles may utilize such areas without backing onto a public street. 
B.  Off-street parking areas of all developments shall be designed so that sanitation, emergency, and other public service vehicles can serve such developments. 
C.  Circulation areas shall be designed so that vehicles can proceed safely without posing a danger to pedestrians and without interfering with parking areas. 
D.  No off-street parking area shall be located over an active or auxiliary septic tank field. 
E.  Retaining walls, screen, landscaping, and building walls shall be protected from vehicle contact. 
F.  A permanent turn-around shall be required when the dead-end aisle exceeds 500 feet, measured along the centerline of the dead-end aisle, from the last aisle or public roadway. 
3.21.2.  Parking space dimensions. 
A.  Each parking space shall contain a rectangular area of at least 171 square feet. 
B.  Parallel parking shall provide a space of 19 feet by nine feet. 
C.  Parking areas and widths shall conform to the following table: 
 
Parking Standards 
A: Parking

Angle 	B: Curb

Length 	C: Stall

Depth 	D: Starting

Loss 	E: Last Car

Requirement 	F: Aisle Width

Minimum 
					One way 	Two way 
30° 	18' 	18' 	30' 	4' 	12' 	20' 
45° 	12' 	20' 	20' 	6' 	14' 	20' 
60° 	10' 	21' 	12' 	8' 	18' 	22' 
90° 	9' 	20' 	0.0' 	9' 	25' 	22' 
 
3.21.3.  Disabled parking. 
A.  Except for a lot containing a single-family or duplex dwelling, all uses shall be required to provide and designate the following number of spaces designed for disabled persons. 
Total Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces 	Total Number of Spaces Required for Disabled 
1—25 	1 
26—50 	2 
51—75 	3 plus 1 for every 50 spaces over 100 
 
B.  Off-street parking spaces for the disabled shall be designed as follows: 
1.  All spaces for the disabled shall have access to a curb-ramp or curb-cut when necessary to allow access to the building served, and shall be located so that users will not be compelled to wheel behind parked vehicles, and shall be located the shortest possible distance between the parking area and the entrance to the principal building it serves. 
2.  Parallel parking spaces for the disabled shall be located either at the beginning or end of a block or adjacent to alley entrances. Curbs adjacent to such spaces shall be of a height which will not interfere with the opening and closing of motor vehicle doors. 
3.  Each parking space for the disabled shall be paved and prominently outlined with paint and with a permanent sign bearing the internationally accepted wheelchair symbol, posted at the head of the parking space. 
4.  The size of the parking space shall be per building code specifications. 
3.21.4.  Cooperative parking. 
A.  Refer to required parking in chapter 4 for the specific zoning district. These requirements may be met with cooperative parking. 
B.  Cooperative provisions for off-street parking may be made by contract between two or more adjacent property owners. The parking area provided on any one lot may be reduced to not less than one-half the number of required parking spaces for the use occupying such lot. These lots shall be interconnected in the HC district. 
3.21.5.  Application of parking requirements. 
A.  Mixed uses. When more than one principal or accessory use occupy the same building or parcel; the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately. 
B.  Change in use, alteration of use, or extension of use. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with these regulations whenever a building or use is changed, altered or enlarged by at least 50 percent in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity, or otherwise. 
C.  A scale drawing or layout of all required parking areas showing the location, size, and arrangement of the individual parking spaces, loading spaces, and landscaped areas shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for approval. 
3.21.6.  Lighting standards. 
A.  All parking space area lighting shall be energy efficient and designed so that any glare is directed away from adjacent properties or create any hazardous traffic conditions. 
B.  Lighting shall be provided to illuminate any off-street parking or loading spaces within developments providing customer service to the public after 5:00 p.m. Required lighting shall be designed at a mounting height, luminance, and spacing to provide a minimum average horizontal illumination of 0.6 foot-candles within the parking area and at primary building entrances.  
Sec. 3.22. - Sight triangle. 
3.22.1.  Intent. For protection against traffic hazards, no impediment to visibility shall be placed, allowed to grow, erected or maintained within visibility triangles described as follows; 
3.22.2.  Size of sight triangle. A triangular-shaped portion of land 25 feet wide and 25 feet deep at the intersection. 
3.22.3.  [Height.] No structure, sign, or landscaping material shall exceed 2½ feet in height within the sight triangle. 
3.22.4.  [Parking.] No parking is allowed within the sight triangle. 
  
Sec. 3.23. - Parking, storage or use of campers or recreational vehicles. 
No recreational vehicle or boat in excess of 17 feet shall be parked or stored in any required front or side yard setback area in a residential district; however, such use may be parked anywhere on residential premises for a period not to exceed 24 hours during loading and unloading, and recreational vehicles may be used for temporary lodging, up to seven days.  
Sec. 3.24. - Parking, storage or use of non-recreational vehicles and equipment. 
1)  No automobile, truck, or trailer of any kind or type, without current license plates, shall be parked, and construction equipment shall not be stored on any lot zoned for residential use, other than in completely enclosed buildings, or screened from vision from the public street serving the property. 
2)  Parking of vehicles, implements, and/or equipment used for commercial, industrial, farm or construction purposes in residential districts shall be limited to one vehicle per residence, with a capacity of no more than two tons. 
3)  Vehicles with a capacity in excess of two tons and used for commercial, industrial, farm, or construction purposes are prohibited from parking in residential districts, including the street/highway right-of-way in such districts, when not actively involved in commerce.  
Sec. 3.25. - Yard and setback modifications. 
1)  Setbacks on corner lots. Where a side yard abuts a street, the minimum side yard requirements along the street shall be not less than the minimum front yard requirements for the same lot. 
2)  Setbacks from streets. The street setback requirements shall not apply on any lot where the average setback of existing buildings located wholly or in part within 100 feet on each side of such lot within the same block and fronting on the same side of the street is less than the minimum required setback. In such cases, the setback on such lot may be less than the required setback; but not less than the average of the setbacks of the aforementioned existing buildings. 
3)  Setbacks from railroads. Structures within commercial and industrial districts which are adjacent to railroads may locate closer to the railroad right-of-way than the permitted side or rear yard setbacks of the respective zoning districts. However, the location must be in accordance with applicable railroad standards and conform to all other pertinent provisions of the zoning ordinance.  
Sec. 3.26. - Accessory buildings and uses. 
1)  The number of accessory buildings shall not exceed two in any zoning district. 
2)  Non-farm accessory buildings shall not exceed 50 percent of the gross floor area (GFA) of the principal building or use. 
Accessory buildings and uses may be located anywhere within the buildable area; and may be located in required yards and setback areas under the following conditions: 
1)  Accessory buildings and uses may be located in required yards and setback areas in the C-2, C-3, I-1 districts and in approved PDD's; provided such uses are located no closer than five feet to any property line, are not located in any required buffer area, and otherwise comply with the regulations for principal uses in said districts. 
2)  Accessory buildings and uses in the R-1, R-2, R-3, RMH and O&P districts may be located in all required yards and setback areas; provided no such uses shall be located in any required buffer area, nor any closer than five feet to a property line, and where indicated shall meet the following conditions: 
Accessory Use—off-street parking. Not more than four off-street parking spaces shall be allowed in any required front yard. 
Accessory buildings, including garages, carports, domestic kennels, storage sheds, etc. May be located in required rear and side yard only. 
Swimming pools, tennis courts, recreational uses, satellite dishes, ham radio ground supported TV antennas. May be located in required side or rear yard only; provided said uses shall be no closer than ten feet to the nearest residential property line, and shall have all lighting shielded or directed away from adjoining residences.  
Sec. 3.27. - Nonresidential design guideline and standards. 
The nonresidential design guidelines and standards as set forth in the attachment to the ordinance of February 12, 2007, as amended, are incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2007)  
CHAPTER 4. - ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 4.1. - Official zoning map. 
4.1.1.  Intent. In order to accomplish the purpose set forth in the comprehensive plan and section 1.2 of this ordinance, the boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established as shown on the official zoning map of the City of Clinton which together with all explanatory matter hereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the city clerk, and bearing the seal of the city under the words: "Official Zoning Map, City of Clinton, SC," together with the date of adoption of this ordinance. The official zoning map shall be located in the office of the zoning administrator and shall be the final authority to the current zoning status of land, water areas, buildings, and other structures in the city, notwithstanding any other zoning map purported to be a copy of the official zoning map. 
4.1.2.  Interpretation of district boundaries. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center of streets, highways, railroad lines, utility easements, and alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines; 
B.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines and city limits shall be construed as following such lines; 
C.  The scale of the map shall determine distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map.  
Sec. 4.2. - Low Density, Residential (R-1). 
4.2.1.  Intent. The Low Density, Residential District (R-1) is a predominately single-family residential area. Other uses may be considered in the district as long as they do not detract from the character of the small-scale residential uses. Additional standards are placed on these uses to mitigate their impact on single-family uses. Government buildings, schools, and parks are also appropriate uses for the Low Density, Residential District. Standards for all uses in the district are designed to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Clinton. 
4.2.2.  General. 
Lot Size 	
Minimum lot size 	7,500 sq. ft. min. - residential 
	10,000 sq. ft. min. - non-res. 
Minimum lot width 	70 ft. 
Maximum number of units 	1 unit 
Minimum floor area/unit 	1,300 sq. ft., at least 1,000 sq. ft. of which is heated 
Setbacks 	
Front 	25 feet on major streets, 20 feet on minor streets 
Side 	10 feet min. between residential units, 25 feet min. from non-residential units 
Rear 	25 feet min from residential units, and 35 feet from non-residential units 
Max height 	35 feet 
Percent maximum lot coverage 	35 percent 
Distance between additional habitable structure on the same lot 	10 feet minimum 
 
 
4.2.3.  Uses. 
A.  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-1 district provided that all specified standards are met. 
1.  Single-family residential building. 
a)  One housing unit per lot permitted. 
2.  Civic building(s). 
a)  Use list: 
(1)  School. 
(2)  Church. 
(3)  Park/playground. 
(4)  Community hall. 
(5)  Governmental services building. 
B.  Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited in the R-1 district. 
1.  Mobile/manufactured homes. 
2.  Bars or taverns. 
3.  Private clubs. 
4.  Service or gas station. 
5.  Outdoor storage. 
6.  Outdoor business. 
7.  Drive-through restaurant. 
8.  Dry cleaning establishment. 
9.  Sexually oriented businesses. 
10.  Cellular towers. 
11.  Any use not listed as being permitted is prohibited. 
4.2.4.  Parking. 
A.  General. The following parking requirements shall apply within the R-1 district: 
[1.]  Residential. Two parking spaces per dwelling unit. 
B.  Landscape buffers. (For non-residential uses): 
1.  Required landscaping area. At least five feet in depth shall be located between the abutting property lines and the parking, loading, or other vehicular use area, except where permitted driveway openings are to be provided. 
2.  Required landscaping materials. 
a)  One tree shall be planted for each 50 linear feet of the landscaping area and one small maturing tree or shrub of at least three feet in height shall be planted every ten linear feet within the landscape. 
3.  Other requirements. 
a)  All portions of the landscaping area not planted with shrubs and trees shall be planted in grass and/or with some other vegetative ground cover; and 
b)  Parked vehicles may overhang a landscaped area no more than one foot, provided curbing or other wheel stops are installed to ensure no greater overhang or penetration of the landscaped islands. Landscaping, walls, fences, and earthberms shall be located as to prevent their damage and/or destruction by overhanging vehicles. 
4.2.5.  Tree protection. 
A.  [Requirements.] Refer to chapter 3, section 3.11 [3.20], tree protection, for general tree protection requirements. 
B.  Grand trees. The destruction of any grand tree (24 inches or greater DBH) is prohibited on any parcel of non-exempt land, unless a permit is granted certifying that removal is in compliance with section 3.11 [3.20]. 
C.  Protected trees. The destruction of any protected tree (eight inches or greater DBH) is prohibited on any parcel of non-exempt land, unless a permit is granted certifying that removal is in compliance with section 3.11 [3.20].  
Sec. 4.3. - Medium Density, Residential (R-2.). 
4.3.1.  Intent. The Medium Density, Residential District (R-2) is a predominately single-family residential area and duplex dwellings. Government buildings, schools, and parks are also appropriate uses for this district. Standards for all uses in the district are designed to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Clinton. 
4.3.2.  General. 
Lot Size 	
Minimum lot size 	6,000 sq. ft. minimum for single-family dwellings, 8,000 sq. ft. for duplexes, and 10,000 sq. ft. for non-residential. 
Minimum lot width 	60 ft. for single-family dwellings; 70 ft. for duplex dwelling and non-residential uses. 
Maximum number of units 	2 units 
Minimum floor area/unit 	1,000 sq. ft. for single-family 
Setbacks 	
Front 	25 ft. min. on major street, 20 ft. min. on minor street. 
Side 	5 ft. min. from residential uses; 20 ft. min. from non-residential uses. 
Rear 	25 feet from residential uses, 30 ft. from non-residential uses. 
	Setbacks apply to all structures greater than 6" above ground level. 
Max height 	35 feet 
Percent maximum lot coverage 	55 percent 
Distance between additional habitable structure on the same lot 	10 feet minimum 
 
 
4.3.3.  Uses. 
A.  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-2 district provided that all specified standards are met. 
1.  Single-family residential building. 
a)  One housing unit per lot permitted. 
2.  Duplex residential building(s). 
a)  Up to two units per lot permitted provided that lot size meets the minimum lot area/unit listed in the general requirements. 
b)  Units may be attached or detached. 
3.  Civic building(s). 
a)  Use List: 
(1)  School. 
(2)  Church. 
(3)  Park/playground. 
(4)  Community hall. 
(5)  Governmental services building. 
B.  Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited in the R-2 district: 
1.  Bars or taverns. 
2.  Private clubs. 
3.  Service or gas station. 
4.  Outdoor storage. 
5.  Outdoor business. 
6.  Drive-through restaurant. 
7.  Dry cleaning establishment. 
8.  Sexually oriented businesses. 
9.  Mobile homes/manufactured homes. 
10.  Cellular towers. 
11.  Any use not listed as being permitted is prohibited. 
4.3.4.  Parking. 
A.  General. The following parking requirements shall apply within the R-2 district: 
1.  Residential. Two parking spaces per dwelling unit. 
B.  Landscape buffers. (For non-residential uses): 
1.  Required landscaping area. At least five feet in depth shall be located between the abutting property lines and the parking, loading, or other vehicular use area, except where permitted driveway openings are to be provided. 
2.  Required landscaping materials. 
a)  One tree shall be planted for each 50 linear feet of the landscaping area and one small maturing tree or shrub of at least three feet in height shall be planted every ten linear feet within the landscape. 
3.  Other requirements. 
a)  All portions of the landscaping area not planted with shrubs and trees shall be planted in grass and/or with some other vegetative ground cover; and 
b)  Parked vehicles may overhang a landscaped area no more than one foot, provided curbing or other wheel stops are installed to ensure no greater overhang or penetration of the landscaped islands. Landscaping, walls, fences, and earthberms shall be located as to prevent their damage and/or destruction by overhanging vehicles. 
4.3.5.  Tree protection. 
D.  [Requirements.] Refer to chapter 3, section 3.11[3.20], tree protection, for general tree protection requirements. 
E.  Grand trees. The destruction of any grand tree (24 inches or greater DBH) is prohibited on any parcel of non-exempt land, unless a permit is granted certifying that removal is in compliance with section 3.11[3.20]. 
F.  Protected trees. The destruction of any protected tree (eight inches or greater DBH) is prohibited on any parcel of non-exempt land, unless a permit is granted certifying that removal is in compliance with section 3.11.  
Sec. 4.4. - High Density, Residential (R-3). 
4.4.1.  Intent. The High Density, Residential District (R-3) is a predominately single-family, duplex, and multifamily residential area. This district is intended to accommodate higher density residential development and a variety of housing types on small lots or in project settings in areas accessible to major streets. Standards for all uses in the district are designed to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Clinton. 
4.4.2.  General. 
Lot Size 	
Minimum lot size 	10,000 sq. ft. min. - non-res. & three family residential, plus 2.500 sq. ft. for each unit over 3. 
	5,000 sq. ft. for single-family res. 
	6,000 sq. ft. for two family res. 
Minimum lot width 	50 ft. for single-family res. 
	60 ft. for two family res. 
	75 ft. for three or more res. 
Setbacks 	
Front 	25 ft. on major street & 20 ft. on minor street 
Side 	5 ft. from a residential use & 20 ft. from a non-residential use 
Rear 	10 ft. from a residential use & 30 ft. from a non-residential use 
	Setbacks apply to all structures greater than 6" above ground level. 
Max height 	50 feet 
Percent maximum lot coverage 	65 percent 
Distance between additional habitable structure on the same lot 	10 feet minimum 
 
 
4.4.3.  Uses. 
A.  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-3 district provided that all specified standards are met. 
1.  Single-family residential building. 
a)  One housing unit per lot permitted. 
2.  Duplex residential building(s). 
a)  Up to two units per lot permitted provided that lot size meets the minimum lot area/unit listed in the general requirements. 
3.  Small multifamily residential units. 
a)  More than two units per lot permitted provided that lot size meets the minimum lot area/unit listed in the general requirements. 
4.  Civic building(s). 
a)  Use list: 
(1)  School. 
(2)  Church. 
(3)  Park/playground. 
(4)  Community hall. 
(5)  Governmental services building. 
[B].  Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited in the R-3 district: 
1.  Bars or taverns. 
2.  Private clubs. 
3.  Service or gas station. 
4.  Outdoor storage. 
5.  Outdoor business. 
6.  Drive-through restaurant. 
7.  Dry cleaning establishment. 
8.  Sexually oriented businesses. 
9.  Cellular towers. 
10.  Mobile/manufactured housing. 
11.  Any use not listed as being permitted is prohibited. 
4.4.4.  Parking. 
A.  General. The following parking requirements shall apply within the R-3 district: 
1.  Residential. Two parking spaces per dwelling unit. 
B.  Landscape buffers. (For non-residential uses): 
1.  Required landscaping area. At least five feet in depth shall be located between the abutting property lines and the parking, loading, or other vehicular use area, except where permitted driveway openings are to be provided. 
2.  Required landscaping materials. 
a)  One tree shall be planted for each 50 linear feet of the landscaping area and one small maturing tree or shrub of at least three feet in height shall be planted every ten linear feet within the landscape. 
3.  Other requirements. 
a)  All portions of the landscaping area not planted with shrubs and trees shall be planted in grass and/or with some other vegetative ground cover; and 
b)  Parked vehicles may overhang a landscaped area no more than one foot, provided curbing or other wheel stops are installed to ensure no greater overhang or penetration of the landscaped islands. Landscaping, walls, fences, and earthberms shall be located as to prevent their damage and/or destruction by overhanging vehicles. 
4.4.5.  Tree protection. 
G.  [Requirements.] Refer to chapter 3, section 3.11[3.20]: tree protection for general tree protection requirements. 
H.  Grand trees. The destruction of any grand tree (24 inches or greater DBH) is prohibited on any parcel of non-exempt land, unless a permit is granted certifying that removal is in compliance with section 3.11[3.20]. 
I.  Protected trees. The destruction of any protected tree (eight inches or greater DBH) is prohibited on any parcel of non-exempt land, unless a permit is granted certifying that removal is in compliance with section 3.11[3.20].  
Sec. 4.5. - Manufactured Housing, Residential (R-MH). 
4.5.1.  Intent. The Manufactured Housing, Residential District (R-MH) is intended to accommodate manufactured housing development in concert with conventional dwellings in planned parks or courts and in areas suited to mixed residential use. It is further intended to foster manufactured housing development as an affordable alternative to other types of housing. Standards for all uses in the district are designed to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Clinton. 
4.5.2.  General. 
Lot Size 	
Minimum lot size 	5,000 sq. ft. for single-family dwellings 
	2 acres for manufactured housing park 
Minimum lot width 	50 ft. for single-family dwellings 
	60 ft. for non-residential 
	200 ft. for manufactured housing park 
Setbacks 	
Front 	25 feet on major streets, 20 ft. for minor street 
Side 	5 ft. adjacent to residential uses, 20 ft. adjacent to non-residential units 
Rear 	10 ft. adjacent to residential uses, 30 ft. adjacent to non-residential units 
Max height 	35 feet 
Percent maximum lot coverage 	55 percent 
Distance between additional habitable structure on the same lot 	15 feet minimum 
 
 
4.5.3.  Uses. 
A.  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the R-MH district provided that all specified standards are met. 
1.  Duplex residential building(s). 
a)  Up to two units per lot permitted provided that lot size meets the minimum lot area/unit listed in the general requirements. 
2.  Small multifamily residential building(s). 
a)  More than two units per lot permitted provided that lot size meets the minimum lot area/unit listed in the general requirements. 
b)  Units may be attached or detached. 
3.  Civic building(s). 
a)  Use List: 
(1)  School. 
(2)  Church. 
(3)  Park/playground. 
(4)  Community hall. 
(5)  Governmental services building. 
4.  Mobile or manufactured home(s). 
a)  Manufactured homes (mobile homes) shall be limited to residential use. 
b)  Only one manufactured home is permitted per parcel provided that it meets the following standards: (Note: These standards do not apply to non-conforming mobile home parks.) 
(1)  A manufactured home must bear a seal certifying that it was built to HUD standards for mobile homes, adopted on June 15, 1976. 
(2)  Pre-owned manufactured homes being placed onto a parcel within the city shall be less than five years old. 
(3)  Exterior siding: Wood, hardboard, vinyl, brick, or aluminum and shall be comparable in composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in standard residential construction. 
(4)  Roofing material: Type of shingle that is commonly used in standard residential construction. 
(5)  Minimum roof pitch: Three foot by twelve foot roof pitch, or the standard of each manufacturer's equivalent to a three foot by twelve foot roof pitch. 
(6)  Skirting: Continuous permanent brick foundation or curtain wall of solid and durable material, continuous except for ventilation and access, shall be installed upon a poured concrete footing after placement on the lot, and before occupancy. 
(7)  The tongue, axles, transporting lights, and removable towing apparatus must be removed after placement on the lot and before occupancy. 
(8)  Stairs, porches, entrance platforms, ramps and other means of entrance and exit to and from the home shall be installed or constructed in a manner commonly used in standard residential construction and attached firmly to the primary structure and anchored securely to the ground. 
(9)  A recreational vehicle is not to be considered a manufactured home. 
(10)  Space numbers. Permanent space numbers shall be provided on each manufactured home space and shall be located so as to be visible from the street or driveway. Signs identifying space locations shall be provided at each street or driveway. 
(11)  License required. A business license shall be required to the opening or operation of a manufactured home park in the City of Clinton. This license may be revoked by city council for a violation of this ordinance or other applicable ordinance and regulations governing the operations of such uses. 
B.  Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited in the R-MH district: 
1.  Bars or taverns. 
2.  Private clubs. 
3.  Service or gas station. 
4.  Outdoor storage. 
5.  Outdoor business. 
6.  Drive-through restaurant. 
7.  Dry cleaning establishment. 
8.  Sexually oriented businesses. 
9.  Cellular towers. 
10.  Any use not listed as being permitted is prohibited. 
4.5.4.  Parking. 
A.  General. The following parking requirements shall apply within the R-MH district. 
[1.]  Residential. Two parking spaces per dwelling unit. 
B.  Landscape buffers. (For non-residential uses): 
1.  Required landscaping area. At least five feet in depth shall be located between the abutting property lines and the parking, loading, or other vehicular use area, except where permitted driveway openings are to be provided. 
2.  Required landscaping materials. 
a)  One tree shall be planted for each 50 linear feet of the landscaping area and one small maturing tree or shrub of at least three feet in height shall be planted every ten linear feet within the landscape. 
3.  Other requirements. 
a)  All portions of the landscaping area not planted with shrubs and trees shall be planted in grass and/or with some other vegetative ground cover; and 
b)  Parked vehicles may overhang a landscaped area no more than one foot, provided curbing or other wheel stops are installed to ensure no greater overhang or penetration of the landscaped islands. Landscaping, walls, fences, and earthberms shall be located as to prevent their damage and/or destruction by overhanging vehicles. 
4.5.5.  Tree protection. 
J.  [Requirements.] Refer to chapter 3, section 3.11[3.20]: tree protection for general tree protection requirements. 
K.  Grand trees. The destruction of any grand tree (24 inches or greater DBH) is prohibited on any parcel of non-exempt land, unless a permit is granted certifying that removal is in compliance with section 3.11[3.20]. 
L.  Protected trees. The destruction of any protected tree (eight inches or greater DBH) is prohibited on any parcel of non-exempt land, unless a permit is granted certifying that removal is in compliance with section 3.11[3.20].  
Sec. 4.6. - Central Commercial District (C-2). 
4.6.1.  Intent. The city center district is the heart of Clinton. This area (the uptown) has been historically and is currently the central area for shopping, services, and governmental facilities for both the residents of the city and surrounding areas. The downtown and its businesses are easily accessible by vehicles, bikes, and pedestrians. A mixture of uses that respect the existing structures, especially those with historic significance, in scale and use are appropriate for this district. 
4.6.2.  General. 
A.  Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet. 
B.  Maximum lot coverage: Building footprint shall not exceed 70 percent of the lot coverage. 
C.  Setbacks. 
1.  Front: Ten feet minimum. 
2.  Side: Five feet minimum on corner lots; 15 feet when contiguous to single-family dwelling unit; none elsewhere. 
3.  Rear: 0 feet minimum. 
D.  Maximum building height: 65 feet. Water towers, transmission towers, chimneys, flag poles, masts and aerials are permitted to exceed height limits, provided evidence from appropriate authorities is submitted to the effect that such building or structure will not interfere with any airport approach zones or flight patterns. 
 
4.63.  Uses. 
A.  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the C-2 district: 
1.  Office/commercial. The following office and commercial uses are permitted in the C-2 district provided that all specified standards are met: 
a)  Use list. 
(1)  Office. 
(2)  Personal services. 
(3)  Business services. 
(4)  General retail. 
(5)  General commercial. 
b)  Standards. 
[1.]  For standards, refer to section 4.7.3. 
2.  Single-family residential. Single-family residential uses are permitted in the C-2 district provided that all standards of the R-3 district are met. 
3.  Multifamily and duplex residential. Attached or detached multifamily residential uses are permitted in the C-2 district provided that all standards of the R-3 district are met. 
(1)  Minimum lot area per housing unit: 2,500 square feet. 
(2)  Parking Requirement: two spaces per unit. 
4.  Institutional. The following institutional uses are permitted in the C-2 district: 
a)  Use list. 
(1)  Church. 
(2)  Government. 
(3)  School. 
5.  Utility. Utility uses are permitted in the C-2 district provided that all specified standards are met. 
a)  Standards. 
(1)  Public utility or communication tower: setback a minimum of one foot for each one foot in height. 
6.  Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage uses are permitted in the C-2 district provided that all specified standards are met. 
a)  Standards. 
(1)  The storage shall be either an accessory use on the same lot as or a primary use for a lot providing that the primary business utilizing the storage is located within the C-2 district. 
(2)  Outdoor storage shall not front on any street and shall be screened from view of surrounding properties. 
(3)  Any tires stored shall be covered under a roofed structure so as not to allow for the accumulation of water inside the tires. 
(4)  No more than two vehicles for salvage may be stored on any lot. 
(5)  Tractor trailers or other large vehicles may not be used as permanent storage buildings. 
7.  Mixed uses. A mixture of the above uses are permitted provided that these uses meet the specified standards for that use in addition to the following standards: 
a)  Standards. 
(1)  When residential uses are attached to businesses or institutional uses, where business and residential portions of the building are located on different floors, business/commercial uses shall occupy the floors below the residential uses to preserve a residential atmosphere for the residents above. 
(2)  When residential uses are attached to businesses or institutional uses, business and residential portions of the mixed use building must be separated either by a soundproof concrete or masonry wall or two framewalls at least two feet apart, each insulated or otherwise soundproofed with the intervening space unoccupied except for utility lines, heating and air conditioning ducts, and similar devices not producing noise or vibration or requiring regular access. 
B.  Accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses and structures shall be limited to the following and any additional uses and structures the zoning administrator finds are similar to those listed in scope, size, and impact and which are otherwise in compliance with this ordinance. 
1.  Residential. 
a)  Private greenhouse. 
b)  Private swimming pool. 
c)  Private tennis or outdoor recreational court. 
d)  Storage shed for personal, non-commercial use. 
e)  Studios and workshops without outdoor display for personal use. 
f)  Utility substation. 
g)  Public utility or communication tower, setback a minimum of one foot for each one foot in height. 
2.  Commercial. 
a)  Storage shed. 
b)  Utility substation. 
c)  Public utility or communication tower, setback a minimum of one foot for each one foot in height. 
3.  Standards. The following standards apply to accessory uses or structures listed as permitted in [subsections] 1 and 2 above. 
a)  Accessory uses or structures shall be located on the same lot as the principal structure or use. 
b)  Accessory structures shall be included in the calculation of total lot coverage. 
c)  Unless otherwise noted, no accessory use or structure shall be located in a required yard provided such uses are located no closer than five feet to any property line, are not located in any required buffer area, and otherwise comply with the regulations for principal uses in said districts. 
d)  No accessory use shall create a nuisance or hazard. 
e)  No accessory use shall be established until the principal use is established. 
f)  The number of accessory buildings shall not exceed two in any zoning district. 
C.  Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited in the C-2 district: 
1.  Mobile homes/manufactured homes. 
2.  Auto repair garage. 
3.  Gas station. 
4.  Sexually oriented businesses. 
5.  Cellular towers. 
6.  Any use not listed as being permitted is prohibited. 
4.6.4.  Parking. 
A.  Refer to general parking provisions in chapter 3, section 3.12[3.21]: parking. 
B.  Parking areas on adjacent lots should be connected. 
4.6.5.  Landscaping. 
A.  Intent. Landscaping is required in the C-2 district to provide for buffering of adjacent zones, sound and light abatement, and screening of commercial uses, commercial parking, or residential parking with more than eight spaces. 
B.  Requirements for parking area borders parallel to adjacent property lines. 
1.  Buffer strip shall be at least five feet in width and shall not block the line of sight for on-coming traffic on street frontage. 
2.  A garden wall, opaque fence, or hedge [min. three feet in height] shall be installed along any adjacent property line. 
3.  Two small maturing trees, 12 ornamental shrubs and landscaped grass areas are required every 100 linear feet. 
C.  Street trees. 
1.  Where appropriate, street trees shall be planted along all public streets with permission of the appropriate jurisdiction. Street trees shall be large maturing canopy species such as Silver Maple, Red Maple, or Live Oak. 
2.  Maximum of one street tree every 30 feet on center. 
4.6.6.  Tree protection. 
A.  [Requirements.] Refer to chapter 3, section 3.11[3.20]: tree protection for general tree protection requirements. 
B.  Grand trees. The destruction of any grand tree (24 inches or greater DBH) is prohibited on any parcel of non-exempt land, unless a permit is granted certifying that removal is in compliance with section 3.11[3.20]. 
C.  Protected trees. The destruction of any protected tree (eight inches or greater DBH) is prohibited on any parcel of non-exempt land, unless a permit is granted certifying that removal is in compliance with section 3.11[3.20]. 
4.6.7.  Signage. 
A.  Materials employed for construction of sign shall be durable and weather resistant, and all signs shall be maintained in good repair. 
B.  Sign area shall be measured by height (A) by length (B) of the smallest rectangle that can be drawn to measure all sign elements. Unless otherwise noted, only one side or face of the same sign shall be used in computing sign area. 
C.  Allowed signs. The applicant may select one of the following one of the four choices for a sign type per street frontage: 
1.  Wall sign. 
a)  Maximum size: 20 square feet or 15 percent of the front wall area, whichever is greater. 
2.  Window sign. 
a)  Maximum size: 30 percent of the window area. 
3.  Projecting sign. 
a)  Maximum size: Six square feet for one side. 
b)  Clearance: Eight feet above ground level. 
 
4.  Awning sign. 
a)  Maximum size: Individual letters shall not exceed ten inches in height. 
b)  Signs, symbols, or designs may be painted or sewn on to any awning. 
5.  Free standing sign. 
a)  Maximum size: 20 square feet per sign face. 
b)  Maximum height: 24 feet from finished grade. 
D.  Secondary signs. The following signs shall be permitted along in conjunction with the allowed sign: 
1.  Window or projecting sign no larger than six inches by 18 inches bearing business identification in addition to a wall or awning sign. 
2.  One sign per business occupying the upper floors of a building no larger than six inches by 18 inches. 
E.  Prohibited signs. 
1.  Moving signs of any type other than barber poles. 
2.  Signs projecting above the roof line. 
3.  Roof signs. 
4.  Any sign not listed as being allowed is prohibited.  
Sec. 4.7. - General Commercial District (C-3). 
4.7.1.  Intent. Businesses in this district, due to the heavy auto traffic along the highways, will be primarily auto dependent businesses. This district may represent the first impression, and often the only impress on, that visitors have of the City of Clinton. Because of this, the intent of these provisions is to create a corridor that represents the city and its local character. In addition, these provisions are intended to facilitate convenient access, minimize traffic congestion, and reduce visual clutter along the highways. 
4.7.2.  General. 
A.  Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet. 
B.  Maximum lot coverage: Building footprint shall not exceed 85 percent of the lot coverage. 
C.  Minimum street frontage: 50 feet. 
D.  Maximum height: 45 feet. 
E.  Setbacks: 
1.  Front: 20 feet on minor street, 25 feet on major street. 
2.  Side: Five feet. Commercial condo projects shall be allowed to share interior to share interior property lines, provided a five-foot setback is observed at both ends, and that no project shall exceed 400 feet in length parallel to the street or streets upon which it is contiguous. 
3.  Rear: 15 feet min. 
F.  Entranceways, awnings, and porches. Permitted to encroach a maximum of six feet into front setbacks. Corner lots may encroach up to six feet on both the front and street-side setback. 
G.  Trash containers. Located in the parking area and screened from the right-of-way. 
 
H.  Mechanical equipment at ground level. Should be placed on the parking lot side of building, away from buildings on adjacent sites, and screened from view of public streets and residential uses. 
4.7.3.  Uses. 
A.  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the C-3 district: 
1.  General retail. 
2.  General commercial. 
3.  Personal services. 
4.  Business services. 
5.  Office. 
6.  Entertainment uses (i.e., theaters, drive-in theaters, mini golf). 
7.  Civic uses. 
8.  Public utility or communication tower, setback a minimum of one foot for each one foot in height. 
9.  Residential units providing they meet the requirements specified in the R-3 district. 
B.  Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited in the C-3 district: 
1.  Mobile homes/manufactured homes. 
2.  Sexually oriented businesses. 
C.  Accessory uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the C-3 district as an accessory to the primary use. 
1.  Outdoor storage. 
3.  Outdoor sales. 
Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage uses are permitted in the C-3 district provided that all specified standards are met. 
a)  Standards. 
(1)  The storage shall be either an accessory use on the same lot as or a primary use for a lot providing that the primary business utilizing the storage is located within the C-2 district. 
(2)  Outdoor storage shall not front on any street and shall be screened from view of surrounding properties. 
(3)  Any tires stored shall be covered by a roofed structure so as not to allow for the accumulation of water inside the tires. 
(4)  No more than two vehicles for salvage may be stored on any lot. 
(5)  Tractor trailers or other large vehicles may not be used as permanent storage buildings. 
4.7.4.  Parking. 
A.  General requirements. See general parking requirements in chapter 3 section 3.12[3.21]. 
B.  [Adjacent lots.] Whenever possible, parking areas on adjacent lots shall be connected. 
C.  Required parking spaces. 
Office/personal services/business services 	1 per 300 square feet 
General retail/general commercial 	1 per 250 square feet 
Restaurant/bars 	1 per 75 square feet 
Hotels/motels/bed and breakfast inns 	1 per room or suite 
All other uses 	1 per 250 square feet 
 
E.  Required loading spaces. One space for every 30,000 square feet of floor area, or a portion thereof with a maximum of two spaces. 
F.  Stacking requirements. Four stacking spaces per drive-through window shall be provided at businesses with drive-through facilities. These spaces shall be located off the public right-of-way and shall not conflict with the parking and circulation in the balance of the required parking area. Stacking spaces shall be a minimum of 24 feet long and nine feet wide. 
4.7.5.  Landscaping. 
A.  General requirements. See landscaping requirements in chapter 3, section 3.10[3.19]: landscaping. 
B.  Street trees. 
1.  Street tree requirements apply only to lot frontage on state maintained highways. 
2.  One large maturing tree every 30 feet. (Pick one or a few species to choose from for consistency.) 
3.  Required trees shall be planted a minimum distance of five feet and a maximum distance of ten feet from the right of way or property boundary within the required front setback. 
C.  Requirements for parking areas. 
1.  Peripheral. 
a)  Required landscaping area. At least five feet in depth shall be located between the abutting property lines and the parking, loading, or other vehicular use area, except where permitted driveway openings area to be provided. 
b)  Required landscaping materials. Choose one: 
(1)  One large maturing tree shall be planted for each 50 linear feet of the landscaping area and one small maturing tree or shrub of at least three feet in height shall be planted every ten linear feet within the landscape; or 
(2)  A combination of trees, hedge, other durable landscape material or approved wall, fence or earthberm may be utilized to form the continuous landscape element of at least three feet in height. 
c)  Other requirements. 
(1)  All portions of the landscaping area not planted with shrubs and trees or covered by a wall or fence barrier shall be planted in grass and/or with some other vegetative ground cover; and 
(2)  Parked vehicles may overhang a landscaped area no more than 2½ feet, provided curbing or other wheel stops are installed to ensure no greater overhang or penetration of the landscaped islands. Landscaping, walls, fences, and earthberms shall be located as to prevent their damage and/or destruction by overhanging vehicles. 
2.  Interior. 
a)  Required landscaping area. Five percent of the interior of any parking, loading, or other vehicular use area shall be landscaped. The location of such landscaping is at the option of the owner or developer; provided, however, the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  Landscape island. Shall be at least five feet in width and ten feet in length. Each island shall contain one large maturing tree plus shrubs and/or vegetative ground cover to cover the entire area. 
(a)  No more than 20 parking spaces shall be permitted in a continuous row without being interrupted by a landscaped island. 
(b)  Each parking row shall terminate in a landscape island. 
(2)  Median strip. Shall be at least five feet in width. 
(a)  Every fourth row of parking shall be separated by a median strip for landscaping and pedestrian purposes. 
(b)  Every median strip shall contain plantings of one large maturing tree at intervals of 30 to 40 feet, plus shrubs and/or vegetative ground cover to cover the entire area. 
b)  Other requirements. 
(1)  All portions of the landscaping area not planted with trees shall be planted in grass and/or with some other vegetative ground cover; and 
(2)  Parked vehicles may overhang a landscaped area no more than 2½ feet, provided curbing or other wheel stops and installed to ensure no greater overhang or penetration of the landscaped islands. Landscaping, walls, fences, and earthberms shall be located as to prevent their damage and/or destruction by overhanging vehicles. 
D.  Requirements for boundaries adjacent to any residential zoning district and existing residential uses in the general commercial district. 
1.  Required buffer area. 
a)  Minimum width: 20 feet. 
2.  Required buffering materials. 
a)  Buffering materials shall provide an opaque buffer to create a strong impression of a spatial separation and to preclude visual contact. 
b)  Two trees for every 100 linear feet. 
c)  17 shrubs per 100 linear feet. 
d)  All portions of the landscaping area not planted with shrubs and trees or covered by a wall or fence barrier shall be planted in grass and/or with some other vegetative ground cover. 
3.  Alternative 1. Buffering requirements reduced by 25 percent (five feet): 
a)  Minimum width may be reduced by 25 percent or five feet with use of a landscaped earth berm. 
b)  Berms shall be constructed within the property boundary meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  Minimum height: Two feet. 
(2)  Minimum crown width: Two feet. 
(3)  Minimum slope: 2:1. 
4.  Alternative 2. Buffering requirements reduced by 50 percent (ten feet): 
a)  Minimum width may be reduced by 50 percent or ten feet and required number of shrubs reduced to 30 shrubs per 100 linear feet with use of landscaped wall or fence. 
b)  Wall shall be solid and meet the standards for walls and fences . 
c)  Maximum wall height: Six feet. 
d)  Shrubs shall reach one-third of the height of the wall within three years. 
5.  Alternative 3. Buffering requirements reduced by 60 percent (12 feet): 
a)  Minimum width may be reduced by 50 percent or 12 feet and required number of shrubs reduced to 30 shrubs per 100 linear feet with use of landscaped wall or fence, and a planted earth berm. 
b)  Berms shall be constructed within the property boundaries meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  Minimum height: two feet. 
(2)  Minimum crown width: two feet. 
(3)  Minimum slope: 2:1 
c)  Wall shall be solid and meet the standards for walls and fences . 
d)  Maximum wall height: six feet. 
e)  Shrubs shall reach one-third of the height of the wall within three years. 
 
4.7.6.  Tree protection. 
A.  [Requirements.] Refer to chapter 3, section 3.11: tree protection for general tree protection requirements. 
B.  Grand trees. The destruction of any grand tree (24 inches or greater DBH) is prohibited on any parcel of non-exempt land, unless a permit is granted certifying that removal is in compliance with section 3.11[3.20]. 
C.  Protected tree. The destruction of any protected tree (eight inches or greater DBH) is prohibited on any parcel of non-exempt land, unless a permit is granted certifying that removal is in compliance with section 3.11[3.20]. 
4.7.7.  Signage. 
A.  Intent. The purpose of these sign regulations are: to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication; to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment; and to increase the city's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations. 
B.  [Requirements.] Refer to section 3.4[3.17]: signage for general sign requirements. 
C.  [Altering signs prohibited.] No sign, or part thereof, may be altered, constructed, changed, converted, enlarged, or moved unless in conformity with the following requirements. 
D.  Sign area. Shall be measured by height (A) by length (B) of the smallest rectangle that can be drawn to measure all sign elements. Unless otherwise noted, only one side or face of the same sign shall be used in computing sign area. 
E.  Allowed signs. The applicant may select two of the following six choices for a sign type per street frontage: 
1.  Wall sign. 
a)  Maximum size: One square foot per linear foot of the building wall on which the sign is to be placed. 
2.  Window sign. 
a)  Maximum size: 20 percent of the window area. 
3.  Projecting sign. 
a)  Maximum size: 16 square feet for one side. 
b)  Maximum height: No projecting sign shall extend above the roofline. 
c)  Clearance: Eight feet above ground level. 
4.  Awning sign. 
a)  Maximum size: 15 percent of exterior surface of the awning. 
b)  Signs, symbols, or designs may be painted or sewn onto the awning. 
5.  Freestanding sign. 
a)  Maximum size: One square foot for every two feet of street frontage. 
b)  Maximum height: 35 feet. 
c)  Setback. No freestanding sign shall be closer than five feet to an exterior property line. 
d)  No more than one freestanding sign shall be allowed per parcel. 
6.  Directory sign. 
a)  The parcel shall contain no more than one directory sign. 
b)  The maximum sign area shall not exceed three inches by 15 inches for each identified activity, business, firm, or tenant. 
c)  The directory sign may take the form of any sign permitted in the zoning district provided that such sign shall comply with its applicable specification. If the directory sign is a freestanding sign, no other freestanding shall be located on the parcel. 
F.  Prohibited signs. 
1.  Moving signs of any type. 
2.  Signs projecting above the roof line. 
3.  Any sign not listed as being allowed is prohibited. 
G.  Criteria for bonus sign area. To encourage design excellence, the maximum sign areas for the general commercial district may be increased by the percentages as provided herein. A separate bonus is granted for compliance with each of the criteria and the area is cumulative, but the percentage increase is based on the original sign area limitation. 
1.  Wall sign, which consists of individual letters or words, mounted directly on the building surface: 15 percent increase permitted. 
2.  Coordinated signs in shopping centers or any three consecutive separate establishments, all the lettering and background is uniform in style and color: ten percent increase permitted. 
3.  Gas stations that incorporate the price information into the main identification sign face: ten percent increase permitted. 
4.  Sign is not internally illuminated (other than non-flashing neon): 15 percent increase permitted. 
5.  Ground sign is installed in a landscaped planted having an area four times the area of the resultant sign for one sign face: 20 percent increase permitted.  
Sec. 4.8. - Office and Professional District (O&P). 
4.8.1.  Intent. This district is intended to accommodate office, institutional, and residential uses in areas whose character is in transition. It is designed principally for use along major streets dominated by older houses to help ameliorate the consequences of change impacting these areas. 
4.8.2.  General. 
A.  Minimum lot size: 6,000 square feet. 
B.  Maximum lot coverage: Building footprint shall not exceed 70 percent of the lot coverage. 
C.  Minimum floor area: 1,200 square feet. 
D.  Setbacks: 
Front: 20 feet minimum. 
Side: Five feet minimum on corner lots; 15 feet. minimum when contiguous to single-family residential; none elsewhere. 
Rear: 15 feet. 
 
E.  Maximum building height: 35 feet. Water towers, transmission towers, chimneys, flag poles, masts and aerials are permitted to exceed height limits, provided evidence from appropriate authorities is submitted to the effect that such building or structure will not interfere with any airport approach zones or flight patterns. 
4.8.3.  Uses. 
A.  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the O&P district. 
1.  Office/commercial. The following office and commercial uses are permitted in the O&P district provided that all specified standards are met. 
a)  Use list. 
(1)  Office. 
(2)  Personal services. 
(3)  Business services. 
(4)  General retail. 
(5)  General commercial. 
b)  Standards. 
Refer to standards in section 4.9.3. 
2.  Single-family residential. Single-family residential uses are permitted in the O&P district provided that all standards of the R-3 district are met. 
3.  Multifamily and duplex residential. Attached or detached multifamily residential uses are permitted in the O&P district provided that all standards of the R-3 district are met. 
(1)  Minimum lot area per housing unit: 2,500 square feet. 
(2)  Parking requirement: two spaces per unit. 
4.  Institutional. The following institutional uses are permitted in the O&P district. 
a)  Use list. 
(1)  Church. 
(2)  Government. 
(3)  School. 
5.  Utility. Utility uses are permitted in the O&P district provided that all specified standards are met. 
a)  Standards. 
(1)  Public utility or communication tower, setback a minimum of one foot for each one foot in height. 
6.  Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage uses are permitted in the O&P district provided that all specified standards are met. 
a)  Standards. 
(1)  The storage shall be either an accessory use on the same lot as or a primary use for a lot providing that the primary business utilizing the storage is located within the O&P district. 
(2)  Outdoor storage shall not front on any street and shall be screened from the view of surrounding property owners. 
(3)  Any tires stored shall be covered by a roofed structure so as not to allow for the accumulation of water inside the tires. 
(4)  No more than two vehicles for salvage may be stored on any lot. 
(5)  Tractor trailers or other large vehicles may not be used as permanent storage buildings. 
7.  Mixed uses. A mixture of the above uses are permitted provided that these uses meet the specified standards for that use in addition to the following standards: 
a)  Standards. 
(1)  When residential uses are attached to businesses or institutional uses, where business and residential portions of the building are located on different floors, business/commercial uses shall occupy the floors below the residential uses to preserve a residential atmosphere for the residents above. 
(2)  When residential uses are attached to businesses or institutional uses, business and residential portions of the mixed use building must be separated either by a soundproof concrete or masonry wall or two framewalls at least two feet apart, each insulated or otherwise soundproofed with the intervening space unoccupied except for utility lines, heating and air conditioning ducts, and similar devices not producing noise or vibration or requiring regular access. 
B.  Accessory uses. Permitted accessory uses and structures shall be limited to the following and any additional uses and structures the zoning administrator finds are similar to those listed in scope, size, and impact and which are otherwise in compliance with this ordinance. 
1.  Residential. 
a)  Private greenhouse. 
b)  Private swimming pool. 
c)  Private tennis or outdoor recreational court. 
d)  Storage shed for personal, non-commercial use. 
e)  Studios and workshops without outdoor display for personal use. 
f)  Utility substation. 
g)  Public utility or communication tower, setback a minimum of one foot for each one foot in height. 
2.  Commercial. 
a)  Storage shed. 
b)  Utility substation. 
c)  Public utility or communication tower, setback a minimum of one foot for each one foot in height. 
3.  Standards. The following standards apply to accessory uses or structures listed as permitted in [subsections B]1 and 2 above: 
a)  Accessory uses or structures shall be located on the same lot as the principal structure or use. 
b)  Accessory structures shall be included in the calculation of total lot coverage. 
c)  Unless otherwise noted, no accessory use or structure shall be located in a required yard. 
d)  No accessory use shall create a nuisance or hazard. 
e)  No accessory use shall be established until the principal use is established. 
f)  No more than two accessory uses are allowed in any zoning district. 
C.  Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited in the O&P district. 
1.  Mobile homes/manufactured homes. 
2.  Auto repair garage. 
3.  Gas station. 
4.  Sexually oriented businesses. 
5.  Any use not listed as being permitted is prohibited. 
4.8.4.  Parking. 
A.  Refer to general parking provisions in chapter 3, section 3.12[3.21]: parking. 
B.  Parking areas on adjacent lots should be connected. 
4.8.5.  Landscaping. 
A.  Intent. Landscaping is required in the O&P district to provide for buffering of adjacent zones, sound and light abatement, and screening of commercial uses, commercial parking, or residential parking with more than eight spaces. 
B.  Requirements for parking area borders parallel to adjacent property lines. 
1.  Buffer strip shall be at least five feet in width and shall not block the line of site for oncoming traffic at street frontage. 
2.  A garden wall, opaque fence, or hedge [min. three feet in height] shall be installed along any adjacent property line. 
3.  Two small maturing trees, 12 ornamental shrubs, and landscaped grass areas are required every 100 linear feet. 
C.  Street trees. 
1.  Where appropriate, street trees shall be planted along all public streets with permission of the appropriate jurisdiction. Street trees shall be large maturing canopy species such as Silver Maple, Red Maple, or Live Oak. 
4.8.6.  Tree protection. 
D.  [Requirements.] Refer to chapter 3, section 3.11[3.20]: tree protection for general tree protection requirements. 
E.  Grand trees. The destruction of any grand tree (24 inches or greater DBH) is prohibited on any parcel of non-exempt land, unless a permit is granted certifying that removal is in compliance with section 3.11[3.20]. 
F.  Protected trees. The destruction of any protected tree (eight inches or greater DBH) is prohibited on any parcel of non-exempt land, unless a permit is granted certifying that removal is in compliance with section 3.11[3.20]. 
4.8.7.  Signage. 
A.  [Maintenance, durability.] Materials employed for construction of sign shall be durable and weather resistant, and all signs shall be maintained in good repair. 
B.  Sign area. Shall be measured by height (A) by length (B) of the smallest rectangle that can be drawn to measure all sign elements. Unless otherwise noted, only one side or face of the same sign shall be used in computing sign area. 
C.  Allowed signs. The applicant may select one of the following one of the four choices for a sign type per street frontage: 
1.  Wall sign. 
a)  Maximum size: 20 square feet or 15 percent of the front wall area, whichever is greater. 
2.  Window sign. 
a)  Maximum size: 30 percent of the window area. 
3.  Projecting sign. 
a)  Maximum size: Six square feet for one side. 
b)  Clearance: Eight feet above ground level. 
 
4.  Awning sign. 
a)  Maximum size. Individual letters shall not exceed ten inches in height. 
b)  Signs, symbols, or designs may be painted or sewn on to any awning. 
5.  Ground sign. 
a)  Monument signs are prohibited along main streets. 
b)  Maximum size: 20 square feet per sign face. 
c)  Maximum height: 35 feet from finished grade. 
D.  Secondary signs. The following signs shall be permitted along in conjunction with the allowed sign: 
1.  Window or projecting sign no larger than six inches by 18 inches bearing business identification in addition to a wall or awning sign. 
2.  One sign per business occupying the upper floors of a building no larger than six inches by 18 inches. 
E.  Prohibited signs. 
1.  Moving signs of any type other than barber poles. 
2.  Internally illuminated other than non-flashing neon. 
3.  Signs projecting above the roof line. 
4.  Roof signs. 
5.  Any sign not listed as being allowed is prohibited.  
Sec. 4.9. - Light Industrial District (LI). 
4.9.1.  Intent. The purpose of the light industrial and office district is to accommodate a mix of similar and compatible light industrial uses, industrial-related business uses, and related commercial uses. The LI district shall have limited traffic and aesthetic impacts on surrounding properties, supporting public facilities, and utilities. The LI district is intended to generate development through the use of creative design, which will enhance the character of the surrounding area. 
4.9.2.  General. 
A.  Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet. 
B.  Maximum lot coverage: Building footprint shall not exceed 50 percent of the lot coverage. 
C.  Maximum height: 50 feet. 
D.  Setbacks: 
1.  Front: 20 feet on a minor street, 25 feet on a major street. 
2.  Side: ten feet, minimum. 
3.  Rear: 20 feet, minimum. 
E.  Maximum percent impervious surface: 85 percent. 
F.  Trash containers shall be located in the parking area and shall be screened from the right-of-way. 
G.  Mechanical equipment at ground level should be placed on the parking lot side of building, away from buildings on adjacent sites, and screened from view of public streets and residential uses. 
 
4.9.3.  Uses. 
A.  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the LI district. 
1.  Wholesale business. 
2.  General commercial. 
3.  Business services. 
4.  Personal services. 
5.  Office. 
6.  Manufacturing services. 
7.  Public utility or communication tower, setback a minimum of one foot for each one foot in height. 
8.  Residential uses provided they meet the requirements of the R-3 district. 
B.  Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited in the LI district: 
1.  Mobile homes/manufactured homes. 
C.  Accessory uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the LI district as an accessory to the primary use. These uses shall meet minimum setbacks: 
1.  Outdoor storage. 
2.  Outdoor sales. 
Outdoor storage: Outdoor storage uses are permitted in the LI district provided that all specified standards are met. 
a)  Standards. 
(1)  The storage shall be either an accessory use on the same lot as or a primary use for a lot providing that the primary business utilizing the storage is located within the LI district. 
(6)  Outdoor storage shall not front on any street and shall be screened from view of surrounding properties. 
(7)  Any tires stored shall be covered by a roofed structure so as not to allow for the accumulation of water inside the tires. 
(8)  No more than four vehicles for salvage may be stored on any lot. 
(9)  Tractor trailers or other large vehicles may not be used as permanent storage buildings. 
D.  Conditional use. The following uses shall be permitted in the LI district as a conditional use provided that the standards provided are met. 
1.  Sexually oriented businesses. 
a)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  Although there are no known sexually oriented businesses currently operating in Clinton, it is possible, and probable, that at some point one or more would desire to locate in Clinton and it is in the interests of the health, safety, and welfare of the patrons of such businesses, as well as the citizens of Clinton, to provide certain minimum standards and regulations for sexually oriented businesses, as well as the operators and employees of such businesses. 
(2)  Sexually oriented businesses generate secondary effects, which are detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare. Additionally, sexually oriented businesses are frequently used for unlawful sexual activities, including public sexual indecency, prostitution, and sexual encounters of a casual nature. Such businesses are of particular concern to the community when they are located in close proximity to each other, or close to schools, churches or parks and playgrounds. 
(3)  The concern over sexually transmitted diseases is a legitimate health concern of Clinton, which demands reasonable regulation of these businesses in order to protect the health and well-being of our citizens. 
(4)  The location of sexually oriented businesses close to residential areas diminishes property values and leads to conditions that give rise to crime in residential neighborhoods. Many studies performed in other communities indicate conclusively that property crimes and sexual crimes increase significantly in neighborhoods in which such a business is located. 
(5)  It is not the intent of this section to suppress any speech activities protected by the First Amendment or to place any impermissible burden on any constitutionally protected expression or expressive conduct by the enactment or enforcement of the ordinance. Rather, it is the intent of Clinton City Council to enact a "content neutral regulation" which addresses the secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses. 
b)  Signage. 
(1)  Freestanding signs are prohibited. 
(2)  Business shall not display a sign or advertising visible from public streets or sidewalks or outside the premises that is photographic, pictorial, or illustrative. 
c)  Required buffers between residential areas or residentially zoned areas and business. 
(1)  Required buffer area: 
(a)  Minimum width: 30 feet. 
(2)  Required buffering materials: 
(a)  Buffering materials shall provide an opaque buffer to create a strong impression of a spatial separation and to preclude visual contact. 
(i)  Seven trees for every 100 linear feet. 
(ii)  50 shrubs per 100 linear feet. 
(iii)  All portions of the landscaping area not planted with shrubs and trees or covered by a wall or fence barrier shall be planted in grass and/or with some other vegetative ground cover. 
(3)  Berms shall be constructed within the property boundaries meeting the following requirements: 
(a)  Minimum height: Two feet. 
(b)  Minimum crown width: Two feet. 
(c)  Minimum slope: 2:1 
(4)  Solid walls shall be constructed and meet the standards for walls and fences set forth in section 3.2. 
(a)  Maximum wall height: Six ft. 
(b)  Shrubs shall reach one-third of the height of the wall within three years. 
(5)  No free access shall be permitted between adjacent residential area and the parcel. 
4.9.4.  Parking. 
A.  General requirements. See general parking requirements in chapter 3 section 3.12[3.21]. 
B.  Required parking spaces. 
Office/personal services/business services 	1 per 300 square feet 
General retail/general commercial 	1 per 250 square feet 
Wholesale business/manufacturing services 	1 for each I employees a maximum employment on a single shift plus 1 space for each company vehicle operating from premises 
Warehouse 	1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 space per 4,000 square feet of gross floor area 
Mini-warehouse 	1 per 10 storage cubicles, plus 2 spaces for employees 
All other uses 	1 per 250 square feet 
 
C.  Required loading spaces. One space for every 30,000 square feet of floor area, or a portion thereof with a maximum of two spaces. 
4.9.5.  Landscaping. 
A.  General requirements. 
1.  Additions, expansions, or changes, which increase a business by 40 percent of the gross floor area, shall be in compliance with the landscaping requirements. 
2.  If more than one landscaping/buffering requirement overlaps, the more stringent regulation shall be applied. 
3.  See landscaping requirements in chapter 3 section 3.10[3.19]: landscaping. 
B.  Requirements for parking areas. 
1.  Peripheral. 
a.  Required landscaping area. At least five feet in depth shall be located between the abutting property lines and the parking, loading, or other vehicular use area, except where permitted driveway openings area to be provided. 
b.  Required landscaping materials. Choose one: 
1.  One large maturing tree shall be planted for each 50 linear feet of the landscaping area and one small maturing tree or shrub of at least three feet in height shall be planted every ten linear feet within the landscape; or 
2.  A combination of trees, hedge, other durable landscape material or approved wall, fence or earthberm may be utilized to form the continuous landscape element of at least three feet in height. 
c.  Other requirements. 
1.  All portions of the landscaping area not planted with shrubs and trees or covered by a wall or fence barrier shall be planted in grass and/or with some other vegetative ground cover; and 
2.  Parked vehicles may overhang a landscaped area no more than 2½ feet, provided curbing or other wheel stops are installed to ensure no greater overhang or penetration of the landscaped islands. Landscaping, walls, fences, and earthberms shall be located as to prevent their damage and/or destruction by overhanging vehicles. 
2.  Interior. 
a.  Required landscaping area. Five percent of the interior of any parking, loading, or other vehicular use area shall be landscaped. The location of such landscaping is at the option of the owner or developer; provided, however, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  Landscape island. Shall be at least five feet in width and ten feet in length. Each island shall contain one large maturing tree plus shrubs and/or vegetative ground cover to cover the entire area. 
a)  No more than 20 parking spaces shall be permitted in a continuous row without being interrupted by a landscaped island. 
b)  Each parking row shall terminate in a landscape island. 
2.  Median Strip. Shall be at least five feet in width. 
a)  Every forth row of parking shall be separated by a median strip for landscaping and pedestrian purposes. 
b)  Every median strip shall contain plantings of one large maturing tree at intervals of 30 to 40 feet, plus shrubs and/or vegetative ground cover to cover the entire area. 
b.  Other requirements: 
1.  All portions of the landscaping area not planted with trees shall be planted in grass and/or with some other vegetative ground cover; and 
2.  Parked vehicles may overhang a landscaped area no more than 2½ feet, provided curbing or other wheel stops and installed to ensure no greater overhang or penetration of the landscaped islands. Landscaping, walls, fences, and earthberms shall he located as to prevent their damage and/or destruction by overhanging vehicles. 
C.  [Requirements for boundaries.] Requirements for boundaries adjacent to any residential zoning district and existing residential uses in the Light Industrial District. 
1.  Required buffer area. 
a.  Minimum depth: 25 feet. 
2.  Required buffering materials. 
a.  Buffering materials shall provide an opaque buffer to create a strong impression of a spatial separation and to preclude visual contact. 
b.  Five trees for every 100 linear feet. 
c.  17 shrubs per 100 linear feet. 
d.  All portions of the landscaping area not planted with shrubs and trees or covered by a wall or fence barrier shall be planted in grass and/or with some other vegetative ground cover. 
3.  Alternative 1. Buffering requirements reduced by 25 percent (five feet): 
a.  Minimum width may be reduced by 25 percent or five feet with use of a landscaped earth berm. 
b.  Berms shall be constructed within the property boundary meeting the following requirements: 
1.  Minimum height: Two feet. 
2.  Minimum crown width: Two feet. 
3.  Minimum Slope: 2:1. 
4.  Alternative 2. Buffering requirements reduced by 50 percent (ten feet): 
a.  Minimum width may be reduced by 50 percent or ten feet and required number of shrubs reduced to 30 shrubs per 100 linear feet with use of landscaped wall or fence. 
b.  Wall shall be solid and meet the standards for walls and fences. 
c.  Maximum wall height: Six feet. 
d.  Shrubs shall reach one-third of the height of the wall within three years. 
5.  Alternative 3. Buffering requirements reduced by 60 percent (12 feet): 
a.  Minimum width may be reduced by 50 percent or 12 feet and required number of shrubs reduced to 30 shrubs per 100 linear feet with use of landscaped wall or fence, and a planted earth berm. 
b.  Berms shall be constructed within the property boundaries meeting the following requirements: 
1.  Minimum height: Two feet. 
2.  Minimum crown width: Two feet. 
3.  Minimum slope: 2:1. 
c.  Wall shall be solid and meet the standards for walls and fences set forth in section 3.2. 
d.  Maximum wall height: Six feet. 
e.  Shrubs shall reach one-third of the height of the wall within three years. 
 
4.9.6.  Tree protection. 
A.  [Requirements.] Refer to chapter 3, section 3.11[3.20]: tree protection for general tree protection requirements. 
B.  Grand trees. The destruction of any grand tree (24 inches or greater DBH) is prohibited on any parcel of non-exempt land, unless a permit is granted certifying that removal is in compliance with section 3.11[3.20]. 
C.  Protected trees. The destruction of any protected tree (eight inches or greater DBH) is prohibited on any parcel of non-exempt land, unless a permit is granted certifying that removal is in compliance with section 3.11[3.20]. 
4.9.7.  Signage. 
A.  Intent. The purpose of these sign regulations are: to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication; to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment; and to increase the city's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations. 
B.  [Requirements.] Refer to section 3.4[3.17]: signage for general sign requirements. 
C.  [Altering sign prohibited.] No sign, or part thereof, may be altered, constructed, changed, converted, enlarged, or moved unless in conformity with the following requirements. 
D.  Sign area. Shall be measured by height (A) by length (B) of the smallest rectangle that can be drawn to measure all sign elements. Unless otherwise noted, only one side or face of the same sign shall be used in computing sign area. 
E.  Allowed signs. The applicant may select two of the following six choices for a sign type per street frontage: 
1.  Wall sign. 
a)  Maximum size: One square foot per lineal foot of the building wall on which the sign is to be placed. 
2.  Window sign. 
a)  Maximum size: 20 percent of the window area. 
3.  Projecting sign. 
a)  Maximum size: 16 square feet for one side. 
b)  Maximum height: No projecting sign shall extend above the roofline. 
c)  Clearance: Eight feet above ground level. 
4.  Awning sign. 
a)  Maximum size: 15 percent of exterior surface of the awning. 
b)  Signs, symbols, or designs may be painted or sewn onto the awning. 
5.  Freestanding sign. 
a)  Maximum size: 12 square feet. 
b)  Maximum height: 35 feet. 
c)  Setback: No freestanding sign shall be closer than five feet to an exterior property line. 
d)  No more than one freestanding sign shall be allowed per parcel. 
6.  Directory sign. 
a)  The parcel shall contain no more than one directory sign. 
b)  The maximum sign area shall not exceed three inches by 15 inches for each identified activity, business, firm, or tenant. 
c)  The directory sign may take the form of any sign permitted in the zoning district provided that such sign shall comply with its applicable specification. If the directory sign is a freestanding sign, no other freestanding shall be located on the parcel. 
F.  Prohibited signs. 
1.  Moving signs of any type. 
2.  Signs projecting above the roof line. 
3.  Any sign not listed as being allowed is prohibited.  
Sec. 4.10. - Industrial District (I-1). 
4.10.1.  Intent. The purpose of the industrial district is to accommodate manufacturing businesses within the city limits. The I-1 district shall have limited traffic and aesthetic impacts on surrounding properties and on supporting public facilities and utilities. The I-1 district is intended to generate development through the use of industrial parks and clustering. 
4.10.2.  General. 
A.  Minimum lot size: 10,000 sq. ft. 
B.  Maximum height: 60 feet. 
C.  Setbacks: 
1.  Adjacent to roads. No building, outdoor storage, areas for collection of refuse, or loading area shall be permitted closer than 25 feet to the right-of-way of any road. No parking, outdoor storage, areas for collection of refuse, or loading space shall be permitted in areas between buildings and streets where such uses are visible from the road. 
2.  Adjacent to agricultural and residential uses/districts. No buildings, outdoor storage, areas for collection of refuse, or loading area shall be permitted closer than 20 feet to any agricultural district or any existing or zoned residential district. No parking shall be permitted closer than 20 feet to any such districts and uses. 
3.  Adjacent to other nonresidential districts. 15 feet for minimum for buildings, parking, outdoor storage, and loading areas. 
D.  Minimum distance between buildings: 30 feet. 
E.  Maximum percent impervious service: 85 percent. 
F.  Trash containers shall be located in the parking area and shall be screened from the right-of-way. 
 
G.  Mechanical equipment at ground level should be placed on the parking lot side of building, away from buildings on adjacent sites, and screened from view of public streets and residential uses. 
4.10.3.  Uses. 
A.  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the I-1 district. 
1.  Wholesale business. 
2.  General commercial. 
3.  Business services. 
4.  Personal services. 
5.  Office. 
6.  Manufacturing services. 
7.  Public utility or communication tower, setback a minimum of one foot for each one foot in height. 
8.  Residential uses provided they meet the requirements of the R-3 district. 
B.  Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited in the I-1 district. 
1.  Mobile homes/manufactured homes. 
C.  Accessory uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the I-1 district as an accessory to the primary use. 
1.  Outdoor storage. 
2.  Outdoor sales. 
Outdoor storage: Outdoor storage uses are permitted in the I-1 district provided that all specified standards are met. 
a)  Standards: 
(1)  The storage shall be either an accessory use on the same lot as or a primary use for a lot providing that the primary business utilizing the storage is located within the I-1 district. 
(2)  Outdoor storage shall not front on any street and shall be screened from the view of surrounding property owners. 
(3)  Any tires stored shall be covered by a roofed structure so as not to allow for the accumulation of water inside the tires. 
(4)  No more than four vehicles for salvage may be stored on any lot. 
(5)  Tractor trailers or other large vehicles may not be used as permanent storage buildings. 
4.10.4.  Parking. 
A.  General requirements. See general parking requirements in chapter 3 section 3.12[3.21]. 
B.  Required parking spaces. 
Office/personal services/business services 	1 per 300 square feet 
General retail/general commercial 	1 per 250 square feet 
Wholesale business/manufacturing services 	1 for each 1 employees at maximum employment on a single shift plus 1 space for each company vehicle operating from premises 
Warehouse 	1 per employee on the largest shift, plus 1 space per 4,000 square feet of gross floor area 
Mini-warehouse 	1 per 10 storage cubicles, plus 2 spaces for employees 
All other uses 	1 per 250 square feet 
 
C.  Required loading spaces. One space for every 30,000 square feet of floor area, or a portion thereof with a maximum of two spaces. 
4.10.5.  Landscaping. 
A.  General requirements. 
1.  Additions, expansions, or changes which increase a business by 40 percent of the gross floor area shall be in compliance with the landscaping requirements. 
2.  If more than one landscaping/buffering requirement overlaps, the more stringent regulation shall be applied. 
3.  See landscaping requirements in chapter 3 section 3.10[3.19]: Landscaping. 
B.  Requirements for parking areas. 
1.  Peripheral. 
a)  Required landscaping area. At least 15 feet in depth shall be located between the abutting property lines and the parking, loading, or other vehicular use area, except where permitted driveway openings area to be provided. 
b)  Required landscaping materials. Choose one: 
(1)  One large maturing tree shall be planted for each 50 linear feet of the landscaping area and one small maturing tree or shrub of at least three feet in height shall be planted every ten linear feet within the landscape; or 
(2)  A combination of trees, hedge, other durable landscape material or approved wall, fence or earthberm may be utilized to form the continuous landscape element of at least three feet in height. 
c)  Other requirements. 
(1)  All portions of the landscaping area not planted with shrubs and trees or covered by a wall or fence barrier shall be planted in grass and/or with some other vegetative ground cover; and 
(2)  Parked vehicles may overhang a landscaped area no more than 2½ feet, provided curbing or other wheel stops are installed to ensure no greater overhang or penetration of the landscaped islands. Landscaping, walls, fences, and earthberms shall be located as to prevent their damage and/or destruction by overhanging vehicles. 
2.  Interior. 
a)  Required landscaping area. Five percent of the interior of any parking, loading, or other vehicular use area shall be landscaped. The location of such landscaping is at the option of the owner or developer; provided, however, the following standards shall apply; 
(1)  Landscape island. Shall be at least five feet in width and ten feet in length. Each island shall contain one large maturing tree plus shrubs and/or vegetative ground cover to cover the entire area. 
(a)  No more than 20 parking spaces shall be permitted in a continuous row without being interrupted by a landscaped island. 
(b)  Each parking row shall terminate in a landscape island. 
(2)  Median strip. Shall be at least five feet in width. 
(a)  Every forth row of parking shall be separated by a median strip for landscaping and pedestrian purposes. 
(b)  Every median strip shall contain plantings of one large maturing tree at intervals of 30 to 40 feet, plus shrubs and/or vegetative ground cover to cover the entire area. 
b)  Other requirements. 
(1)  All portions of the landscaping area not planted with trees shall be planted in grass and/or with some other vegetative ground cover; and 
(2)  Parked vehicles may overhang a landscaped area no more than 2½ feet, provided curbing or other wheel stops and installed to ensure no greater overhang or penetration of the landscaped islands. Landscaping, walls, fences, and earthberms shall be located as to prevent their damage and/or destruction by overhanging vehicles. 
C.  Requirements for boundaries adjacent to any neighborhood residential zoning district and existing residential uses in the Industrial District. 
1.  Required buffer area. 
a)  Minimum depth: 25 feet. 
2.  Required buffering materials. 
a)  One large maturing tree shall be planted for each 50 linear feet of the landscaping area and one small maturing tree or shrub of at least three feet in height shall be planted every ten linear feet within the landscape. 
b)  All portions of the landscaping area not planted with shrubs and trees or covered by a wall or fence barrier shall be planted in grass and/or with some other vegetative ground cover. 
4.10.6.  Tree Protection. 
A.  [Requirements.] Refer to chapter 3, section 3.11[3.20]: tree protection for general tree protection requirements. 
B.  Grand Trees. The destruction of any grand tree (24 inches or greater DBH) is prohibited on any parcel of non-exempt land, unless a permit is granted certifying that removal is in compliance with section 3.11[3.20]. 
C.  Protected Trees. The destruction of any protected tree (eight inches or greater DBH) is prohibited on any parcel of non-exempt land, unless a permit is granted certifying that removal is in compliance with section 3.11[3.20]. 
4.10.7.  Signage. 
A.  Intent. The purpose of these sign regulations are: to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication; to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment; and to increase the city's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations. 
B.  [Requirements.] Refer to section 3.4[3.17]: signage for general sign requirements. 
C.  [Altering sign prohibited.] No sign, or part thereof, may be altered, constructed, changed, converted, enlarged, or moved unless in conformity with the following requirements. 
D.  Sign area. Shall be measured by height (A) by length (B) of the smallest rectangle that can be drawn to measure all sign elements. Unless otherwise noted, only one side or face of the same sign shall be used in computing sign area. 
E.  Allowed signs. The applicant may select two of the following six choices for a sign type per street frontage: 
1.  Wall sign. 
a)  Maximum size: one square foot per lineal foot of the building wall on which the sign is to be placed. 
2.  Window sign. 
a)  Maximum size: 20 percent of the window area. 
 
3.  Projecting sign. 
a)  Maximum size: 16 square feet for one side. 
b)  Maximum height: No projecting sign shall extend above the roofline. 
c)  Clearance: Eight feet above ground level. 
4.  Awning sign. 
a)  Maximum size: 15 percent of exterior surface of the awning. 
b)  Signs, symbols, or designs may be painted or sewn onto the awning. 
5.  Ground sign. 
a)  Maximum size: 45 square feet for one side. 
b)  Maximum height: 3½ feet. 
6.  Directory sign. 
a)  The parcel shall contain no more than one directory sign. 
b)  The maximum sign area shall not exceed three inches by 15 inches for each identified activity, business, firm, or tenant. 
c)  The directory sign may take the form of any sign permitted in the zoning district provided that such sign shall comply with its applicable specification. If the directory sign is a freestanding sign, no other freestanding shall be located on the parcel. 
7.  Freestanding sign. 
a)  Maximum size: One square foot for every three feet of street frontage. 
b)  Maximum height: 35 feet. 
F.  Prohibited signs. 
1.  Moving signs of any type. 
2.  Signs projecting above the roof line. 
3.  Any sign not listed as being allowed is prohibited.  
Sec. 4.10.5. - Industrial District (I-2). 
4.10.5.1.  Intent. The purpose of the industrial district is to accommodate manufacturing businesses within the city limits. The (I-2) district shall have limited traffic and aesthetic impacts on surrounding properties and on supporting public facilities and utilities. The (I-2) district is intended to generate development through the use of industrial parks and clustering. 
4.10.5.2.  General. 
A.  Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet. 
B.  Setbacks: 
1.  Adjacent to roads. No building, outdoor storage, areas for collection of refuse, or loading area shall be permitted closer than 25 feet to the right-of-way of any road. 
2.  Adjacent to agricultural and residential uses/districts. No building, outdoor storage, areas for collection of refuse, or loading area shall be permitted closer than 20 feet to any agricultural district or zoned residential district. No parking shall be permitted closer than 20 feet to any such districts and uses. 
3.  Adjacent to other nonresidential districts. 15 feet for minimum for buildings, parking, outdoor storage, and loading areas. 
C.  Maximum percent impervious service: 85 percent. 
D.  Trash containers shall be located in the parking area and shall be screened from the right-of-way. 
4.10.5.3  Uses. 
A.  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the I-2 district. 
1.  Wholesale business. 
2.  General commercial. 
3.  Business services. 
4.  Personal services. 
5.  Office. 
6.  Manufacturing services. 
7.  Public utility or communication tower, setback a minimum of one foot for each one foot in height. 
8.  Government buildings. 
B.  Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited in the I-2 district: 
1.  Mobile homes/manufactured homes. 
C.  Accessory uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the I-2 district as an accessory to the primary use: 
1.  Outdoor storage. 
2.  Outdoor sales. 
Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage uses are permitted in the I-2 district provided that all specified standards are met. 
a)  Standards. 
(1)  The storage shall be either an accessory use on the same lot as or a primary use for a lot providing that the primary business utilizing the storage is located within the I-2 district. 
(2)  Outdoor storage shall not front on any street and shall be screened from the view of surrounding property owners. 
(3)  Any tires stored shall be covered by a roofed structure so as not to allow for the accumulation of water inside the tires. 
(4)  No more than four vehicles for salvage may be stored on any lot. 
(5)  Tractor trailers or other large vehicles may not be used as permanent storage buildings. 
4.10.5.4.  Parking. 
A.  General requirements. See general parking requirements in chapter 3 section 3.12[3.21]. 
B.  [Adjacent lots.] Whenever possible, parking areas on adjacent lots shall be connected. 
C.  Required parking spaces. 
Office/personal service/business services 	1 per 300 square feet 
General retail/ general commercial 	1 per 250 square feet 
Wholesale business/manufacturing 
services/distribution - warehouse 	1 for each 1 employees at maximum employment on a single shift plus 1 space for each company vehicle operating from premises 
Mini-warehouse 	1 per 10 storage cubicles, plus 2 spaces for employees 
All other uses 	1 per 250 square feet 
 
4.10.5.5.  Landscaping. 
1.  General requirements. 
1.  Additions, expansions, or changes which increase a business by 40 percent of the gross floor area shall be in compliance with the landscaping requirements. 
2.  If more than one landscaping/buffering requirement overlaps, the more stringent regulation shall be applied. 
3.  See landscaping requirements in chapter 3 section 3.10[3.19]: landscaping. 
B.  Requirements for parking areas. 
1.  Peripheral. 
a)  Required landscaping area. At least 15 feet in depth shall be located between the abutting property lines and the parking, loading, or other vehicular use area, except where permitted driveway openings are to be provided. 
b)  Required landscaping materials. Choose one: 
1.  One tree shall be planted for each 50 linear feet of the landscaping area and one small maturing tree or shrub of at least three feet in height shall be planted every ten linear feet within the landscape; or 
2.  A combination of trees, hedge, other durable material or approved wall, fence or earth berm may be utilized to form the continuous landscape element of at least three feet in height. 
c)  Other requirements. 
(1)  All portions of the landscaping area not planted with shrubs and trees shall be planted in grass and/or with some other vegetative ground cover. 
2.  Interior. 
A)  Required landscaping area. Five percent of the interior of any parking, loading, or other vehicular use area shall be landscaped. The location of such landscaping is at the option of the owner or developer; provided, however, the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  Landscape island. Shall be at least five feet in width and ten feet in length. Each island shall contain one large maturing tree plus shrubs and/or vegetative ground cover to cover the entire area. 
(a)  No more than 20 parking spaces shall be permitted in a continuous row without being interrupted by a landscaped island. 
(b)  Each parking row shall terminate in a landscape island. 
(2)  Median strip. Shall be at least five feet in width. 
(a)  Every forth row of parking shall be separated by a median strip for landscaping and pedestrian purposes. 
(b)  Every median strip shall contain planting of one large maturing tree at intervals of 30 to 40 feet, plus shrubs and/or vegetative ground cover to cover the entire area. 
B)  Other requirements. 
(1)  All portions of the landscaping area not planted with trees shall be planted in grass and/or with some other vegetative ground cover. 
C.  [Requirements for boundaries.] Requirements for boundaries adjacent to any neighborhood residential zoning district and existing residential uses in the industrial district. 
1.  Required buffer area: 
a)  Minimum depth: 25 feet. 
2.  Required buffering materials: 
1.  One tree shall be planted for each 50 linear feet of the landscaping area and one small maturing tree or shrub of at least three feet in height shall be planted every ten linear feet within the landscape. 
2.  All portions of the landscaping area not planted with shrubs and trees shall be planted in grass and/or with some other vegetative ground cover. 
4.10.5.6.  Signage. 
A.  Intent. The purpose of these sign regulations are: to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communications; to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment; and to increase the city's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the possible adverse of signs on nearby public and private property; and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations. 
B.  [Requirements.] Refer to section 3.4[3.17]: signage for general sign requirements. 
C.  [Altering sign prohibited.] No sign, or part thereof, may be altered, constructed, changed, converted, enlarged, or moved unless in conformity with the following requirements. 
D.  Sign area. Shall be measured by height by length of the smallest rectangle that can be drawn to measure all sign elements. Unless otherwise noted, only one side or face of the same sign shall be used in computing sign area. 
E.  Allowed signs. The applicant may select two of the following six choices for a sign type per street frontage: 
1.  Wall sign. 
a)  Maximum size: One square foot per linear foot of the building wall on which the sign is to be placed. 
2.  Window sign. 
a)  Maximum size: 20 percent of the window area. 
3.  Projecting sign. 
a)  Maximum size: 16 square feet for one side. 
b)  Maximum height: No projecting sign shall extend above the roofline. 
b)  Clearance: Eight feet above ground level. 
4.  Awning sign. 
a)  Maximum size: 15 percent of exterior surface of the awning. 
b)  Signs, symbols, or designs may be painted or sewn on to any awning. 
5.  Ground sign. 
a)  Maximum size: 45 square feet for one side. 
b)  Maximum height: 5½ feet. 
6.  Directory sign. 
a)  The parcel shall contain no more than one directory sign. 
b)  The maximum sign area shall not exceed three inches by 15 inches for each identified activity, business, firm, or tenant. 
c)  The directory sign may take the form of any sign permitted in the zoning district provided that such sign shall comply with its applicable specification. If the directory sign is a freestanding sign, no other freestanding shall be located on the parcel. 
F.  Prohibited signs. 
1.  Moving signs of any type. 
2.  Signs projecting above the roof line. 
3.  Any sign not listed as being allowed is prohibited.  
Sec. 4.11. - Planned Development District (PD). 
4.11.1.  Intent. The intent of the Planned Development District is to encourage flexibility in the development of land in order to promote its most appropriate use; to improve the design, character, and quality of new development; to facilitate the provision of streets and utilities; and to preserve the natural and scenic features of open areas. 
4.11.2.  General. 
A.  Any area may apply to be zoned PD if one or more of the following conditions are met: 
1.  Separate land uses, which would not otherwise be permitted to locate within the same zoning district, are proposed for development on one or more adjacent parcels. 
2.  Exceptions or variations to the existing regulations are essential for the project in terms of site, design, or dimensional requirements. 
B.  Minimum parcel size: 2.5 acres. 
C.  Minimum lot depth: 200 feet. 
D.  Lot shall adjoin or have direct access to at least one major street. 
E.  The site shall be in one ownership, or if in several ownerships, the application for amendment to the zoning chapter shall be filed jointly by all of the owners. 
4.11.3.  Uses. 
A.  Permitted uses. The following uses or combination of uses shall be considered. 
1.  Any use proposed by the developer and considered by the planning commission and city council as being compatible to other nearby uses within and beyond the district may be permitted in such district, upon approval by the planning commission and city council. A listing of permitted uses within a particular PD district shall be adopted as part of the regulations applying to that district. Thereafter, the uses permitted in the district shall be restricted to those listed, approved and adopted. 
B.  Prohibited uses. The following uses or combination of uses shall not be considered in the PD district. 
1.  Sexually oriented businesses. 
4.11.4.  Design criteria and development standards. 
A.  Overall site design shall be harmonious in terms of landscaping, enclosure of principal and accessory uses, sizes of structures, street patterns, and use relationships. Variety in building types, heights, facades, setbacks, and size of open spaces shall be encouraged. 
B.  Densities for residential dwelling units shall not exceed one unit per 2,500 square feet of land area including yard and other dimensional requirements. 
C.  Bufferyards: As determined as needed by the planning commission and city council. 
D.  Open space: As determined as needed by the planning commission and city council. 
E.  All standards of the existing zoning district shall apply, if not specified otherwise in that particular PD district. 
4.11.5.  Administrative procedures with regard to PD zoning districts. 
A.  Zoning chapter amendment required. Any request pertaining to the establishment of a PD Zoning District shall be considered an amendment to the zoning chapter and shall be administered and processed in accordance with section 5.4. The request shall first be submitted to the planning commission for review, public hearing, and recommendation, then forwarded to city council for final action. If approved by the city council, all information pertaining to the proposal shall be adopted. Any proposed changes in the district shall be treated as amendments to the zoning chapter and must be considered accordingly. 
B.  Time limitation. If the approved planned development project has not begun within two years of its approval date by city council, the planned development chapter shall become null and void and the land classification shall revert to its previous zoning classification. 
4.11.6.  Submission materials required for development plan. 
A.  Purpose and effect. An application for rezoning to a Planned Development District shall include a development plan incorporating the information required in [subsection] B [of this section] and such additional information as the applicant may deem necessary to provide a detailed understanding of the proposed planned development. Although it is unnecessary to become involved in the preparation of engineering drawings at this stage, the development plan must be sufficiently detailed to be judged for its superiority to other forms of development or other zoning districts. No development plan shall be required for rezoning to districts other than PD districts. 
B.  Application contents. The following information and documentation together with such additional information as required by the commission shall constitute a complete rezoning application: 
1.  The applicant's name and address and ownership interest in the subject property. 
2.  The name and address, and signed written consent of those having an ownership interest, if different than the applicant filing the application. 
3.  The tax map identification number. 
4.  The present and proposed zoning classification and use of the subject property and adjacent land. 
5.  A survey showing property boundary lines, metes and bounds, utility transmission lines and public rights-of-way crossing and adjacent to the subject property. 
6.  A vicinity map. 
7.  A written statement generally describing the proposed development's compliance with the comprehensive plan. 
8.  One or more development plans at a scale approved by the zoning administrator depicting or describing the following features of the development: 
a)  A land use plan map with a description of the type, location, and nature of land use (and building type) within each area of the development indicating the acreage and proposed density and lot requirements of each subarea. 
b)  A proposed traffic circulation map, which illustrates internal traffic ways, related to the development, existing and proposed access points, and through roads accessing adjacent parcels. 
c)  A general description of the means of providing water service, sanitary sewerage, utilities, refuse collection, schools, fire protection, libraries, parks and similar services, where applicable. 
d)  A delineation and description of the open space areas. 
e)  A statement identifying easements and restrictive covenants relating to the establishment of common open space or service facility within the planned development, and the establishment and activation of any entity that is to be responsible for the management and maintenance of any public or private common area. 
9.  A tabulation of the following information: 
a)  The maximum total number of dwelling units proposed by type of structure, by subarea, if applicable. 
b)  The maximum total square feet of building floor area proposed for nonresidential uses by type of use, by sub area, if applicable. 
c)  The total land area, expressed in acres and as a percent of the total development area, proposed to be devoted to residential and non-residential uses. 
d)  The minimum lot requirements for each proposed use (if different that the minimum lot requirements specified in the current zoning district). 
10.  If the planned development is proposed for construction in phases during a period exceeding a single construction season, a proposed phasing plan shall be submitted stating the portion of each uses and public spaces to be provided during each stage. 
11.  A statement identifying each of the regulations or other applicable provisions of this ordinance, which the applicant proposes to be modified as, part of the development plan, the proposed modification, and the justification thereof.  
Sec. 4.12. - Agricultural-Reserve District (A-R). 
4.12.1.  Intent. The intent of this district is to allow agricultural and recreational activities compatible with intensive urban development, in harmony with low-density residential development. 
4.12.2.  General. 
A.  Minimum parcel size: One acre. 
B.  Minimum lot depth: 200 feet. 
C.  Minimum floor area: 1,300 square feet. 
D.  The site shall be in one ownership, or if in several ownerships, the application for amendment to the zoning chapter shall be filed jointly by all of the owners. 
4.12.3.  Uses. 
A.  Permitted uses. The following uses or combination of uses shall be considered: 
1.  Any single-family residential use at a density not exceeding four dwelling units per acre of land. 
2.  Farm or establishment for the growing, care, processing, packing, and handling of field crops, truck gardening products, and fruit and/or nut trees. 
3.  Tree farm, timber area, or forest management area. 
4.  Horticultural nursery. 
5.  Church, cemetery, religious, eleemosynary, semi-public philanthropic institution. 
6.  Club, lodge, grange, union hall, community center, or social center. 
7.  Any publicly owned and operated building, facility, or land. 
8.  Unlighted, regulation size or par three golf courses. 
9.  Wildlife refuges including caretaker's dwellings and associated facilities. 
10.  Schools, private or public; day care centers; child nurseries. 
B.  Prohibited uses. The following uses or combination of uses shall not be considered in the A-R district: 
1.  Sexually oriented businesses. 
2.  Cellular towers. 
3.  Mobile homes/manufactured homes. 
4.12.4.  Design criteria and development standards. 
F.  Overall site design shall be harmonious in terms of landscaping, enclosure of principal and accessory uses, sizes of structures, street patterns, and use relationships. 
G.  Densities for residential dwelling units shall not exceed four unit per acre of land area including yard and other dimensional requirements. 
H.  Bufferyards: As determined as needed by the planning commission and city council. 
I.  Open space: As determined as needed by the planning commission and city council.  
Sec. 4.13. - Historical Buildings and Maintenance District (HB-MD). 
4.13.1.  Intent. The Historical Building and Maintenance District is an overlay district, designed and intended to promote the educational, cultural, economic, and general welfare of the community by providing a mechanism for the identification, recognition, preservation, maintenance, protection and enhancement of existing historic and architecturally valuable structures, properties and/or districts which serve as visible reminders of the social, cultural, economic, political and/or architectural history of the City of Clinton. 
Additionally, the intent is to strengthen the commercial base of the district by providing a just, equitable and practicable method for repairing or demolishing buildings or structures which from any cause, endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety, or welfare of the general public or their occupants, diminish property values or detract excessively from the appropriate appearance of the district. 
4.13.2.  General. Permitted uses are determined by the underlying zoning district. Where this district overlays a Residential Zoning District, for example, only those uses permitted in the Residential Zoning District shall be permitted in the HB-MD Overlay District, subject to additional requirements and standards of this section. 
Within the Historical Buildings and Maintenance District the zoning administrator shall issue no license, permit or certificate of occupancy unless and until all applicable provisions of this section shall be complied with. No land or building shall be used in a manner inconsistent with or in conflict with the requirements of this section. 
4.13.3.  Maintenance standards and requirements for all buildings and premises. The owner of any building or premises within the HB-MD District shall adhere to the following general maintenance requirements to insure that: 
1)  The premises are free of all nuisances and any hazards to the safety of the occupants, customers, or other persons utilizing the premises or to pedestrians passing thereby. 
2)  The premises are free of loose and overhanging objects, which by reason of location above ground level constitute a danger of falling on persons in the vicinity thereof. Standard Building Code reference in effect. 
3)  The premises are free of holes, excavations, breaks, projections, or obstructions on walks, driveways, parking lots and parking areas, and other parts of the premises which are accessible to and used by persons on the premises. All such holes and excavations shall be filled and repaired, walks and steps replaced, and other conditions removed where necessary with reasonable dispatch by the owner upon their discovery. 
4)  The exterior of the premises and structure is in good repair and free from deterioration so as not to constitute a nuisance. 
5)  All surfaces shall be maintained free of cracked or broken glass, loose shingles, loose wood, crumbling stone or brick, loose or broken plastic or other similar hazardous conditions. 
6)  All structures and decorative elements of building fronts and sides abutting streets shall be repaired or replaced in a workmanlike manner to match as closely as possible the original materials and construction techniques. 
7)  All floors, interior walls, and ceilings of every structure shall be structurally sound and shall be maintained in a condition compatible with its use and where open to the public shall be maintained in a condition so as not to constitute a hazard to the public. 
8)  Structures at the rear of buildings attached or unattached to the principal structure, which are found by this maintenance code to be structurally deficient, shall be properly repaired or demolished. 
9)  All existing miscellaneous elements on building walls and roofs and surrounding premises, such as empty electrical or other conduits, unused sign brackets, antenna, etc. shall be removed. 
10)  If the building is to be used for storage, it should not be visible to passersby either through the use of window drapings or using rear areas of the building for storage. The intent of this section is to keep building fronts from looking abandoned and cluttered. 
4.13.4.  Specific duties and responsibilities. 
1)  Walls. All foundation walls shall be kept structurally sound, and capable of bearing imposed loads safely. 
2)  Walls. All material used to maintain or reconstruct a wall or part thereof, including the application of sidings or other surfacing material shall be of standard quality. 
3)  Walls. Where a wall of a building has become exposed as a result of demolition of adjacent buildings, said wall must have all doors, windows, vents, or other type similar openings closed with material of the type comprising the wall. No protrusions or loose material shall be in the wall. The exposed wall shall be painted, stuccoed, or bricked so as not to detract from the aesthetics and value of adjacent property and weatherproofed, if necessary, with construction material to prevent deterioration of the wall. The party causing the exposure of the wall shall bear the obligation of compliance with this section. 
4)  Windows. All windows must be tight fitting and have sashes of proper size and design. Sashes with rotten woods, broken joints, or broken or loose mullions or muntins shall be replaced. All broken and missing windows shall be replaced with glass or Plexiglas. All exposed woods shall be repaired and painted. 
5)  Windows. All first floor openings originally designed as windows shall be maintained as windows, complete with sills, lintels, frame and glass, unless specifically approved otherwise by the planning commission. Where the commission approves the enclosure of the window, the commission shall approve the manner by which it will be enclosed (i.e., shutters, brick, paint color, etc.). 
6)  Exceptions for second story windows. Other options such as using an inoperable glass plug; closed, complimentary painted wooden shutters; or inserting high quality public art shall be acceptable for second story window treatment. 
7)  Painting. All exterior surfaces, which require paint or sealing in order to protect the underlying surface from deterioration shall be so painted or sealed. Prior to choosing the color of the paint, property owners shall be required to review a recommended list of complimentary colors compatible with color schemes found in uptown Clinton. The property owner shall, however, retain the right to either choose a color from this list or another color they think would better enhance their building. 
8)  Painting. All exterior surfaces that have been painted shall be maintained free of peeling and flaking. Where 25 percent or more of the aggregate of any painted wall shall have peeling or flaking or previous paint worn away, the entire wall shall be repainted. 
9)  Advertising structures. All advertising structures and awnings and their accompanying supporting members shall be maintained in good repair and shall not constitute a nuisance or safety hazard. All non-operative signs shall be repaired or shall with their supporting members be removed forthwith. In the event such signs, billboards, marquees or awnings are not properly maintained in accordance with the foregoing, they shall, together, with their supporting members, be made of cloth, plastic, or similar material. Such awnings should be maintained so as not to show evidence of excessive fading, tearing, ripping, or other holes, which diminish their function and cause unsightly conditions. Whenever an advertising structure or awning is removed, all supporting members shall also be removed. Nothing herein shall be constructed to authorize any encroachments on streets, sidewalks, or other parts of the public domain. All signage shall also comply with regulations governing signage in the zoning ordinance of the City of Clinton. 
10)  Chimneys and other roof structures. All chimneys, flues, and vent attachments thereto shall be maintained structurally sound, free from defects so as to capably perform at all times the functions for which they were designed. Chimneys, flues, gas vents, or other draft-producing equipment shall provide sufficient draft to develop the rated output of the connected equipment, shall be structurally safe, durable, smoke-tight, and capable of withstanding the action of flue gases. 
11)  Porches. All exterior porches, landings balconies, stairs, and fire escapes shall be provided with banisters or railing properly designed and maintained to minimize the hazard of falling, and the same shall be kept structurally sound, in good repair, and free of defects. 
12)  Cornices. All cornices shall be made structurally sound. Rotten or weakened portions shall be removed and/or replaced to match as closely as possible the original patterns. All exposed wood shall be painted. 
13)  Washrooms. All washrooms and water closet compartment floors shall be surfaced with water-resistant material and shall be kept in a dry and sanitary condition at all times. 
14)  Washrooms. All washrooms shall be provided with permanently installed artificial lighting fixtures with a switch and wall plate so located and maintained that there is no danger of short-circuiting from water from other bathroom facilities or from splashing of water. National Electric Code reference - section 300-6 Protection Against Corrosion. 
15)  Downspouts. Sheet metal gutters and downspouts shall be replaced or repaired as necessary and shall be neatly located and securely installed. 
16)  Garbage. There shall not be stored or allowed to accumulate any flammable or combustible liquids or materials on the premises unless they are a type approved for storage by the regulation of the fire prevention bureau, and then only in such quantities as may be prescribed by the regulations. Standard Fire Prevention Code reference - chapter 9 - Flammable and Combustible Liquids, and section 502 - Flammable and Combustible Materials. 
17)  Garbage. No garbage or solid waste shall be stored or allowed to accumulate on the interior or exterior of the premises unless contained in trash receptacles, which are in accordance with the City Code of Clinton. 
18)  Parking lots. All parking lots shall be built and maintained with an "all weather" surface and in accordance with the zoning ordinance of the City of Clinton. 
19)  [Landscaping.] Where landscaping has been incorporated in the development plan of a commercial business or where landscaping has been required by the city as part of a development plan (including parking plans) the landscaped areas shall be maintained in a manner to equal and reflect the original landscaping approved for the development plan. 
20)  Curb cuts. Where curb cuts are abandoned due to new construction, change of access or general discontinuity or use, said curb cut should be closed and replaced with a stand and sidewalk and curb and gutter arrangement congruous with the existing sidewalk. 
21)  Sidewalks. Damage to public sidewalks and/or curb and gutter located in the public right of way shall be repaired or replaced at no expense to the city when such damage is caused by vehicles making deliveries to the premises under the control of the owner. 
22)  Vending machines. Vending machines, with the exception of newspaper racks, are prohibited from being place on uptown sidewalks and streets except during designated uptown special events and festivals. 
23)  [Exterior improvements.] All facade and/or exterior improvements/repairs made in compliance with this code shall first be reviewed with the zoning administrator before construction (i.e., paint colors, window treatment, awnings, cornices, etc.). The City of Clinton must accomplish this review prior to the release of a building permit. This is in no way an attempt to insure that all buildings are restored to reflect one certain style of architecture or be uniform in appearance. The intent here is to ensure that improvements/repairs to the facade are made in such a way as to keep, as much as possible, the historical character of the building, the harmonious nature of uptown, and inform the property owner about possible financial incentives available to them. 
4.13.5.  Relationship of duties and responsibilities to occupancy. The provisions of this Code that apply to the exterior or exterior components of a structure or building shall be complied with whether the structure or building is occupied or vacant. All unoccupied or vacant structures or buildings shall be secured by their owners to prevent the entry of unauthorized persons or the formation of nuisance conditions such as infestation including roosting birds and accumulated debris in recessed entry ways. 
4.13.6.  Duties and responsibilities of the operator. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the operator to ensure that: 
1)  All parts of the premises under the control of the operator shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition consistent with the business use and the occupant shall refrain from performing any acts which would render other parts of the premises unsafe or unsanitary or which would obstruct any adjacent owner/operator from performing any duty required, or from maintaining his premises in a safe and sanitary condition. 
2)  Every operator shall be responsible for the elimination of infestation in and on the premises, subject to his or her control. 
3)  Every operator shall maintain all plumbing fixtures in a safe and sanitary condition. 
4)  No garbage or solid waste shall be stored or allowed to accumulate on the premises unless contained in trash receptacles. 
5)  Damage to public sidewalks and/or curb and gutter located in the public right of way shall be repaired or replaced at no expense to the city when such damage is caused by vehicles making deliveries to the business under the control of the operator. The party which inflicted the damage shall instead, provide the repair. 
6)  Where the owner would not otherwise know of a defect of any facility, utility, or equipment required to be furnished hereunder and the same is found to be defective or inoperable, the operator affected thereby shall, upon learning of such defect provide notice to the owner. 
4.13.7.  Demolition of uptown buildings. Where a building is under the jurisdiction of this Code, the owner may demolish the building provided that the following requirements are met: 
1)  The owner obtains a demolition permit from the building inspector of the City of Clinton. 
2)  All sewer, gas, water, and similar taps or connections be properly closed and disconnected. 
3)  All debris from the building be removed from the site. This requirement is for the removal of all debris that is above the street level of the building. 
4)  The lot be graded to a smooth, even, finished grade, free from building material, debris, hole and/or depressions. Where building debris remains on the site below street level, the owner must back fill the lot with 12 inches of clean fill which shall be graded to a smooth, even finished grade. 
5)  Where walls of adjacent buildings become exposed as a result of the demolition said walls must have all doors, windows, vents, or other similar openings closed with material of the type comprising the wall. No protrusions or loose material shall be in the wall. The exposed wall shall be painted, stuccoed, or bricked so as not to detract from the aesthetics and value of adjacent property and weatherproofed to prevent deterioration of the wall. 
6)  Where fire or other acts of God destroys buildings, the above requirements shall apply. 
4.13.8.  Demolition of uptown buildings. 
Any building or premises damaged by fire, collapse, or an Act of God to such an extent that the cost of repair and reconstruction does not exceed 50 percent of the physical valuation of the entire structure at the time the damage occurred, the damaged portions of the building or premises may be razed or shall be secured to prevent unauthorized entry and repaired in a manner that complies in all respects with all codes and ordinances of the City of Clinton related to new buildings. 
Any building or premises damaged by fire, collapse, or an Act of God to such an extent that the cost of repair and reconstruction exceeds 50 percent of the physical valuation of the entire structure at the time the damage occurred), said building shall be razed in accordance with the latest version of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
Any building or premises damaged by fire, collapse, or Act of God, wear and tear, or natural deterioration to such an extent that it constitutes an imminent threat to the safety of its occupants or to the safety of the general citizenry shall be removed immediately. Said finding of imminent threat shall be by the fire chief or by the zoning administrator and shall be based on the structural integrity of the building or premises. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and the cause their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise. The zoning administrator shall apply all of the above regulations at his/her discretion. 
Exemptions - Buildings of historical value may be granted exemption by the planning commission. In granting an exemption, the commission must make a finding of fact that the building is a building of historical value to the city, that the owner will repair the damage on a timely basis, with commencement not to exceed six months, and that the building will be reconstructed and/or repaired in such a way as to keep the historical character of the building and blend aesthetically with the rest of the uptown and meet the relevant section of the latest Standard Building Code. 
4.13.9.  Code administrator. 
The code administrator is hereby established and shall be the person designated as such by the city manager of the City of Clinton. It shall be the duty and authority of the code administrator to enforce the Maintenance Code and to legally proceed against each and every person found in violation of the requirements of this Code. 
All inspections, regulations, and enforcement of violations of the provisions of this ordinance, unless expressly stated to the contrary, shall be under the direction and supervision of the administrator. 
All buildings and premises as set forth in this Code are subject to inspections by the administrator or his/her designated representatives. Upon presentation of proper identification and credentials to the owner, agent, or occupant in charge of the property and/or premises, and securing his oral or written permission, the administrator and/or his/her representative may enter and make such inspections as necessary during all reasonable hours. 
If permission for entry for the purpose of inspection is denied and no emergency exists, the administrator shall, after presentation of probably cause, procure court order from the municipal court judge. 
In cases of emergency where extreme hazards are known to exist which may involve potential loss of life or severe property damage, the above limitations will not apply. 
4.13.10.  Notice of violation. 
Whenever the code administrator or such other authorized official determines that there exists a violation of any provision of this Code, he/she shall give notice of such violation to the person or persons responsible therefore or to their agent or representative and order compliance. 
Such notice and order shall be in writing; specify in detail the violation or violations, together with the respective sections of this Code being violated; setting forth 120 days within which to correct the violations; contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter and in case of an unsafe building, such notice and order shall comply with the latest version of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
Service of notice shall be by delivery personally to one or more of the following: the owner or operator of the property, or the person responsible, or by leaving the notice at the usual place of abode or business of the owner, operator, or his agent; or by depositing the notice in the United States Post Office addressed to the owner or operator or his agent or persons responsible at his/her last known address with postage prepaid thereon, and certified or registered; or in event service of notice cannot be obtained in either of the above methods, by posting and keeping posted for 24 hours, a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the premises where the violation has occurred and published once a week for three weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city such information as is necessary to inform an owner or operator or person responsible for the location of the premises and type of offense. No person shall deface or remove such notice without the consent of the administrator. 
Once the notice has been served, the person or persons responsible or their agent or representative shall have 30 days to present a justified, factual appeal to the planning commission if compliance to the Code causes an undue financial difficulty or cannot be commenced because of other extenuating circumstances. As a result of this appeal, the planning commission may grant a phased schedule of maintenance with completion and compliance to [this] Code not to exceed 36 months. 
4.13.11.  Violations and penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this code or after due notice shall fail to comply with orders issued by the code administrator under the terms and provisions of the Code shall be charged with a misdemeanor of the laws of the City of Clinton and punished upon conviction by a fine of $200.00 by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both per violation. Each day of any violation of this Code shall constitute a separate violation punishable as separate violations of this Code. 
4.13.12.  Amendments. The provisions and requirements of this Code may, from time to time, be amended, supplemented, or changed as necessary. Initiation of any amendment may be by council, city staff, planning commission, or by private organizations or citizens. Any such proposed amendment must first be reviewed through the planning commission for its recommendation prior to being considered for amendment by ordinance of the Clinton City Council. 
4.13.13.  Validity. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code.  
Sec. 4.14. - Planned Development District: Musgrove Street Planned Development District. 
4.14.1.  Intent. The intent of the planned development district is to encourage flexibility in the development of land in order to promote its most appropriate use; to improve the design, character, and quality of new development; to facilitate the provision of streets and utilities; and to preserve the natural and scenic features of open space. 
4.14.2.  General. 
Minimum lot size 	2.5 acres 
Minimum lot width 	70 ft. 
Minimum floor area: 	11,500 sq. ft. per apartment building 
Setbacks: 	Front: 10 ft. 
	Side: 5 ft. 
	Rear: 10 ft. 
Maximum height: 	60 ft. 
Percent maximum lot coverage: 	65 percentDistance between habitable structures on same lot: 10 ft. min. 
 
4.14.3.  Uses. 
A.  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in the Musgrove Street Planned Development District provided that all specified standards are met: 
1.  Single-family residential buildings. 
i.  One house per lot permitted. 
2.  Duplex residential buildings. 
i.  Up to two units per lot permitted provided that the lot size meets the minimum lot area listed in section 4.14.2. 
3.  Multifamily residential units. 
i.  More than two units per lot are permitted provided that the lot size meets the minimum lot area listed in section 4.14.2. 
4.  Civic buildings. 
i.  Civic buildings including, but not limited to, schools, churches, playgrounds, parks, community halls, and government services buildings may be constructed in this zone. 
B.  Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited in the Musgrove Street PDD: 
1.  Bars or taverns. 
2.  Private clubs. 
3.  Service or gas stations. 
4.  Outdoor storage. 
5.  Outdoor business. 
6.  Drive through restaurant. 
7.  Dry cleaning establishment. 
8.  Sexually oriented businesses. 
9.  Cellular towers. 
10.  Mobile/manufactured housing. 
11.  Any use not listed as permitted is prohibited. 
4.14.4.  Parking. 
A.  Parking shall meet general requirements in chapter 3 section 3.12[3.21] of the City of Clinton zoning ordinance. 
B.  A minimum of two parking spaces per dwelling unit will be provided for all multifamily construction within the Musgrove Street PDD. 
4.14.5.  Landscaping. 
A.  General requirements. See landscaping requirements in chapter 3 section 3.10[3.19]: landscaping. 
B.  Parking areas. 
1.  Peripheral. 
i.  Required landscaping area. At least five feet in depth shall be located between the abutting property lines and the parking, loading, or other vehicular use area, except where permitted driveway openings are to be provided. 
ii.  Required landscaping materials. Choose one: 
1.  One large maturing three shall be planted for each 50 linear feet of the landscaping area and one small maturing tree or shrub of at least three feet in height shall be planted every ten linear feet within the landscape; or 
2.  A combination of trees, hedge, other durable landscape material, or approved wall, fence, or earthen berm may be utilized to form a continuous landscape element of at least three feet in height. 
iii.  Other requirements. 
1.  All portions of the landscaped area not planted with shrubs and trees or coved by a wall or fence barrier shall be planted in grass and/or some other vegetative ground cover; and 
2.  Parked vehicles may overhang a landscaped are no more than 2.5 feet, provided curbing or other wheel stops are installed to ensure no greater overhang or penetration of the landscaped islands. Landscaping, walls, fences, and earthberms shall be located as to prevent their damage and/or destruction by overhanging vehicles. 
2.  Interior. 
i.  Required landscaping area. Five percent of the interior of any parking, loading, or other vehicular use area shall be landscaped. The location of such landscaping is at the option of the owner or developer; provided, however, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  Landscape island: shall be at least five feet in width and ten feet in length. Each island shall contain one large maturing tree plus shrubs and/or vegetative ground cover to cover the entire area. 
2.  No more than 20 parking spaces shall be permitted in a continuous row without being interrupted by a landscaped island. 
3.  Each parking row shall terminate in a landscape island. 
4.  Median strip: shall be at least five feet in width. 
5.  Every fourth row of parking shall be separated by a median strip for landscaping and pedestrian purposes. 
6.  Every median strip shall contain plantings of one large maturing tree at intervals of 30 to 40 feet, plus shrubs and/or vegetative ground cover to cover the entire area. 
ii.  Other requirements. 
1.  All portions of the landscaping area not planted with trees shall be planted in grass and/or with some other vegetative ground cover; and 
2.  Parked vehicles may overhang a landscaped area no more than 2½ feet, provided curbing or other wheel stops and installed to ensure no greater overhang or penetration of the landscaped islands. Landscaping, walls, fences, and earthberms shall be located as to prevent their damage and/or destruction by overhanging vehicles. 
C.  [Requirements for boundaries.] Requirements for boundaries adjacent to any residential zoning district and existing residential uses in the general commercial district. 
1.  Required buffer area. 
i.  Minimum width: 20 feet. 
2.  Required buffering materials. 
i.  Buffering materials shall provide an opaque buffer to create a strong impression of a spatial separation and to preclude visual contact. 
ii.  Two trees for every 100 linear feet. 
iii.  17 shrubs per 100 linear feet. 
iv.  All portions of the landscaping area not planted with shrubs and trees or covered by a wall or fence barrier shall be planted in grass and/or with some other vegetative ground cover. 
3.  Alternative 1. Buffering requirements reduced by 25 percent (five feet): 
i.  Minimum width may be reduced by 25 percent or five feet with use of a landscaped earth berm. 
ii.  Berms shall be constructed within the property boundary meeting the following requirements: 
1.  Minimum height: two feet. 
2.  Minimum crown width: two feet. 
3.  Minimum slope: 2:1. 
4.  Alternative 2. Buffering requirements reduced by 50 percent (ten feet): 
i.  Minimum width may be reduced by 50 percent or ten feet and required number of shrubs reduced to 30 shrubs per 100 linear feet with use of landscaped wall or fence. 
ii.  Wall shall be solid and meet the standards for walls and fences set forth in section 3.2. 
iii.  Maximum wall height: Ten ft. 
iv.  Shrubs shall reach one-third of the height of the wall within three years. 
5.  Alternative 3. Buffering requirements reduced by 60 percent (12 feet): 
i.  Minimum width may be reduced by 50 percent or 12 feet and required number of shrubs reduced to 30 shrubs per 100 linear feet with use of landscaped wall or fence, and a planted earth berm. 
ii.  Berms shall be constructed within the property boundaries meeting the following requirements: 
1.  Minimum height: Two feet. 
2.  Minimum crown width: Two feet. 
3.  Minimum slope: Adjoining property boundary. 
iii.  Wall shall be solid and meet the standards for walls and fences set forth in section 3.2. 
1.  Maximum wall height: Ten feet. 
2.  Shrubs shall reach one-third of the height of the wall within three years. 
4.14.6.  Tree protection. 
A.  Refer to chapter 3, section 3.11[3.20] for general tree protection requirements. 
4.14.7.  Signage. 
A.  Intent. The purpose of these sign regulations are: to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication; to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment; and to increase the city's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations. 
B.  [Requirements.] Refer to section 3.4[3.17]: signage for general sign requirements. 
C.  [Altering sign prohibited.] No sign, or part thereof, may be altered, constructed, changed, converted, enlarged, or moved unless in conformity with the following requirements. 
D.  Sign area. Shall be measured by height (A) by length (B) of the smallest rectangle that can be drawn to measure all sign elements. Unless otherwise noted, only one side or face of the same sign shall be used in computing sign area. 
E.  Allowed signs. The applicant may select two of the following two choices for a sign type per street frontage: 
1.  Awning sign. 
i.  Maximum Size: 15 percent of exterior surface of the awning. 
ii.  Signs, symbols, or designs may be painted or sewn onto the awning. 
2.  Freestanding (ground) sign. 
i.  Maximum size: One square foot for every two feet of street frontage. 
ii.  Maximum height: Eight feet. 
iii.  Setback: No freestanding sign shall be closer than five feet to an exterior property line. 
iv.  No more than one freestanding sign shall be allowed per parcel. 
v.  Freestanding signs may not be pole mounted and must be set in a brick or masonry base. 
F.  Prohibited signs. 
1.  Moving signs of any type. 
2.  Signs projecting above the roof line. 
3.  Any sign not listed as being allowed is prohibited. 
Musgrove Street Planned Development District 
  
CHAPTER 5. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 5.1. - Nonconforming land uses. 
5.1.1.  Nonconforming land uses are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. However, to avoid undue hardship, the lawful use of any building or land use at the time of the enactment of this ordinance may be continued even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this ordinance except that the nonconforming building or land use shall not be: 
A.  Changed to another nonconforming use. 
B.  Reestablished after discontinuance for three months. 
C.  Repaired, rebuilt, or altered after damage exceeding 50 percent of its preexisting (before damaged) assessed market value. Reconstruction must begin within six months after damage is incurred. 
D.  Enlarged or altered in a way which increases the nonconformity. 
5.1.2.  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official.  
Sec. 5.2. - Lots of record. 
Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of this ordinance (or revision thereto) has less area or width than herein required in the district in which it is located, said lot may nevertheless be used for a permitted use in the district.  
Sec. 5.3. - Administration, enforcement, appeal, complaints, and remedies. 
5.3.1.  Administrative officer. This ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the city zoning administrator. 
5.3.2.  Building permits. Building permits are required for all structures and signs constructed or erected after the effective date of this ordinance. No building permit shall be issued until a zoning permit has been issued by the zoning administrator. 
5.3.3.  Zoning permits. A zoning permit will only be issued only after it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator that all land development and zoning codes will be met. 
A.  General provisions. No building or structure shall be erected or occupied, no use, or change in use commenced, and no excavation or grading commenced relating thereto unless a zoning permit has been issued by the zoning administrator and is still valid. 
B.  Permit applications. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the following: 
1.  The actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; 
2.  The exact size and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any; 
3.  The location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration; 
4.  The number, size, location, and lighting of proposed and existing signs, if any; and 
5.  The number, size, and location of proposed and existing off-street parking lots or spaces. 
The application shall include such other information as lawfully may be required by the zoning administrator, including: 
1.  Existing or proposed uses of the building and land; 
2.  The number of families, housekeeping units, or rental units the building is designed to accommodate; 
3.  Conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with, and provide for the enforcement of this ordinance. 
One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the zoning administrator, after he shall have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to same by his signature on such copy. The original copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the city. 
C.  Records. The zoning administrator shall maintain a record of all zoning permits on file at his office, and copies shall be made available on request to interested parties. 
D.  Expiration of building and zoning permits. Any building and zoning permit issued in accordance with this ordinance will lapse and become invalid unless the work for which it was issued is started within six months of the date of issue, or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of at least one year. Written notice of the permit lapse shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the canceled permits shall not proceed unless and until new permits have been obtained. 
5.3.4.  Certificate of occupancy. 
A.  Inspections. 
1.  An inspection of the structure will be required prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. This inspection will be conducted either by employees of the county, or by an entity under contract with the county. 
2.  The inspection will evaluate whether the structure complies with the provisions of this ordinance, and with any conditions required by the building permit, or Clinton Land Development Regulations. 
5.3.5.  Planning commission. The Clinton Planning Commission as established by Clinton City Council, shall function as an advisory committee to the zoning administrator with respect to the provisions of this ordinance. 
5.3.6.  Violations. If the zoning administrator shall find that any of the provisions of this chapter are being violated or has received reliable information indicating that a violation of this ordinance is about to occur, he shall: 
A.  Notify in writing the person responsible for such violations and the property owner, if different, indicating the nature of the violation; and 
B.  Take such action as is necessary to correct the violation and prevent further, similar violations from occurring. 
C.  Selection of remedial action. 
1.  In order to correct a violation of this ordinance, or to mitigate the adverse impacts resulting from a violation of this ordinance, the zoning administrator has the discretion to select among the following courses of action, as appropriate under the circumstances; 
a)  Order a discontinuance of the illegal action; 
b)  Require cessation of construction, or of an unauthorized activity or use, pending the submission and approval of a building permit, or development plan as provided for in this ordinance; 
c)  Require the developer or owner to take specific actions to bring the construction or activity in question into compliance with this ordinance; 
d)  Where compliance is not practicable, require the developer or owner to take specific actions that will minimize the extent and impacts of the non-compliance, so long as this will not work an undue hardship on adjoining or nearby property and uses; 
e)  Where the severity of the situation warrants, require the removal of illegal structures, additions, and uses; 
f)  Require the developer or owner to take appropriate actions to mitigate the adverse impacts caused by, or associated with, the violating action or use; and/or 
g)  Require the developer or owner to otherwise make reasonable restitution for damage caused or expenses incurred as a result of the violation of this ordinance. 
D.  Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined, as determined by the municipal court for each offense. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
E.  Appeals. The developer or owner may appeal any action of the zoning administrator under this section to the board of zoning appeals. Such appeal must be filed within 30 days of the receipt of notice of such action. The zoning administrator's action will remain in effect during the appeal process. 
F.  Judicial action. The zoning administrator is empowered to seek injunctive relief or specific performance to enforce the provisions of this ordinance, or of any requirements for remedial action taken under this section. Injunctive relief is especially warranted when land altering activity is commenced, or is about to commence, which could be construed as contrary to the provisions of this ordinance. 
5.3.7.  Appeal from the decision of the zoning administrator. It is the intention of this ordinance that all questions arising in connection with the enforcement of the ordinance shall be presented first to the zoning administrator and that such questions shall be presented to the board of zoning appeals only on appeal from the written decision of the zoning administrator.  
Sec. 5.4. - Amendments. 
5.4.1.  The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this ordinance may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed, provided, however, that no such action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
5.4.2.  Application to city. 
A.  Any amendments, change or supplement to the zoning map or ordinance must first be submitted to the zoning administrator for review and recommendation. 
B.  Application form, together with the application fee for zoning amendment shall be filed with the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall review the application as to proper form. Within 15 working days of receipt, applicant shall receive written notice from the zoning administrator of review, if application is incomplete and notice of the proposed meeting date, or if additional information is required. 
C.  Upon receipt of a complete application the zoning administrator shall then transmit application and recommendation to the planning commission within 15 days. 
D.  Required information. The applicant shall set forth a detailed description of the amendment on an application provided by the zoning administrator. When the amendment involves a change in the zoning map, the applicant shall submit the following information: 
1.  A legal description and street address of the subject property, together with a property boundary map if subject property is not explicitly delineated on the zoning map. 
2.  Name, address, and phone number of applicant. 
3.  Name of property owner(s) and applicant's interest in the property if not the owner in fee simple title. 
4.  Filing date of application. 
5.  Applicant's and property owner's signature. 
5.4.3.  Notice. 
A.  Newspaper notice. A notice shall be placed in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 15 days prior to the hearing. The notice must list the hearing time and place. 
B.  Posting property. In rezoning cases, conspicuous notices shall be posted on or adjacent to the affected property by the zoning administrator. One notice must be visible from each public street that borders the property. Such sign(s) shall be posted at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. 
C.  Mail notice. Written notice must be mailed to all interested groups requesting notice. 
5.4.4.  Planning commission review. All proposed amendments must be submitted to the Clinton Planning Commission for its review and recommendation. The planning commission shall have 30 days within which to submit its report. If the planning commission fails to submit a report within the 30-day period, it shall be deemed to have recommended approval of the requested amendment. In reviewing any petition for a zoning amendment, the planning commission shall identify and evaluate all factor relevant to the petition. These facts should include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  Whether or not the requested zoning change is justified by a change in conditions since the original ordinance was adopted or by an error in the original ordinance. 
B.  Whether or not the requested zoning change is consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
C.  The precedents, and the possible effects of such precedents, which might result from approval or denial of the petition. 
D.  The capability of the city or other government agencies to provide any services, facilities, and/or programs that might be required if the petition were approved. 
E.  Effect of approval of the petition on the condition and/or value of property in the city. 
F.  Effect of approval of the petition on adopted plans and policies of the City of Clinton. 
5.4.5.  Public hearing. The city council shall conduct a public hearing. city council shall review the planning commission report and comments made at the public hearing before taking action to either adopt or reject the ordinance. 
5.4.6.  Limit on re-application. Except for requests which are continued with the mutual consent of the applicant and the planning commission, a property owner or owners shall not initiate action for a zoning amendment affecting the same parcel of property, or any part thereof, more often than once every 12 months. 
5.4.7.  Adoption of ordinance. After the required public hearing and planning commission review, the amendment or rezoning is submitted to city council for consideration of adoption. Adoption of the amendment or rezoning must be by ordinance. After adoption, the zoning administrator shall make the necessary changes to the zoning ordinance text and official map.  
Sec. 5.5. - Board of zoning appeals. 
5.5.1.  Establishment of board of zoning appeals. A board of zoning appeals is hereby established. Said board shall consist of five members. 
5.5.2.  Membership. 
A.  Members shall be citizens of Clinton. 
B.  Members shall be appointed by the council for overlapping terms of five years. 
C.  Members may serve up to two terms. 
D.  Members may continue to serve until a successor is appointed. 
E.  Initial appointment shall be one member each for terms of one, two, three, four, and five years. 
F.  Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. 
G.  Members shall serve without pay, but may be reimbursed for expenses incurred while representing the board. 
H.  Members cannot hold any other public office or position in the city. 
5.5.3.  Proceedings of the board of zoning appeals. 
A.  The board of zoning appeals shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman from its members who shall serve for one year or until re-elected or until their successors are elected. 
B.  The board shall appoint a secretary, who may be a city officer, a city employee, a member of the planning commission, or a member of the board of zoning appeals. 
C.  The board shall adopt rules and by-laws in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and the South Carolina Code of Laws, 1994, title 6, chapter 7; as amended. 
D.  Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. 
5.5.4.  Decisions of the board of zoning appeals. The concurring vote of three members of the board of zoning appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the zoning administrator or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance or to affect any variation of this ordinance. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examination and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. On all appeals, applications and other matters brought before the board of zoning appeals, the board shall inform in writing all the parties involved of its decision(s) and the reason(s) heretofore. 
5.5.5.  Procedures for appeals and variances. 
A.  Application. Any person displeased with the written decision of the zoning administrator may appeal it to the board of zoning appeals. Such appeals shall be filed with the secretary within 30 days after the date of written notice of the decision or order of the zoning administrator. The applicant and parties to the permitting process are entitled to notice of the appeal. 
B.  Stay of proceedings. Filing an appeal to the board stays all legal proceedings to enforce the appealed action unless the appealed officer certifies that a stay would cause imminent peril to life and property. In such cases, a board or court restraining order may stay the action. 
C.  Hearings. The board of zoning appeals shall hold a public hearing within 30 days of receiving written application for the hearing, give public notice there of at least 15 days prior to the hearing by placing notice in a general circulation newspaper in the community. 
D.  Posting property. In cases involving variances, staff must post conspicuous notices on or next to the affected property. At least one notice must be visible from each street that borders the property. 
5.5.6.  Powers of the board of zoning appeals. 
A.  Administrative review. The board may hear and decide appeals where it is alleged the zoning administrator erred in an order, requirement, decision, or determination. In such cases, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, the zoning administrator's actions. The board has all the powers of the zoning administrator in such cases and may direct the issuance of a permit. 
B.  Variances. The board has the power to hear and decide requests for variances when strict application of the zoning ordinance would cause an unnecessary hardship. 
1.  The following standards must apply for finding an unnecessary hardship: 
a)  Extraordinary conditions. There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property, which could exist due to topography, street widening, or other conditions which make it difficult or impossible to make an economically feasible use of the property, 
b)  Other property. Extraordinary conditions generally do not apply to other property in the vicinity. 
c)  Utilization. Because of these extraordinary conditions, the application of the ordinance to a particular piece of property would effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property. 
d)  Detriment. The authorization of a variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property or the public good, and the character of the district will not be harmed by granting of the variance. 
2.  Conditions. In granting a variance, the board may attach conditions to it. These conditions may address the location, character, or other features of a proposed building, structure, or use. The board sets the conditions to protect established property values in the surrounding area or to promote the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
3.  Use variances. The board may not grant use variances. A "use variance" involves the establishment of a use not otherwise permitted in a zoning district, or extends physically a non-conforming land use or changes the zoning district boundaries shown on the official zoning map. 
5.5.7.  Appeals from decisions of board of zoning appeals. 
A.  Any person who may have a substantial interest in any decision of the board of zoning appeals may appeal from any decision of the board to the circuit court filing with the clerk of such court a petition in writing setting forth plainly, fully and distinctly wherein such decision is contrary to law. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the decision of the board is rendered.  
Sec. 5.6. - Fees. 
The city council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses, and a collection procedure for building permits, zoning permits, zoning amendments, and variances, appeals and other matters pertaining to this ordinance. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the zoning administrator and may be altered or amended only by the city council. Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.  
CHAPTER 6. - DESIGN REVIEW BOARD AND HISTORIC PRESERVATION OVERLAY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Title. 
The title of this ordinance shall be the Clinton Design Review Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 2-1-2010, § 1)  
Sec. 6-2. - Authority. 
City council expressly adopts this ordinance as a portion of the city's zoning ordinance, pursuit to S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-870, to make specific provision for the preservation and protection of historic and architecturally valuable districts and neighborhoods, and to protect the unique and special character of the Clinton Historic Preservation District. 
(Ord. of 2-1-2010, § 1)  
Sec. 6-3. - Purpose. 
By establishing the Clinton Review Design Board and charging it with the responsibility to protect the architectural integrity of historic structures and the character of the City of Clinton, the city intends: 
a.  To safeguard the heritage of the city, by preserving the historic district's element of cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history; 
b.  To ensure the preservation of significant historic sites and structures, and to prevent undesirable development which would adversely affect them; 
c.  To stabilize and improve property values m the Historic District and surrounding properties; 
d.  To foster civic beauty and pride; 
e.  To strengthen the local economy; and 
f.  To promote the use and preservation of the Historic Preservation District for the education, welfare and pleasure of residents of Clinton, Laurens County and the state. 
(Ord. of 2-1-2010, § 1)  
Sec. 6-4. - Clinton design review board established as a board of architectural review. 
There is hereby established a board of architectural review for the City of Clinton, to be called the "Clinton Design Review Board," which shall have the powers and duties as provided in S.C. Code 1976, title 6, chapter 29, sections 870 et seq. 
a.  Composition of the commission. The Clinton Design Review Board shall consist of five members, who shall be appointed by city council. None of the members may hold any other public office or position in the city. In appointing members to the commission, city council shall consider the nominee's demonstrated interest in local historic preservation and/or professional expertise in preservation related fields such as architecture, history, planning, archaeology, real estate, engineering, construction and law. A member of the Clinton Planning Commission, appointed by a majority of the planning commission and approved by the Clinton City Council, may serve as an ex-officio member of the Clinton Design Review Board. 
b.  Terms of office. Members shall serve a term of two years. Terms shall be staggered, so that the terms of three members shall expire in each odd-numbered year, and terms of two members shall expire in each even-numbered year. Members shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified. A member who replaces another member in midterm shall serve out the remainder of the term. Commission members may be appointed to succeed themselves, to a maximum of two successive terms. Newly appointed members shall be installed at the first regular meeting after their appointment. 
c.  Compensation. Members shall serve without compensation. Reimbursement for actual expenses incurred in the performance of official duties may be reimbursed from budgeted funds pursuant to reimbursement policies and procedures for employees of the City of Clinton. 
d.  Removal of members. Members may be removed at any time by city council. 
e.  Organization and rules of procedure. As required by S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-870(D), the commission shall hold an annual organizational meeting and shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from among its members, each of whom shall serve for one year or until he/she is re-elected or his/her successor is elected and qualified. The board shall appoint a secretary, who may be a city employee designated for this purpose by the city manager. The board shall adopt rules of procedure in accordance with the provisions of state law. The chairman or, in his/her absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which immediately must be filed at city hall and must be a public record. 
f.  Meetings. Meetings of the board shall be held monthly if there is business before the board. Additional meetings may be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the commission may determine. A quorum, consisting of three members of the board, must be present for the conduct of business. 
(Ord. of 2-1-2010, § 1; Ord. of 3-2-2015, § 1)  
Sec. 6-5. - Clinton review district designated. 
The Clinton Historic Preservation District is hereby designated as a Zoning Overlay District, with boundaries as shown on the Official Clinton Zoning Map, adopted together with this ordinance and incorporated herein by reference. 
a.  Additional designation of historic properties. From time to time, city council may choose to add additional properties to the historic district. Such additions may be made at the request of a property owner, upon recommendation of the Clinton Design Review Board, or upon city council's own initiative. All such additional designations shall constitute an amendment to the city's zoning ordinance, and the procedures for designation shall comply with the requirements for zoning amendments. In considering additional designations, the city shall consider whether the property: 
1.  Has significant character, interest or value as part of the heritage of the city; 
2.  Is the site of an event significant in history; 
3.  Is associated with a person or persons who contributed significantly to the culture and development of the community, state or nation; 
4.  Exemplifies the cultural, economic, social, ethnic or historic heritage of the community, state or nation; 
5.  Embodies distinguishing characteristics of a type, style, period or specimen in architecture or engineering; 
6.  Is part of or related to a distinctive element of community planning; or 
7.  Represents an established and familiar visual feature of the neighborhood or community. 
Owners of properties proposed for historic designation shall be notified in writing 30 days prior to consideration by city council. All additional historic designations shall be included within the Zoning Overlay District, and shown on the Official Clinton Zoning Map. 
(Ord. of 2-1-2010, § 1)  
Sec. 6-6. - Power and duties. 
The Clinton Design Review Board shall promote the purposes and objectives of this ordinance, shall have the following powers, and shall perform the following functions: 
1.  To review and recommend to city council the designation of individual historic properties for inclusion in the Historic Preservation District; 
2.  To review plans and applications as hereinafter provided, for all exterior modifications to structures and all new construction within the Historic Preservation District and other designated areas, including demolition of structures within the Historic Preservation District; and 
3.  To review and approve, approve with modifications, or deny approval for such plans and applications, in accordance with the prescribed procedures and guidelines. 
(Ord. of 2-1-2010, § 1)  
Sec. 6-7. - Issuance of certificate of appropriateness. 
a.  Within the Clinton Historic Preservation District. Within the Clinton Historic Preservation District, the board shall review each plan and application for the demolition, new construction, exterior alteration, modification or addition to any property, for compliance with the requirements and standards established in this ordinance. The board shall have the power to approve, approve with modifications or deny approval for such application, in accordance with the procedures set forth below. Approved applications shall be issued a certificate of appropriateness. Within the Clinton Historic Preservation District, no building permit shall be issued, and no modification to exterior architectural features may be made, prior to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. 
b.  Maintenance and repair excepted. A certificate of appropriateness is not required for the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in the Historic Preservation District, which does not involve a change in design, material, color or outer appearance. 
(Ord. of 2-1-2010, § 1)  
Sec. 6-8. - Procedures for issuance of certificate of appropriateness. 
The property owner or his/her representative shall submit an application to the design review board requesting the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. The application shall be submitted on a form provided by the city, together with such supporting materials as required herein. 
a.  Pre-application required. At the outset of a project, and prior to significant expenditures of time and financial resources, applicants are required to submit a pre-application, consisting of preliminary scale drawings and outline specifications, including color and material samples. The purpose of this review is to acquaint the applicant with the design standard applicable to his/her property. Pre-application review by the design review board is advisory only, and is not binding on either the applicant or the board. 
b.  Submission of applications. Applications shall be submitted to the city planning director or other official as designated by the city manager. Complete applications submitted seven or more days prior to the regularly scheduled monthly meeting of the design review board shall be placed on the agenda for review. Incomplete applications will be returned. 
c.  Contents of application. The application must show in detail all proposed exterior alterations and modifications and/or new construction, and must provide all information requested on the application form. In addition: 
1.  The application must identify the applicable design standard(s) and show that the proposed action complies with such standards(s). 
2.  Drawings are required for exterior alterations to existing structures and for all new construction. As used here drawings shall mean plans and exterior elevations drawn to scale, with sufficient detail to show, insofar as they relate to exterior appearance, the architectural design; proposed materials, textures and colors; and plan or site layout, including all improvements such as walls, walks, terraces, plantings, accessory buildings, signs and lights. Drawings shall be signed by the architect or draftsman, and submitted in multiple copies as directed by the planning director. 
d.  Design review board action. The design review board shall review the application, and shall decide whether the proposed action complies with the design guidelines and standards as set forth herein. In acting upon the application, the board shall either issue a certificate of appropriateness, including such conditions as it deems appropriate in conformance with the standards here or deny the application. Actions shall be taken by majority vote of those board members in attendance. 
1.  The applicant shall have the right to be heard before the board, and to make such presentation as he/she deems appropriate to explain the application and answer questions posed by the board members. 
2.  The board may request the submission of additional or clarifying information and materials, and may postpone action on an application to a special meeting or the next regularly scheduled monthly meeting to consider this input. 
3.  Similarly, the board may postpone action on an application to a special meeting the next regularly scheduled monthly meeting in order to provide notice to affected property owners, or to call a public meeting or public hearing on the application. 
4.  The certificate shall be signed by the chairman of the board, and a copy shall be delivered to the city's building official. 
5.  Denials shall include a statement in the record of the reason(s) therefore and the planning director shall so inform the applicant in writing. 
e.  Time limits. The board must take action on an application no later than the second regularly scheduled monthly meeting following the timely submission of the application, unless the applicant agrees to the postponement of action; provided, however, that the time limits for demolition shall be as stated herein below. If the board fails to act within this time period, the application shall be considered approved. 
f.  Withdrawal; revision; submission of a new application. An applicant may withdraw and re-submit his/her application at any time during the review process. An applicant may request postponement of review and revise his/her application at any time during the review process; revisions must be submitted within seven days of the board's regularly scheduled monthly meeting to be placed on the agenda; however, the board may waive this requirement, or may schedule a special meeting to act on a revised application. If an application is denied by the board, a new application may be submitted at any time if there is a substantial change in the plans for the proposed work; however, if no substantial change is made, a new application may not be filed for a period of six months following the board's denial. 
(Ord. of 2-1-2010, § 1)  
Sec. 6-9. - Guidelines and standards. 
In reviewing an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the design review board shall take into account the architectural and historical significance of the structure under consideration, and the exterior form and appearance of any proposed additions or modifications to the structure, as well as the effect of such change or additions upon other structures in the vicinity. The design review board shall use the following standards in reviewing and acting upon applications for certificates of appropriateness: 
a.  Generally. Clinton Historic Preservation District. Generally, all modifications to exterior architectural features and all new construction within the Clinton Historic Preservation District shall comply with the guidelines and standards as set forth in the publication "Clinton Main Street Design Guidelines" prepared by the Clinton Main Street Board with the "intent to establish guidelines which will enhance the environment for trade, entertainment, and leisure through basic principles of design such as building texture, color, rhythm, and pattern." 
b.  Specific requirements. Clinton Historic Preservation District. In addition to the standards set forth in the manual, the following requirements shall apply: 
1.  Siding. Any use of non-traditional siding must be approved by the design review board and must meet the characteristics of the original facade of the building. 
2.  Colors. Exterior colors shall be appropriate to the design and period of the structure, and shall be selected from the palates as set forth in the Manual provided, that on a case-by-case basis, the board may approve alternate or additional colors that meet the standards set forth in paragraph [subsection] (c) below [of this section]. 
3.  Signs. Signs shall not be internally lighted. Within the Historic District, permanent signage shall be limited to the identification of commercial, institutional and historic properties. Property owners are encouraged to use externally lighted ground signs and wall signs where built into the building facade. Sign size and height shall be limited as set forth in the zoning ordinance of the City of Clinton. 
4.  Building materials. The design review board must approve all proposed building or renovation material through the pre-application process, but the following list of building materials and types of buildings are provided as inappropriate for use in the Clinton Historic Preservation District: 
•  Metal buildings 
•  Concrete block (with the exception of split-face block) 
•  Plywood 
•  Tilled-up concrete 
5.  New construction. The character of the Historic Preservation District derives from the mix of architectural styles and periods. New construction is not required to reproduce historic structures, but it must be consistent with the size, height, design and general appearance of structures on nearby properties. New construction must "blend in" with the character of the neighborhood in which it is situated, and shall not disrupt the character of the Historic District. New construction must also adhere to items 9.b.1—4. 
c.  Exceptions to specific standards. The city recognizes that from time to time, these standards may present difficulties to property owners who wish to repair, use or adaptively reuse structures within the Historic Preservation District. Accordingly, the design review board may, but is not required to, grant an exception to a specific standard set forth in the manual if it expressly finds: 
1.  The proposed action will maintain the overall appearance of period authenticity; and, 
2.  New, replacement or repaired features will be consistent with the architectural features of the structure; and, 
3.  The proposed action will not adversely affect other structures in the vicinity, or diminish the character of the Historic Preservation District. 
In reviewing a request for an exception, the board may require the property owner to provide materials and documents regarding the condition of the structure, available alternatives to the proposed action, costs and financing options. The board may modify the applicant's request for an exception, and shall have the power to approve the request either in whole or in part. All exceptions must be specified in a written attachment to the certificate of appropriateness. 
d.  Demolition. 
1.  No building or structure in the Historic Preservation District shall be demolished or otherwise removed until the owner thereof has given the design review board 90 days written notice of the proposed action. During this notice period, the design review board may negotiate with the owner and take such advisory actions as it deems appropriate to find a means of preserving the structure. The board may call a public hearing to inform the public and solicit input concerning any proposed demolition. 
2.  In passing upon an application to demolish, or demolish in part, or remove the architectural appearance of any existing structure, the design review board shall consider, among other things, the historic, architectural and aesthetic features of such structure, the nature and character of the surrounding area, the use of such structure, and the importance to the city. 
3.  The design review board shall have the power to deny outright the demolition or removal of a structure if it deems the structure of such architectural or historical significance that the removal will be detrimental to the public interest. 
4.  If the design review board determines that the structure has no particular historic significance or value toward maintaining the character of the Historic District, it may waive all or part of the 90-day notice period, thereby allowing the demolition or removal to proceed. 
(Ord. of 2-1-2010, § 1)  
Sec. 6-10. - Enforcement. 
Violations of this ordinance are violations of the city's zoning ordinance, and may be punished as set forth therein. The city's codes enforcement officer(s) and other city officials, directly empowered by written notice of the city manager, are hereby designated as enforcement officers for the purpose of enforcing the terms of this ordinance, and shall have the power to issue citations for the violation of this ordinance, in accordance with the provisions of the city's Code. 
(Ord. of 2-1-2010, § 1)  
Sec. 6-11. - Appeal. 
In accordance with S.C. Code 1976. § 6-29-900 et seq., any person having a substantial interest in a decision of the board may appeal to the circuit court for Laurens County, by filing with the clerk of court a written petition setting forth plainly, fully and distinctly why the decision is contrary to law. The appeal must be filed within 30 days after the affected party receives actual notice of the board's decision. 
(Ord. of 2-1-2010, § 1)  
Sec. 6-12. - Definitions. 
As used in this ordinance, words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
a.  Certificate of appropriateness is a document issued by the Clinton Design Review Board, following a prescribed review procedures, certifying that the proposed actions are found to be acceptable in terms of design criteria relating to the individual property and the Historic District. 
b.  Board shall mean the Clinton Design Review Board. 
c.  Demolition shall mean the removal of a structure, in whole or in part, without accompanying renovation or restoration. 
d.  Exterior architectural features shall include the exterior portion of any building or other structure, including stone walls, fences, light fixtures, signs, steps, pavement and other appurtenant features. 
e.  Exterior alternations and modifications shall include any change in the external architectural features of a structure. 
f.  Historic Preservation District shall mean the Clinton Historic District, as designated by city council and established as an overlay district on the city's zoning map. 
g.  Period authenticity shall mean an architectural building design, style, appearance and use of materials consistent with the generally accepted architectural and design standards for a particular historical time frame, and for purposes of this ordinance shall bear reference to structures built in and around the City of Clinton. 
(Ord. of 2-1-2010, § 1)  
CHAPTER 7 - STANDARDS FOR PLACEMENT OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES IN COVERED AREAS 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Definitions. 
Antenna means communication equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services. 
Applicable codes means uniform building, energy, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, gas, and fire codes in S.C. Code 1976, tit. 6, ch. 9, local amendments to those codes authorized by state law, and local codes or ordinances which impose requirements defined in section 5 of this chapter including objective design and concealment standards to regulate location, context, material, color, stealth and concealment standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis. 
Applicant means any person who submits an application to a city and is a wireless services provider or a wireless infrastructure provider. 
Application means a request submitted by an applicant for a permit to: 
(1)  Collocate small wireless facilities; or 
(2)  Construct, install, maintain, operate, replace or modify a utility pole or wireless support structure. 
Cable, communications, fiber or electric easement means an easement, granted to a cable or video service provider, a communications service provider (including without limitation a telephone utility), a fiber optics cable services provider, or an electric services provider created or authorized by state law to provide such services, that runs parallel to and abuts or within a right-of-way and is occupied by existing utility poles or wireless support structures carrying electric distribution lines, wires, cable, conduit, fiber optic cable for telecommunications, cable or electric service or supporting municipal street lights, or security lights. The term cable, communications, fiber or electric easement excludes easements for service drops or lines connecting the customer's premises to the cable, communications, fiber or electrical provider. 
City-owned pole means: 
(1)  A utility pole owned or operated by the city in covered areas, including a utility pole that provides lighting or traffic control functions, or other law enforcement functions, including light poles, traffic signals, and structures for signage; and 
(2)  A pole or similar structure owned or operated by the city in a covered area that supports only wireless facilities. The term does not include a utility pole owned or operated by and accounted for as an asset of a municipal electric utility. 
Collocate means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace one or more wireless facilities on, under, within, or adjacent to an existing wireless support structure or utility pole located in covered areas within the jurisdiction of the city. "Collocation" has a corresponding meaning. 
Covered areas means the surface of, and the space above and below, any public rights-of-way, ROW, city rights-of-way, public rights-of-way, and/or cable, communications, fiber or electric easement as those terms are defined herein. 
Day means calendar day unless the last day for the city or an applicant to take action under this chapter ends on a weekend, holiday, or time when all but city emergency services are closed due to weather or some unforeseen situation. 
Decorative pole means a utility pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signage or a temporary holiday or special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to nondiscriminatory municipal practices. 
Design district means an area that is zoned, or otherwise designated by municipal ordinance, and for which the city maintains and enforces unique design and aesthetic standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis. 
Fee means a one-time charge. 
Historic district means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district under municipal, state or federal law and for which the city maintains and enforces unique design and aesthetic standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis. 
Micro wireless facility means a small wireless facility that meets the following qualifications: 
(1)  Is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height; and 
(2)  Any exterior antenna is no longer than 11 inches. 
Person means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization, including the city. 
Rate means a recurring charge. 
Rights-of-way or ROW or city rights-of-way or public rights-of-way means that area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, sidewalk, alley dedicated to, managed or controlled by the city, county or state, but not including a federal interstate highway, in the city. 
Small wireless facility means a wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: 
(1)  Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume, or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of not more than six cubic feet; and 
(2)  All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services. 
Transmission pole means a pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part to carry electric transmission (as opposed to distribution) lines. 
Underground district means an area that is designated by ordinances, zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions, that prohibit installing above ground structures in a covered area and for which the city maintains and enforces standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis. 
Utility pole means a pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part for the purpose of carrying electric distribution lines or cables or wires for telecommunications, cable or electric service, or for lighting, traffic control devices, traffic control or directional signage, or a similar function regardless of ownership, including city-owned poles. Such term shall not include structures supporting only wireless facilities, nor shall it include wireless support structures. 
Wireless facility means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless services between user equipment and a communications network, including: 
(1)  Equipment associated with wireless communications; 
(2)  Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. The term includes small wireless facilities. The term does not include the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated, wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or coaxial or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to, or directly associated with, an antenna. 
Wireless infrastructure provider means any person including a person authorized to provide telecommunications service in the state, that builds, installs or maintains utility poles, wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities or wireless support structures. 
Wireless services means any services provided using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, delivered to the public using wireless facilities. 
Wireless services provider means a person who provides wireless services. 
Wireless support structure means a freestanding structure, such as a monopole or, other existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Such term shall not include a utility pole. 
(Ord. of 5-6-2019, § 1)  
Sec. 7-2. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to provide policies and procedures for the placement of small wireless facilities in covered areas within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  It is the intent of this chapter to establish uniform standards including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Prevention of interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways, traffic light poles or other light poles, and other public ways and places; 
(2)  Prevention of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
(3)  Prevention of interference with other facilities and operations of facilities lawfully located in covered areas or public property; 
(4)  Preservation of the character of neighborhoods where facilities are installed; 
(5)  Preservation of the character of historic structures, or historic neighborhoods, including but not limited to such structures or neighborhoods listed on the National Register of Historic Places or locally designated historic districts; and, 
(6)  Facilitation of the rapid deployment of small wireless facilities to provide the citizens with the benefits of advanced wireless services. 
(Ord. of 5-6-2019, § 2)  
Sec. 7-3. - Permitted use; application process and fees. 
(a)  Permitted use and consent. Collocation of a small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or a new or modified utility pole or wireless support structure installed in a covered area shall be a permitted use, except in supplemental review districts where such facilities are a conditional use, subject to administrative review, conditions and other requirements in section 5. In accord with Article VIII, Section 15 of the State Constitution and related municipal code and ordinance provisions, the city consents to the use of public rights-of-way by permit holders acting in compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  Permit required. No person shall place a small wireless facility in a covered area without first filing a small wireless facility application and obtaining a permit, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(c)  Permit applications. All small wireless facility applications filed pursuant to this chapter shall be on a form, paper or electronic, as required by the city. The applicant may designate portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly, and the city shall endeavor to protect materials so designated from public disclosure to the fullest extent permitted by state law. 
(d)  Application requirements. The small wireless facility permit application shall be made by the applicant, or its duly authorized representative as noted in a notarized statement from a person with the applicant with authority to make such an authorization, and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address, telephone number and e-mail address; 
(2)  Facility owner's name, address, telephone number and email address, if different from applicant; 
(3)  Intended facility use: owner operated or owner leased capacity; 
(4)  The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and e-mail addresses of all consultants, if any, acting on behalf of the applicant with respect to the filing of the application; 
(5)  A general description of the proposed scope of work for the collocation of the small wireless facility. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters, including but not limited to sub-surface utilities, likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed; 
(6)  Identification of any consultant that is acting on behalf of the applicant and that is authorized to speak with the city, or a designee of the city, on the area of consultation for the applicant even if the applicant cannot be available; 
(7)  Verification from an appropriate representative of the applicant that the small wireless facility shall comply with all applicable codes; 
(8)  Verification of payment of the annual municipal consent or administrative fee for telecommunications companies to use public rights-of-ways pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, § 58-9-2230; 
(9)  Verification of local business license, if applicable; 
(10)  Evidence the applicant is duly authorized to do business in the state; 
(11)  Evidence the applicant has received any necessary certificate of public convenience and necessity or other required authority from the state public service commission or the Federal Communications Commission or evidence that it is not required; 
(12)  A copy of an approved South Carolina Department of Transportation encroachment permit and all documents required by SCDOT as part of the encroachment permit application, if the proposed location is within a SCDOT right-of-way; and, 
(13)  If the proposed location is outside of a SCDOT right-of-way, a statement that the applicant has a lease, attachment agreement or other authorization from the owner of the utility pole or structure proposed for collocation. 
(e)  Routine maintenance and replacement. An application shall not be required for: 
(1)  Routine maintenance; 
(2)  The replacement of a small wireless facility with another small wireless facility that is substantially similar or smaller in size, weight, and height; or 
(3)  The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are strung on cables between existing utility poles and/or wireless support structures in compliance with the National Electrical Safety Code by a wireless services provider or a wireless infrastructure provider that is authorized to occupy the public rights-of-way and that is remitting a consent, franchise, or administrative fee pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, § 58-9-2230. 
(f)  Information updates. Any amendment to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted in writing to the city within ten business days after the change necessitating the amendment. 
(g)  Consolidated application. An applicant seeking to collocate multiple small wireless facilities may, at the applicant's discretion, file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for up to 20 small wireless facilities. Provided, however, the city's denial of any site or sites within a single application shall not affect other sites submitted in the same application. The city shall grant a permit for any and all sites in a single application that it does not deny subject to the requirements of this section. 
(h)  Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by law, and except as to telecommunication companies exempted pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, § 58-9-2230, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be accompanied by a fee of $100.00 for each small wireless facility, except that the fee for small wireless facilities addressed in a consolidated application shall be $100.00 each for the first five small wireless facilities and $50.00 for each additional small wireless facility up to a maximum of 20 small wireless facilities. For clarity, any applicant that pays either a franchise, consent fee, or administrative fee pursuant to the requirements of S.C. Code 1976, § 58-9-2230 shall not be required to pay any building permit fee, zoning permit fee, encroachment fee, degradation fee, or any other fee assessed on a telecommunications provider for its occupation of or work within the ROW. 
(i)  Interference with public safety equipment . A small wireless facility shall be operated and maintained in a manner that does not interfere with public safety (police, traffic control, fire and emergency services) equipment. 
(Ord. of 5-6-2019, § 3)  
Sec. 7-4. - Action on permit application. 
(a)  Review of small wireless facility applications. The city shall review the application for a small wireless facility permit for conformity with applicable requirements of this chapter, and shall issue a permit on nondiscriminatory terms and conditions subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Within ten days of receiving an application, the city must determine and notify the applicant whether the application is complete; or if an application is incomplete, the city must specifically identify the missing information. 
(2)  Make its final decision to approve or deny the application within 60 days of submission of a completed application. 
(3)  Notify the applicant in writing of its final decision, and if the application is denied, specify the basis for a denial, including citations to federal, state or local code provisions and/or statutes on which the denial was based. 
(4)  Notwithstanding an initial denial, the applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the city and resubmit the application within 30 days of the denial, and the city shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days of receipt of it. The subsequent review by the city shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the original denial. 
(b)  Review deadline. If the city fails to act on an application within the 60 day review period (or within the 30-day review period for an amended application), the applicant may provide notice that the time period for acting has lapsed and the application is then deemed approved. 
(c)  Review of eligible facilities requests. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the city shall approve and may not deny applications that constitute eligible facilities requests for modification of an eligible support structure that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such structure as provided in 47 CFR 1.40001, within 60 days according to the procedures established under 47 CFR 1.40001(c). 
(d)  Compensation. Subject to the limitations set forth in subsection 3(h) herein, every permit shall include as a condition the applicant's agreement to pay such lawful franchise fees, business license taxes, administrative fees and consent fees as are permitted under applicable state and federal law. The applicant shall also pay all applicable ad valorem taxes, service fees, sales taxes, or other taxes and fees as may now or hereafter be lawfully imposed on other businesses within the city. 
(Ord. of 5-6-2019, § 4)  
Sec. 7-5. - Requirements for small wireless facilities in covered areas. 
(a)  Administrative review. The city shall perform an administrative review of permit applications including the location or installation of new, modified, or replacement utility poles and/or wireless support structures and the attachment of wireless facilities and equipment on utility poles or wireless support structures. Review factors, in addition to location, shall include the size, shape, color, texture, and materials of the structures and attachments. 
(1)  The city may require a proposed wireless facility be designed to not be significantly more readily apparent or plainly visible (to a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities) from covered areas than existing utility structures, poles and equipment located within 500 linear feet on the same covered area as the subject utility pole or wireless support structure. 
(2)  Where small wireless facilities are determined to be appropriate, the use of reasonable stealth and concealment treatments, low profile equipment and control boxes, and screening may be required to avoid significant negative impacts on the character and visual aesthetics of the area. However, such requirements may be waived by the city upon a showing that the particular location of a small wireless facility does not warrant stealth or concealment treatments or imposes an excessive expense. The waiver shall be granted or denied within 45 days after the date of the request. 
(3)  Supplemental review districts identified in subsection 5(c) and listed in this appendix may be subject to a higher level of review. 
(b)  Maximum size of permitted use. 
(1)  The height of an antenna of a collocated small wireless facility shall be limited to the greater of ten feet above: 
a.  The height of an existing or modified utility pole or wireless support structure; or 
b.  The height of a new utility pole or wireless support structure as provided in subsection (2) below. 
(2)  The height of a new or modified utility pole, or wireless support structure is limited to the greater of: 
a.  The tallest utility pole, excluding transmission poles, or wireless support structure located in the same covered area, measured from grade, in place within 500 linear feet on the same covered area as the subject utility pole or wireless support structure as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derived; or 
b.  In the absence of any such utility pole or wireless support structure, either: 
1.  40 feet in any area zoned exclusively for single family residential use, unless a waiver is granted for good cause shown; or 
2.  50 feet in any other area. 
(3)  Collocation is not allowed on a decorative pole less than 20 feet in height. 
(c)  Supplemental review districts. Collocated small wireless facilitates and new or modified utility poles or wireless support structures located in supplemental review districts shall be a conditional use and subject to the design and aesthetic requirements and review processes for structures specified in this chapter establishing the supplemental review district(s) in addition to the requirement of this chapter, provided that the city will work in good faith with the applicant to accommodate the installation of collocated small wireless facilities and new or modified utility poles or wireless support structures in supplemental review districts to the fullest extent practicable. The city reserves its right to maintain and implement the following types of supplemental review districts: 
(1)  Underground districts. A wireless services provider or a wireless infrastructure provider shall comply with nondiscriminatory requirements that prohibit electric utilities, telecommunications or cable providers from installing above-ground structures in the covered area in these districts. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use or replacement of existing utility poles or wireless support structures in underground districts for the collocation of small wireless facilities subject to administrative review by the zoning administrator, appropriate design and concealment and a finding that such use does not increase the height by more than three feet. 
(2)  Historic and design districts. As a condition for approval of new small wireless facilities or new wireless support structure in a historic district or a design district, the city may require that a wireless services provider or a wireless infrastructure provider comply with the design and aesthetic standards of the historic district or design district to minimize the impact to the aesthetics in a historic district or on a design district's decorative poles. If design and concealment treatments are determined on review by the city to be insufficient to mitigate harm to the historic district or design district, the application may be denied. 
This section may not be construed to limit a municipality's authority to enforce historic preservation zoning regulations consistent with the preservation of local zoning authority under 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7), the requirements for facility modifications under 47 U.S.C. § 1455(a), or the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (54 U.S.C. § 300101 et seq.), and the regulations adopted to implement those laws. 
(d)  Appeals, special exceptions and variance requirements. Appeals of administrative decisions and requests for special exceptions and variances from the provisions of this chapter, when strict application would result in an unnecessary hardship or in the inability to deploy needed small wireless facilities, shall be heard and decided by the board of zoning appeals or equivalent board for architectural, design or historical district reviews. An applicant seeking a special exception to construct a new decorative pole, utility pole or other wireless support structure to collocate a small wireless facility in an underground district shall demonstrate, including certification through an engineer, that it has diligently attempted to locate the proposed decorative pole, utility pole, wireless support structure, or small wireless facility outside of the underground district and that placement of the decorative pole, utility pole, wireless support structure, or small wireless facility within the underground district is necessary to provide the needed wireless coverage or capacity, and one or more of the following conditions exist supporting a special exception: 
(1)  No existing utility pole or wireless support structure is located within the location search radius or to the extent a utility pole or wireless support structure is located within the search radius, such utility pole or wireless support structure: 
a.  Is not available for collocation under commercially reasonable rates, terms, and conditions; 
b.  Cannot accommodate the collocation of the small wireless facility and meet the technical requirements necessary to deliver adequate wireless service coverage or capacity; or 
c.  Would require modifications exceeding the three feet height limitation imposed in subsection 5(c)(1). 
(2)  The only available option to deliver adequate wireless service coverage or capacity in the search radius requires modifications to an existing utility pole or wireless support structure exceeding the three-feet height limitation imposed in subsection 5(c)(i) or the installation of a new utility pole or wireless support structure for collocation of a small wireless facility; or 
(3)  The applicant has demonstrated other circumstances that, in the reasonable discretion of the [board, etc.], warrant a special exception or variance. 
The applicant shall abide by the design, stealth and concealment treatments imposed as conditions of the special exception. 
(e)  Existing supplemental review districts. Supplemental review districts approved by the city as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derived are listed in this appendix. The code provisions authorizing the district, applicable design guidelines or manual, review authority and appeal jurisdiction are specified in this appendix. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit or otherwise limit the city from establishing additional supplemental review districts, provided however, that facilities and structures for which a permit was approved or deemed approved pursuant to this chapter prior to the establishment of the additional supplemental review district remain subject to the provisions of this chapter, including routine maintenance and replacement of those facilities and structures as set out in subsection 3(e)(1) and (2) of this chapter, and not to any provisions otherwise applicable to the additional supplemental review district. If a wireless services provider or a wireless infrastructure provider voluntarily replaces such facilities in a manner that does not comply with subsection 3(e)(2) of this chapter, or if a wireless services provider or a wireless infrastructure provider voluntarily relocates such facilities, such replacement or relocation is subject to the then-existing provisions and requirements of the additional supplemental review district. 
(f)  Repair of damage. A wireless services provider or a wireless infrastructure provider shall repair all damage to a city right-of-way directly caused by the activities of the wireless services provider or the wireless infrastructure provider, while occupying, installing, repairing, or maintaining wireless facilities, wireless support structures, city utility poles, or utility poles and to return the right-of-way to its functional equivalence before the damage. If the wireless services provider or the wireless infrastructure provider fails to make the repairs required by the city within 45 days after written notice, unless the city and the wireless services provider or the wireless infrastructure provider agree in writing to a longer time period, the city may undertake those repairs and charge the applicable party the reasonable and documented cost of the repairs. The city may maintain an action to recover the costs of the repairs. 
(Ord. of 5-6-2019, § 5)  
Sec. 7-6. - Effect of permit. 
(a)  Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A permit from the city authorizes an applicant to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this chapter, and does not create a property right or grant any authority whatsoever to the applicant to impinge upon the rights of others who may already have an interest in the covered area. 
(b)  Duration. Unless construction has actually begun and is diligently pursued to completion at that point, no permit for construction issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period longer than 12 months unless both city and applicant agree to a reasonable extension and all required fees are paid for the term regardless of construction. The inability of the applicant to obtain electrical power or backhaul transport services to serve the wireless facility such that it is operational within the 12 months due to the action or inaction of third-party utility providers shall not result in the invalidity of the permit. 
(Ord. of 5-6-2019, § 6)  
Sec. 7-7. - Removal, relocation or modification of a small wireless facility in the ROW. 
(a)  Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the city, a wireless services provider or a wireless infrastructure provider shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any wireless facilities or wireless support structures within the rights-of-way whenever the city, in its reasonable discretion, has determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon, the rights-of-way. 
(b)  Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The city retains the right to cut or move any wireless facility or wireless support structure located within its rights-of-way as the city, in its reasonable discretion, may determine to be necessary, appropriate, or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the city shall notify the wireless services provider or the wireless infrastructure provider and provide opportunity to move its own wireless facilities or wireless support structure prior to the city cutting or removing a wireless facility or wireless support structure and the city shall notify the wireless services provider or the wireless infrastructure provider after cutting or removing a wireless facility. 
(c)  Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a wireless facility or wireless support structure within the city rights-of-way, the wireless services provider or the wireless infrastructure provider shall notify the city within 90 days of such abandonment. Following receipt of such notice the city may direct the wireless services provider or the wireless infrastructure provider to remove all or any portion of the wireless facility or wireless support structure if the city, in its sole discretion, determines that such removal will be in the best interests of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(d)  Abandonment by inaction. At any point when a wireless services provider or a wireless infrastructure provider fails to pay any required fee, or annual payment to the city, and fails to respond within 60 days to a written inquiry from the city as to whether the wireless services provider or the wireless infrastructure provider intends to continue to operate a wireless facility or wireless support structure, for whatever reason, the wireless facility shall be deemed abandoned and the city may, at its sole option, remove all or any portion of the wireless facility or wireless support structure, or take other action as authorized by law, including recovery of actual costs incurred in removing the wireless facility or wireless support structure. 
(Ord. of 5-6-2019, § 7)  
Sec. 7-8. - Attachment to city-owned utility poles in the covered areas. 
(a)  Annual rate. The rate to place a small wireless facility on a city-owned pole in covered areas shall be $50.00 per year per wooden pole or $200.00 dollars per year for all other city-owned poles. This rate is in addition to reimbursement to the city for any expenses for make-ready work. The city reserves the right to require a pole attachment agreement to further define the terms and conditions of attachments to city-owned poles. The rates specified in this section shall not apply to poles owned, or operated and accounted for as an asset of, a municipal electric utility. 
(b)  Cease payment. A wireless services provider or a wireless infrastructure provider is authorized to remove its facilities at any time from a city-owned pole in covered areas and cease paying the annual rate to the city as of the next due date for payment following the removal. 
(c)  Make-ready. For city-owned utility poles in covered areas, the applicant shall reimburse the city for expenses for any reasonable make-ready work. The city shall provide a good faith estimate for any make-ready work necessary to enable the pole to support the requested small wireless facility, including pole replacement if necessary, within 60 days after receipt of a completed request. Make-ready work including any pole replacement shall be completed within 60 days of written acceptance of the good faith estimate by the wireless services provider or the wireless infrastructure provider. 
(d)  Municipal utilities excluded. Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authority of a municipal electric utility to deny, limit, restrict, or determine the rates, fees, terms, and conditions for the use of or attachment to a utility pole owned, or operated and accounted for as an asset of, a municipal electric utility. 
(Ord. of 5-6-2019, § 8) 
