
Goose Creek, South Carolina Code of Ordinances


CITY OF GOOSE CREEK, SOUTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2018 S-11 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 18-018, passed 8-14-2018



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



CITY OFFICIALS



 




Kevin M. Condon




Mayor Pro Tem








City Council




Debra Green-Fletcher




Brandon L. Cox




Corey McClary




Jerry Tekac




Gayla S.L. McSwain








Jake Bloom




City Administrator








Kelly J. Lovette, MMC




City Clerk








Tim Domin




City Attorney





 



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ADOPTING ORDINANCE 09-005



AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF GOOSE CREEK,
SOUTH CAROLINA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED
THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE
MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE
SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE



BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL:



Section 1.   The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Goose Creek,
South Carolina," published by American Legal Publishing Corporation,
consisting of chapters 10 through 151, which shall supersede all general and
permanent ordinances of the City passed on or before the adoption of this
ordinance, to the extent provided in Section 2 hereof.



Section 2.   All provisions of the Code shall be in full force and effect
from and after the effective date of this ordinance, and all ordinances of a
general and permanent nature enacted on final passage on or before the
effective date of this ordinance and not included in the Code or recognized
and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and
after the effective date of the Code.



Section 3.   The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be
construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a
subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.



Section 4.   Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person
convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance or
resolution, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall
be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding
30 days. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation
shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this
section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the
amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in
the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the
City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive
relief and revocation of licenses or permits.



Section 5.   Any and all additions or amendments to the Code when passed
in such form as to indicate the intention of the Mayor and Councilmembers to
make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the
Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments.



Section 6.   In case of the amendment of any section of the Code for which
a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section 4 of
this ordinance and in Section 1-6 of such Code shall apply to the section as
amended, or in case the amendment contains provisions for which a penalty,
other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section
in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in the other section shall be
held to relate to the section so amended, unless the penalty is specifically
repealed therein.



Section 7.   Any ordinance adopted after the effective date of this
ordinance which amends or refers to ordinances which have been codified in
such Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of
such Code.



Section 9.   This ordinance shall become effective August 11, 2009.



INTRODUCED the 14th day of July, 2009.



Done the 11th day of August, 2009.



                                          
                          /s/     



                           Mayor Michael J.
Heitzler, Ed.D.



Attest:                                          /s/ 
   



     Kelly J. Lovette, CMC, City Clerk



                                          /s/     
                                                
  /s/     



Mayor Pro Tem James (Kimo) R. Esarey      Councilmember Marguerite H.
Brown



                                          /s/     
                                                
  /s/     



Councilmember Sal Gandolfo               Councilmember John B.
McCants



                                          /s/     
                                                
  /s/     



Councilmember Mark A. Phillips            Councilmember Jerry
Tekac



TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Designation and citation



   10.02   Continuation of existing ordinances



   10.03   Definitions



   10.04   Rules of construction



   10.05   Catchlines



   10.06   Severability



   10.07   Effect of repeal or expiration



   10.08   Amendments



   10.09   Altering the code



   10.10   Liability for violations



   10.11   Prosecution for different penalties



   10.12   Municipal uniform ordinance summons



   10.13   Recording, filing, publication of ordinances



   10.14   Effective date of ordinances



   10.15   Supplementation of code



   10.16   Certain ordinances not affected by code



   10.99   Penalty



§ 10.01  DESIGNATION AND CITATION.



   The ordinances embraced in this and following chapters and sections
constitute and are designated as “The Code of Ordinances of Goose Creek,
South Carolina”, and may be so cited.  They may be cited also as the
“Goose Creek City Code” or “The City Code of Goose Creek”.



§ 10.02  CONTINUATION OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.



   The provisions appearing in this code, as far as they are the same as
those ordinances existing at the time of the adoption hereof, shall be
considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments.



§ 10.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AND or OR.  The word AND may be read as OR, and the word OR may be
read as AND where the sense requires it.



   BOND.  When BOND is required, an undertaking in writing shall be
sufficient.



   CITY.  The City of Goose Creek, Berkeley County, South Carolina.



   CLERK.  The Municipal City Clerk.  The title may be used
interchangeably with “Clerk”, “City Clerk” or “Clerk-Treasurer”,
if one person holds both positions.



   COMPUTATION OF TIME.  The time within which an act is to be done,
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, and if the last
day be Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded. The day the act,
event or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is
not to be included.  The last day of the period so computed is to be
included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or a state or federal holiday, in
which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is neither a
Saturday, Sunday nor the holiday.  When the period of time prescribed or
allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and holidays
shall be excluded in the computation. A half holiday shall be considered as
other days and not as a holiday.



   CORPORATE LIMITS, CORPORATION LIMITS.  Whenever the words CORPORATE
LIMITS, CORPORATION LIMITS or words of similar import are used, they shall
mean the legal boundary of the City of Goose Creek.



   COUNCIL or CITY COUNCIL.  The Mayor and Council, as defined in S.C.
Code § 5-11-20.



   COUNTY.  The County of Berkeley, State of South Carolina.



   DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.  Whenever a provision appears in this code
requiring the manager of a department or other officer of the city to do some
act or perform some duty, it shall be constructed to authorize the manager of
the department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize
subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection,
unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise.



   EMERGENCY VEHICLE.  Vehicles of the Fire and Police Departments,
ambulances and/or emergency vehicles or public service corporations as are
designated or authorized by the South Carolina Department of Highways and
Transportation, or by the City Council.



   GENDER.  See § 10.04(B).



   IN THE CITY.  Any territory, jurisdiction of which, for the exercise
of the city’s regulatory power, has been conferred on it by public or local
law.



   INTERPRETATION.  In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements
adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience
and general welfare. Where any provision of this code imposes greater
restriction upon the subject matter than another more general provision
imposed by the code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or
regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.



   JOINT AUTHORITY.  All words giving joint authority to three or more
persons or offices shall be construed as giving the authority to a majority
of the persons or officers.



   KEEPER, PROPRIETOR.  Persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs
and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or
employee.



   MAY.  The act shall be permissive.



   MINOR.  All references to minors in this code shall be deemed to mean
persons under the age of 18 years, except as otherwise provided in laws
relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages.



   MONTH.  A calendar month, unless defined otherwise.



   MUNICIPALITY.  May be used interchangeably with “city” and shall
mean the entire area within the corporate limits.



   NAME OF OFFICIAL, BOARD AND THE LIKE.  Whenever reference is made to
an official, board, commission, department and the like, by title only, it
shall be construed as though the words “of the City of Goose Creek” were
added.



   NONTECHNICAL and TECHNICAL WORDS.  Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but
technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar
and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to
the meaning.



   NUMBER.  See § 10.04(A).



   OATH or SWEAR.  SWORN shall be construed to include an affirmation in
all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath,
and in such cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be the equivalent to words
AFFIRM and AFFIRMED and vice versa.



   OWNER.  When applied to a building or land, any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole
or part of the building or land.



   PERSON.  A corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization
and any other group as a unit, as well as an individual or individuals.



   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Every species of property, except real property,
as defined in this section.



   PRECEDING and FOLLOWING.  The next before and the next after,
respectively.



   PREMISES.  Place or places.



   PROPERTY.  Real and personal property.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent
thereto, and any river or other waterway.



   REAL PROPERTY and REAL ESTATE.  Lands, tenements and the hereditaments.



   RESIDENCE.  The place adopted by a person as the person’s place of
habitation, and to which, whenever the person is absent, the person has the
intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at
another, the place where the person sleeps shall be deemed the person’s
residence.



   RESIDENCE DISTRICT.  Territory contiguous to, and including a street
not comprising a business district when the property on the street for a
distance of 300 feet or more, is in the main improved with dwellings or
dwellings and buildings in use with residences.



   ROADWAY.  The portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel.



   SEAL.  The city or corporate seal.



   SHALL.  The act shall be mandatory.



   SIDEWALK.  Any portion of a street between the curb line, or the
lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb and the adjacent property
line intended for the use of pedestrians.



   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  A mark, when a person cannot write.



   STATE.  The State of South Carolina.



   STATUTE REFERENCES.  Whenever reference is made, for example, to S.C.
Code § 44-1-160, it shall be constructed to refer to the code of Laws of
South Carolina, § 44-1-160, as amended, or whatever section is to be cited.
Whenever reference is made, for example, to Acts 1944, p.1301, it shall be
constructed to refer to page 1301 of the Acts of South Carolina 1944, or
whatever page and year is to be cited.



   STREET.  Streets, avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes,
bridges and all other public thoroughfares, and shall mean the entire width
thereof between abutting property lines.  It shall be construed to include a
sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless the
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council.



   TENANT or OCCUPANT.  When applied to a building or land, shall include
any person who occupies the whole or part of a building or land, whether
alone or with others.



   TENSE.  Words used in the past and present tense shall include the
future as well as the past and present.



   WEEK.  Seven days.



   WRITING.  The words “writing” or “written” shall include
printing and any other mode of representing words and letters.



   YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise defined.



(1985 Code, § 1-2)



§ 10.04  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   As used in this code and all ordinances, in all cases in which the
spirit and intent may require it, the following shall apply.



   (A)   Any word importing the singular number shall be held to
include the plural, and all words in the plural shall apply also to the
singular.



   (B)   All words importing the masculine gender shall apply to
females also, and words in the feminine gender shall apply to males.



   (C)   All words importing the present tense shall apply to the
future also.



§ 10.05  CATCHLINES.



   The catchlines of the several sections of this code, printed in capital
letters, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate or emphasize the
contents of the sections, not as any part of the section nor, unless
expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of the sections,
including the catchlines, are ended or reenacted.



§ 10.06  SEVERABILITY.



   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council, that if
any section, division, sentence, clause or phrase of this code shall be
declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of
competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the
remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, divisions and sections of this code
since the same would have been enacted without the incorporation in this code
of any unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, division or section.



§ 10.07  EFFECT OF REPEAL OR EXPIRATION.



   The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any
provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued, any offense
committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced
before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired.



§ 10.08  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   All ordinances adopted subsequent to the adoption of this
code, which amend, repeal or in any way affect this code, shall be numbered
in accordance with the numbering system of this code and printed for
inclusion herein.  In the case of repealed chapters, sections and divisions,
or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, the repealed portions may be
excluded from the code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby.



   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this code shall be made
by amending the provisions by specific reference to the section number of
this code in substantially the following, but not necessarily the exact,
language:  “that §             (number to be inserted) of the City
Code of The City of Goose Creek is hereby amended as follows:          
                  .”



   (C)   In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the code
is to be added, the following language may be used:  “that the Goose Creek
City Code, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered §      
        (number to be inserted), which section shall read as follows: 
            .”  The new section shall then be set out in full as
enacted, and the sections of this code may be renumbered to accomplish the
intention.



   (D)   All divisions, sections, chapters or provisions to be repealed
shall be specifically repealed by division, section or chapter number, as the
case may be.



§ 10.09  ALTERING THE CODE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or delete pages or
portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the laws of the municipality to be misrepresented
thereby.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 10.10  LIABILITY FOR VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Any violation of this code by any officer, agent or other
person acting for or employed by any corporation, unincorporated association
or organization while acting within the scope of his or her office or
employment, shall, in every case, also be deemed to be a violation by the
corporation, association or organization.



   (B)   Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by
any corporation, unincorporated association or organization shall be subject
and liable to punishment as well as the corporation, unincorporated
association or organization for the violation by it of any provision of this
code, where the violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act,
omission or order of any person.



§ 10.11  PROSECUTION FOR DIFFERENT PENALTIES.



   In all cases where the same offense may be created by different clauses
or sections of the ordinances of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against
the same person for the same offense.



§ 10.12  MUNICIPAL UNIFORM ORDINANCE SUMMONS.



   (A)   Any person or entity violating any provision of the code, or
any code adopted pursuant thereto, within the corporate limits of the city,
may be issued a uniform ordinance summons.  Issuance of the uniform
ordinance summons shall vest jurisdiction in the Municipal Court to hear and
dispose of the charge for which the uniform ordinance summons was issued and
served.  The uniform ordinance summons may be issued by any city law
enforcement officer or any other city employees designated by the Council as
code enforcement officers.  The bond amount for violations shall be
prescribed by the Chief Municipal Court Judge.  City law enforcement or code
enforcement officers are prohibited from accepting bonds.  Bonds are to be
posted in the manner prescribed in the uniform ordinance summons. The uniform
ordinance summons shall not be used to perform a custodial arrest.



   (B)   This section does not apply to any ordinance which regulates
the use of motor vehicles on the public roads.



§ 10.13  RECORDING, FILING, PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the Council shall be recorded by the Municipal
Clerk in proper books with indexes. The originals shall be filed in the
Clerk's office and due proof of the publication of all ordinances requiring
publication, by the certificate of the publisher or printer, shall be
procured by the Clerk, and attached thereto, or written and attested upon the
face of the record of the ordinance.



(1985 Code, § 1-5)



Statutory reference:



   Proof of ordinance of municipality, see S.C. Code § 19-3-10



§ 10.14  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances shall take effect upon their publication, unless an
ordinance shall otherwise specify the time when it shall go into effect.



(1985 Code, § 1-7)



§ 10.15  SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE.



   (A)   By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code
shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the City
Council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and
general parts of ordinances passed by the Council or adopted by initiative
and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes
made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that
they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages
which have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so
prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be current through
the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.



   (B)   In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the
code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by the omission
thereof from reprinted pages.



   (C)   When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier
(meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the
supplement) may make formal, non-substantive changes in ordinances and parts
of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so
to embody them into the unified Code. For example, the codifier may:



      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate
subdivisions;



      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for
sections and other subdivisions of the code printed in the supplement and
make changes in the catchlines, headings and titles;



      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other
subdivisions to be inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate
new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers;



      (4)   Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the
same meaning to “this chapter”, “this article”, “this division”
and the like, as the case may be, or to “sections           to    
        “ (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the
code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into
the code); and



      (5)   Make other non-substantive changes necessary to preserve
the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the code; but, in no
case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.



(1985 Code, § 1-8)



§ 10.16  CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT AFFECTED BY CODE.



   (A)   Nothing in this code, or the ordinance adopting this code,
shall affect any ordinance:



      (1)   Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the
city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of
the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city;



      (2)   Containing any administrative provisions of the City
Council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this code;



      (3)   Granting any right or franchise and establishing any
rates therefor;



      (4)   Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating,
opening, paving, widening, vacating and the like, any street or public way in
the city;



      (5)   Making any appropriation;



      (6)   Levying or imposing taxes, not inconsistent with this
code;



      (7)   Establishing or prescribing grades of streets in the
city;



      (8)   Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes
therefor;



      (9)   Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the
city, or prescribing subdivision regulations;



      (10)   Adopting, extending or contracting the boundaries of
the city;



      (11)   Prescribing the number, classification or compensation
of any city officers or employees, not inconsistent herewith;



      (12)   Prescribing zoning regulations or re-zoning particular
property;



      (13)   The ordinance contained in this section, adopting the
Mayor-Council form of government;



      (14)   Any ordinance adopted after April 9, 1985; and



      (15)   Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a
general and permanent nature.



   (B)   All ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full
force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this code. The
ordinances are on file in the City Clerk's office.



(1985 Code, § 1-11)



§ 10.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance, resolution, rule,
regulation or order promulgated by any agency or officer thereof under
authority duly vested in him, her or it, any act is prohibited or is made or
declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, or the doing of any act
is required, where no specific penalty is provided for the violation thereof,
the violation of any provisions of this code, ordinance, resolution, rule,
regulation or order shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 plus
assessments required by the State of South Carolina or by imprisonment for a
period not exceeding 30 days, or both.  No penalty shall exceed the penalty
provided by state law for similar offenses.  Each day any violation of this
code or any ordinance, rule or regulation shall continue shall constitute a
separate offense.



   (B)   (1)   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance or
resolution of the city, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense, or whenever in the code, ordinance or resolution, the
doing of any act required or the failure to do any act is declared to be
unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of
any such provision of this code or any ordinance, shall be punished by a fine
not exceeding $500 plus assessments required by the State of South Carolina
or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days. Each day any violation of
any provision of this code or of any ordinance shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense.



      (2)   In addition to the penalty herein above provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions
of this code, or any such ordinance or resolution, shall be deemed a public
nuisance and may be, by the city, abated as provided by law, and each day
that the condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.



(1985 Code, § 1-6)  (Ord. 93-005A, passed 8-30-1993)



Statutory references:



   Authority, see S.C. Code § 5-7-30



   Limitation on fine and term of imprisonment, see S.C. Code § 5-7-30



   Maximum penalties that Municipal Judge may impose, see S.C. Code §
14-25-65



TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter




      30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





      31.   CITY COUNCIL





      32.   CITY OFFICERS





      33.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS





      34.   FINANCE AND TAXATION





      35.   CIVIL EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS





      36.   COURT AND CRIMINAL PROCEDURE





      37.   ELECTIONS





      38.   PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES




CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   30.01   Administrative regulations



   30.02   Administrative directives



   30.03   City Seal



   30.04   Uniform ordinance summons



§ 30.01  ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS.



   Administrative regulations shall be issued by the City Administrator.



(1985 Code, § 2-1)



§ 30.02  ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIVES.



   Administrative directives shall be issued by the City Administrator and
department managers.



(1985 Code, § 2-2)



§ 30.03  CITY SEAL.



   The city shall have a common seal, which shall be affixed to all
ordinances passed by the City Council, to all deeds of real estate executed
on behalf of the city and to all notes, bonds and other evidences of
indebtedness executed in behalf of the city.



(1985 Code, § 2-3)



§ 30.04  UNIFORM ORDINANCE SUMMONS.



   A uniform ordinance summons is hereby adopted pursuant to S.C. Code §
56-7-80, as amended, with the following stipulations:



   (A)   The City Administrator shall have responsibility for the
ordinance summons, and shall insure that a complete audit of the ordinance
summons shall be completed on an annual basis by the city's independent
auditor;



   (B)   The Finance Director shall be responsible for having the
ordinance summons printed, issuing the same and keeping a record of the
ordinance summons issued to city code enforcement officials;



   (C)   All code enforcement officials issuing ordinance summons shall
be responsible for forwarding the copy of the ordinance summons labeled
“Court Copy”, to the Municipal Court within 24 hours of issuing the
ordinance summons. It shall also be the code enforcement official’s
responsibility to retain the copy of the ordinance summons labeled “Officer
Copy” until the designated hearing time, and after all action concerning
the ordinance summons has been concluded, the code enforcement official shall
deliver the “Officer Copy” to the Finance Director within 24 hours for
the proper accounting of the same;



   (D)   The form of the ordinance summons shall be substantially the
same (sequentially numbered, in triplicate) as the form which is attached
hereto, and incorporated herein by reference. The ordinance summons shall
clearly indicate by printing that such is an ordinance summons of the City of
Goose Creek, South Carolina; and



   (E)   The City Administrator may promulgate additional
administrative regulations for the proper handling of the ordinance summons.



(Ord. 92-09, passed 11-10-1992)



CHAPTER 31: CITY COUNCIL



Section




General Provisions




   31.001   Composition of Council



   31.002   Eligibility for Mayor and Council members



   31.003   Tenure



   31.004   Oath of office



   31.005   Compensation of Mayor and Council members as fixed




Mayor




   31.020   Chief Executive Officer



   31.021   Investigation of city books, papers and records



   31.022   Devolution of powers and duties; generally



   31.023   Suppression of riots and preservation of good order




Powers and Duties




   31.035   Legislative power; determination of policy



   31.036   Enactment of ordinances



   31.037   Police power



   31.038   Establishment of offices



   31.039   General health and welfare



   31.040   Adoption of the budget



   31.041   Authorization of issuance of bonds



   31.042   To secure an independent audit



   31.043   Power to investigate; subpoena witness



   31.044   Power to hold in contempt; disruptive actions



   31.045   Appeal from administrative rules and regulations




Meetings and Procedure




   31.060   Place, day and time of regular meeting; meetings open



   31.061   Special meetings



   31.062   Executive sessions



   31.063   Minutes



   31.064   Duty to attend; penalty for failure



   31.065   Quorum, lack thereof; tie vote



   31.066   Presiding officer; duties generally



   31.067   Robert’s Rules of Order



   31.068   Order of proceedings



   31.069   Speaking by member; addressing Chair; respect



   31.070   Recognition of speaker



   31.071   Frequency



   31.072   Voting; members required to vote



   31.073   Explanation of vote; reasons may be recorded



   31.074   Interested member not to vote



   31.075   Reducing motions, resolutions and propositions to writing



   31.076   Citizens’ request to meet with Council



   31.077   Committees



   31.078   Committee reports generally; required; signing



   31.079   Approval or disapproval of proposals and recommendations



   31.080   Acts required to be done by ordinance



   31.081   Passage of ordinances; duty of Council; enforcement



   31.082   Form



   31.083   Introduction; readings



   31.084   Signing



   31.085   Effective date of ordinances



   31.086   Entering ordinances in book; indexing; proof of publication



   31.087   Notation in ordinance book of amending and repealing



   31.088   Tampering with ordinance books or minute books




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 31.001  COMPOSITION OF COUNCIL.



   The governing body of the city shall consist of a Mayor and six Council
members and shall be known as the City Council.



(1985 Code, § 2-20)



§ 31.002 ELIGIBILITY FOR MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   To be eligible for the position of Mayor or Council member of the city,
a person shall be a duly qualified elector of the city under the constitution
and statutes of the state.



(1985 Code, § 2-21)



§ 31.003  TENURE.



   The Mayor and Council members shall hold office for the period of four
years and until their successors shall be duly elected and have qualified.
The terms of Council shall be staggered so that not more than one half of the
Council and Mayor shall be elected in the same general election.



(1985 Code, § 2-22)



§ 31.004  OATH OF OFFICE.



   The Mayor and Council members, before entering upon the duties of their
respective offices, shall take the following oath: “I do solemnly swear (or
affirm) that I am duly qualified, according to the Constitution of this
state, to exercise the duties of the office to which I have been elected, and
that I will, to the best of my ability, discharge the duties thereof, and
preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the state and of the United
States. As Mayor (or Council member) of the City of Goose Creek, I will
equally, fairly and impartially to the best of my ability and skill, exercise
the trust reposed in me and will use my best endeavor to preserve the peace
and carry into effect, according to law, the purpose for which I have been
elected. So help me God”.



(1985 Code, § 2-23)



§ 31.005  COMPENSATION OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS AS FIXED.



   The Mayor and Council members shall be paid an annual salary, made in
equal monthly payments, in accordance with the amounts set forth in the
annual appropriations ordinance, in accordance with state law.



(1985 Code, § 2-24)



Statutory reference:



   Fixing compensation, see S.C. Code § 5-7-170




MAYOR




§ 31.020  CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER.



   The Mayor shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the city and shall
exercise all powers and authority vested in the officer by the ordinances of
the city and the laws of the state. In addition to the powers and duties
exercised and required by law or ordinance, it shall be the Mayor's duty to
be vigilant and active at all times in causing the ordinances and laws of the
city to be duly executed and put into force, to inspect the conduct of all
subordinate officers in the government or management of their respective
offices and, as far as it is in the Mayor's power, to cause all negligence,
carelessness and positive violation of duty to be duly prosecuted and
punished.



(1985 Code, § 2-30)



§ 31.021  INVESTIGATION OF CITY BOOKS, PAPERS AND RECORDS.



   The Mayor shall have full power to investigate the books, papers and
records of the officers of the city, whenever, in the Mayor's opinion, it may
be necessary, or appoint others to do so.



(1985 Code, § 2-31)



§ 31.022  DEVOLUTION OF POWERS AND DUTIES; GENERALLY.



   It shall be the duty of the Mayor, at the first meeting after the
officer's inauguration, to call an election at which one of the Council
members may be elected Mayor Pro Tem, whose duty it shall be to act as Mayor
in the absence of the Mayor from the city, or when the Mayor may be
incapacitated from discharging the duties of the office. In the absence or
inability of both the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem, the duties of the Mayor shall
devolve on and be performed by the Council member as the Council shall name.



(1985 Code, § 2-32)



§ 31.023  SUPPRESSION OF RIOTS AND PRESERVATION OF GOOD ORDER.



   It is the special duty of the Mayor to take prompt measures for the
suppression of rows and riots and the preservation of good order in the city,
for which purpose the Mayor is authorized to require all the city officers
and, if necessary, the citizens, to aid and assist the officer.



(1985 Code, § 2-33)




POWERS AND DUTIES




§ 31.035  LEGISLATIVE POWER; DETERMINATION OF POLICY.



   (A)   All legislative powers of the city and the determination of
all matters of policy shall be vested in the City Council.



   (B)   Each Council member, including the Mayor, shall have one vote.



(1985 Code, § 2-40)



§ 31.036  ENACTMENT OF ORDINANCES.



   The City Council shall enact ordinances of every nature and kind, not
prohibited by the law or constitution of the state or of the nation.



(1985 Code, § 2-41)



Statutory references:



   Acts required to be done by ordinance, see S.C. Code § 5-7-260



   Form and procedure for introducing and passing ordinances, see S.C.
Code § 5-7-270



§ 31.037  POLICE POWER.



   The City Council shall have the power and authority to make, ordain and
establish all the rules, bylaws, regulations and ordinances not inconsistent
with the laws of the state or nation respecting the roads, streets, markets,
police, health and order of the city or respecting any subject as shall
appear to the Council necessary and proper for the security, welfare and
convenience of the city, or for preserving the health, peace, order and good
government within the city. The City Council may fix fines and penalties for
the violation thereof not exceeding $500 fine or 30 days imprisonment.



(1985 Code, § 2-42)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 5-7-30



§ 31.038  ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICES.



   The City Council shall have the power to establish the subordinate
offices as it deems necessary, and assign to the offices appropriate duties
and powers.



(1985 Code, § 2-43)



Statutory reference:



   Establishment and the like, of departments, see S.C. Code § 5-9-40



§ 31.039  GENERAL HEALTH AND WELFARE.



   It shall be the responsibility of the City Council to provide for the
general health and welfare of the city in accordance with the law of the
state with reference to the general police powers now granted to
municipalities.



(1985 Code, § 2-44)



§ 31.040  ADOPTION OF THE BUDGET.



   The City Council shall annually adopt a budget for the city.



(1985 Code, § 2-45)



§ 31.041  AUTHORIZATION OF ISSUANCE OF BONDS.



   The City Council shall authorize the issuance of bonds by a bond
ordinance subject to the restrictions and limitations as may be prescribed by
law.



(1985 Code, § 2-46)



§ 31.042  TO SECURE AN INDEPENDENT AUDIT.



   (A)   The Council shall provide for an independent annual audit of
all financial records and transactions of the municipality and of any agency
funded in whole or in part by municipal funds, and may provide for more
frequent audits as it deems necessary. The audits shall be made by a
certified public accountant or firm of the accountants who have no personal
interest direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the municipal
government or any of its officers



   (B)   The Council may, without requiring competitive bids, designate
the accountant or firm annually or for a period not exceeding four years,
provided, that the designation for any particular fiscal year shall be made
no later than 30 days after the beginning of the fiscal year. The reports of
the audit shall be made available for public inspection. The Council may, in
its discretion, accept independent audits of municipal agencies and
departments and include the audit of the municipality.



(1985 Code, § 2-47)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 5-7-240



§ 31.043  POWER TO INVESTIGATE; SUBPOENA WITNESS.



   The City Council shall have the authority to appoint committees to
investigate any department of the city government and any office thereof, and
the committees of Council shall have the same power which a magistrate has to
compel the attendance of witnesses and to require them to give evidence under
oath in the same manner as in the courts of the state.



(1985 Code, § 2-48)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see S.C. Code § 5-7-100



§ 31.044  POWER TO HOLD IN CONTEMPT; DISRUPTIVE ACTIONS.



   (A)   Any person refusing to obey a subpoena and give the evidence
as is required thereunder shall be held in contempt of Council.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or interfere
with any session or meeting of the Council by any means or any manner, or to
use profane, obscene or disrespectful language, gestures or signs, to or in
the presence thereof, or to commit any offense which is by the laws of the
state, deemed a contempt.



(1985 Code, § 2-49)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 31.045  APPEAL FROM ADMINISTRATIVE RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Every citizen who shall be held to be in violation of any
rule, regulation or directive to the city through its normal governmental
operations shall have recourse by appeal to the City Council except for those
violations normally handled by the court.



   (B)   To perfect this appeal, the petitioner must reduce it to
writing by citing the violation, date and time, and all the facts bearing
thereon as the petitioner sees them, and present it to Council or to the City
Clerk for transmittal to the Council at its next session.



   (C)   The Council shall have the right to deny the petition or to
alter, amend or rescind the rule, regulation or directive, as its
investigation shall indicate.



(1985 Code, § 2-50)




MEETINGS AND PROCEDURE




§ 31.060  PLACE, DAY AND TIME OF REGULAR MEETING; MEETINGS OPEN.



   (A)   The regular meetings of the City Council shall be held in the
City Hall on the second Tuesday of each month. The time shall be 7:00 p.m.
unless another hour is specified.



   (B)   All meetings shall be open to the public, except as otherwise
specifically provided for by the state “Freedom of Information Act”.



(1985 Code, § 2-60)



Statutory reference:



   For the Act, see S.C. Code §§ 30-4-10et seq.



§ 31.061  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   A special meeting may be called by the Mayor in case of an emergency or
when, in the Mayor's judgement, the good of the city requires it. The Mayor
shall call extra or special meetings when requested by a majority of the
Council members. Notice of a special meeting shall be given immediately to
all members and the news media by the City Clerk.



(1985 Code, § 2-61)



§ 31.062  EXECUTIVE SESSIONS.



   The City Council may be called into executive session as permitted by
the state “Freedom of Information Act”.



(1985 Code, § 2-62)



Statutory reference:



   For the Act, see S.C. Code §§ 30-4-10et seq.



§ 31.063  MINUTES.



   The minutes of all meetings of the Council, except during executive
session, shall be kept by the City Clerk and shall be recorded in a book
designated as “The Minutes of City Council of Goose Creek”.



(1985 Code, § 2-63)



§ 31.064  DUTY TO ATTEND; PENALTY FOR FAILURE.



   It shall be the duty of the Council members to attend the regular
meetings of the Council and, when notified, to attend all extra or special
meetings called by the Mayor. The Mayor or Council member failing or refusing
to attend these meetings without sufficient excuse, shall pay the fine as the
Council may impose.



(1985 Code, § 2-64)



§ 31.065  QUORUM, LACK THEREOF; TIE VOTE.



   (A)   A majority of the Council members elected shall constitute a
quorum to do business. If a quorum fails to appear within 15 minutes after
the hour appointed for a Council meeting, no member shall be required to
attend longer.



   (B)   If, in the vote the Council shall be equally divided, the
question shall be decided in the negative.



(1985 Code, § 2-65)



Statutory reference:



   Quorum, see S.C. Code § 5-7-160



§ 31.066  PRESIDING OFFICER; DUTIES GENERALLY.



   (A)   The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of the Council. In
the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall preside and in the absence
of the Mayor Pro Tem, the Council shall proceed to elect, if a quorum is
found to be present, by a majority vote of those present, a Chairperson on
the meeting to preside until the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem appears.



   (B)   The presiding officer shall preserve decorum and shall decide
all questions of order, subject to appeal to the Council.



(1985 Code, § 2-66)



§ 31.067  ROBERT’S RULES OF ORDER.



   (A)   Except as may be otherwise provided, the proceedings of the
City Council shall be controlled by the Robert’s Rules of Order, Modern
Edition.



   (B)   The City Administrator and/or officer designated by City
Council shall act as parliamentarian.



(1985 Code, § 2-67)



§ 31.068  ORDER OF PROCEEDINGS.



   Immediately at the hour appointed for the meeting of the Council, the
Mayor shall call the same to order, and if a quorum is present, business
shall be proceeded within the following order:



   (A)   Approval of the minutes of the preceding meeting;



   (B)   Ordinances already in possession of Council shall be
considered;



   (C)   Petitions received and disposed with;



   (D)   Reports or communications from city officers;



   (E)   Reports from special committees;



   (F)   Miscellaneous business not included in any of the preceding
categories; and



   (G)   Adjournment.



(1985 Code, § 2-68)



§ 31.069  SPEAKING BY MEMBER; ADDRESSING CHAIR; RESPECT.



   Every member of the Council when about to speak shall address the
presiding officer, and in speaking shall avoid all disrespect to the Council
and all personalities, and shall confine the speaking to the subject under
consideration.



(1985 Code, § 2-69)



§ 31.070  RECOGNITION OF SPEAKER.



   The presiding officer, when addressed by a member who rises in order,
shall name the member using no official title. The member who shall rise
first in order, shall be first heard. If several members rise about the same
time, the presiding officer shall decide who shall speak first.



(1985 Code, § 2-70)



§ 31.071  FREQUENCY.



   No member shall speak more than twice on the same question without
leave of the Council, except to explain.



(1985 Code, § 2-71)



§ 31.072  VOTING; MEMBERS REQUIRED TO VOTE.



   The “yeas” and “nays” on any question shall always be recorded
when required by any member. When the question has been stated, the roll
shall be called by the Clerk, and after the first response has been made to
the call, all debate shall cease and no member shall say more than “yea”
or “nay”. During the roll call, no member shall leave the Council chamber
and every member present shall, when the member's name is called, give the
member's vote unless excused by a majority of members present. Should the
vote of all present result in a tie, the question shall be decided in the
negative.



(1985 Code, § 2-72)



§ 31.073  EXPLANATION OF VOTE; REASONS MAY BE RECORDED.



   (A)   Any member of the Council may, if the member desires, have
time in which to explain the member's vote if permitted by a majority of the
Council. The member may be allowed not more than five minutes in which to do
so.



   (B)   A member may, if the member desires, have the member's reasons
for voting for or against any measure recorded in the minutes of the meeting.



(1985 Code, § 2-73)



§ 31.074  INTERESTED MEMBER NOT TO VOTE.



   No member of Council or the Mayor shall vote on any question of a
private nature, in the event of which the person is personally interested.



(1985 Code, § 2-74)



Statutory reference:



   Conflicts of interests, see S.C. Code § 5-7-130



§ 31.075  REDUCING MOTIONS, RESOLUTIONS AND PROPOSITIONS TO WRITING.



   All motions, resolutions or propositions shall be reduced to writing,
if required by any member of the Council.



(1985 Code, § 2-75)



§ 31.076  CITIZENS’ REQUEST TO MEET WITH COUNCIL.



   All persons desiring to meet and engage in a business session with the
Council shall first submit a written request to the Mayor, requesting an
appointment, stating time and place for the meeting and shall stipulate the
nature of business to be discussed or transacted, this notice to be given at
least ten days prior to the meeting or at a time within the discretion of the
Mayor.



(1985 Code, § 2-76)



§ 31.077  COMMITTEES.



   The City Council may provide for special committee, whose members shall
be appointed by the Mayor. The Mayor shall be an ex-officio member of all the
committees.



(1985 Code, § 2-77)



§ 31.078  COMMITTEE REPORTS GENERALLY; REQUIRED; SIGNING.



   All committees of the Council shall regularly report to the Council all
their acts and plans for matters within their jurisdiction. Committee reports
shall be signed by a majority of the members to whom the subject was referred.



(1985 Code, § 2-78)



§ 31.079  APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL OF PROPOSALS AND RECOMMENDATIONS.



   The City Council shall be the final authority for the approval or
disapproval of any committee proposals or recommendations.



(1985 Code, § 2-79)



§ 31.080  ACTS REQUIRED TO BE DONE BY ORDINANCE.



   The City Council shall act by ordinance in all matters required by law
to be done by ordinance, including:



   (A)   The adoption or amending of an administrative code or the
establishment, alteration or abolition of a municipal department, office or
agency;



   (B)   The establishment of a fine or other penalty or the
establishment of any rule or regulation in which a fine or other penalty is
imposed for violations;



   (C)   The adoption of budgets or the levy of taxes, except as
otherwise provided, with respect to the property tax levied by the adoption
of a budget, pursuant to public notice;



   (D)   The granting, renewal or extension of franchises;



   (E)   The authorization to borrow money;



   (F)   The selling, leasing or contracting to sell or lease any lands
of the municipality; and



   (G)   The amending or repealing of any ordinance listed above.



(1985 Code, § 2-80)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 5-7-260



§ 31.081  PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES; DUTY OF COUNCIL; ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be the duty of City Council to pass, from time to time, the
ordinances as to its judgement shall best promote the interest of the
citizens and property holders of the city, and to diligently and actively
ensure the enforcement of these and all ordinances of the city.



(1985 Code, § 2-81)



§ 31.082  FORM.



   Every proposed ordinance shall be in writing and in the form required
for final adoption which shall include:



   (A)   A title briefly describing the content;



   (B)   Findings, reasons or basis for the ordinance, if desired and
appropriate;



   (C)   An enacting clause;



   (D)   Citation of any ordinance repealed;



   (E)   The provisions of the ordinance, which may include code
section numbers if the ordinance is to be codified or amends an existing
codified ordinance;



   (F)   The effective date of the ordinance;



   (G)   The approval of the City Attorney as to form and assignment of
an ordinance number; and



   (H)   Space for the signatures of the Mayor, members of Council and
the City Clerk.



(1985 Code, § 2-82)



Statutory reference:



   Introducing and passing ordinances, see S.C. Code § 5-7-270



§ 31.083  INTRODUCTION; READINGS.



   Every proposed ordinance must be introduced in writing and in the form
required for final adoption. No ordinance may have the force of law until it
has been read at least two times and on two separate days, with at least six
days between each reading.



(1985 Code, § 2-83)



Statutory reference:



   Required readings, see S.C. Code § 5-7-270



§ 31.084  SIGNING.



   Every ordinance passed by the City Council shall be signed by at least
three members of Council, the Mayor and the City Clerk before it shall be in
force.



(1985 Code, § 2-84)



§ 31.085  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances shall take effect upon their publication, unless an
ordinance shall otherwise specify the time when it shall go into effect.



(1985 Code, § 2-85)



§ 31.086  ENTERING ORDINANCES IN BOOK; INDEXING; PROOF OF PUBLICATION.



   The City Clerk shall enter the original ordinance in the ordinance book
of the city as passed by the Council. The ordinance book shall be indexed.
Due proof of the publication of all ordinances requiring publication by the
certificate of the publisher or printer shall be procured by the City Clerk.



(1985 Code, § 2-86)



§ 31.087  NOTATION IN ORDINANCE BOOK OF AMENDING AND REPEALING.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall write on the indexes pages of each
ordinance book, if any part therein has been amended or repealed, as the case
may be, the words “amended” or “repealed” with a reference to the
ordinance number where the amending or repealing ordinance can be found.



   (B)   When the amending or repealing ordinance shall change the
subject matter, the notation shall be made in the index at the appropriate
places.



(1985 Code, § 2-87)



§ 31.088  TAMPERING WITH ORDINANCE BOOKS OR MINUTE BOOKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, without authority from the City
Council, to make any alterations, erasures, changes or interlineations in the
ordinance books or minute books of the city.



(1985 Code, § 2-88)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 32: CITY OFFICERS



Section




City Administrator




   32.01   Appointment; term; bond; removal



   32.02   Communications with Council



   32.03   Job description



   32.04   General duties; delegation of authority




City Clerk




   32.20   Appointment; term; salary as fixed



   32.21   Bond



   32.22   Subject to orders, directions and the like



   32.23   General duties



   32.24   Signing and attesting ordinances and other documents



   32.25   Keeping the ordinance book



   32.26   Removal of papers or documents from Clerk’s custody



   32.27   Custodian of Seal




City Attorney




   32.45   Appointment



   32.46   Qualifications



   32.47   Term



   32.48   General duties



   32.49   Duty to attend Council meetings



   32.50   Duty to advise and assist Mayor, Council and city officers



   32.51   Prosecution and defense of actions; appearance in legal
proceedings



   32.52   Drafting ordinances and instruments; legal correspondence



   32.53   Salary as fixed




CITY ADMINISTRATOR




§ 32.01  APPOINTMENT; TERM; BOND; REMOVAL.



   (A)   Appointment.  The Mayor and the City Council shall appoint a
City Administrator and fix the Administrator's compensation. The City
Administrator shall be named solely on the basis of the person's executive
and administrative qualifications.



   (B)   Term.  The City Administrator shall serve at the pleasure of
the Mayor and City Council for an indefinite term.



   (C)   Bond.  The City Administrator shall enter into an approved
bond in the sum as prescribed by the City Council, conditioned for the
faithful and honest performance of the duties of the office. The cost of the
bond shall be paid by the city.



   (D)   Removal.  The City Administrator may be removed from office
by a majority vote of all members of the City Council. Those members voting
for removal shall state their reasons for the vote. The action of the City
Council in removing the City Administrator shall be final. In all cases the
City Administrator shall receive 90 days notice of removal, or severance pay
for 90 days if the removal is effective immediately; or for a greater amount
as dictated by a contract between the city and the City Administrator.



(1985 Code, § 2-100)



§ 32.02  COMMUNICATIONS WITH COUNCIL.



   The City Administrator shall relate to and communicate with the Mayor
and the City Council as a whole, any problems, situations and conditions
which arise concerning any department or activity of the city which, in the
opinion of the City Administrator, is of significance. Except for the purpose
of inquiry, the members of the Council shall communicate directly to the City
Administrator in all matters concerning any department or activity of the
city. No member of City Council shall give orders to anyone subordinate to
the City Administrator except in a case of an emergency.



(1985 Code, § 2-101)



§ 32.03  JOB DESCRIPTION.



   (A)   Function.  Plans, directs and coordinates administrative and
operational activities of the city, appoints and supervises all appointed
department managers, performs duties involving formulation of broad policies
and long-term programs, including decision making which establishes guides
and general directives for the organization as a whole.



   (B)   Examples of work performed.



      (1)   Approves preparation of and submits annual budget to
Mayor and City Council;



      (2)   Recommends organizational changes and assists in
formulation of internal plans, policies and programs;



      (3)   Maintains operational control and supervision of all
appointed department managers and their departments;



      (4)   Plans, directs and coordinates activities of all
departments funded by the Council;



      (5)   Coordinates the activities of city government with all
other agencies within the city, county and with state and federal agencies,
develops and establishes policies and procedures for the operation of
administrative functions and operational activities of the city, including
fire, police, street and public works and the like; and



      (6)   Performs related duties as required.



   (C)   Required knowledge, skills and abilities.



      (1)   Thorough knowledge of principals and practices of public
and private business administration;



      (2)   Extensive knowledge of public works activities and
practice; and



      (3)   Extensive knowledge of modern planning and capital
budgeting.



   (D)   Minimum training and experience.  A master's degree in public
administration and three years experience in local government administration,
or a bachelor's degree and six years related experience.



(1985 Code, § 2-102)



§ 32.04  GENERAL DUTIES; DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The City Administrator shall be responsible to the Mayor and
to the City Council for the proper administration of the policies and affairs
of the city, and to that end shall have the power and authority and be
required to:



      (1)   Assist the Mayor in carrying out the duties of the
Mayor's office;



      (2)   Direct, supervise and coordinate administrative
activities and operations;



      (3)   Appoint department managers with approval of the Mayor
and Council;



      (4)   Appoint other city employees;



      (5)   Suspend or dismiss department managers with approval of
the Mayor and Council;



      (6)   Suspend or dismiss other city employees;



      (7)   Prepare a proposed annual operating budget and submit
the proposed budget to the Mayor and Council for review and consideration;



      (8)   Have responsibility for administration of annual
operating budget after adoption;



      (9)   Prepare an annually updated five year capital program
and budget;



      (10)   Recommend and administer personnel policies,
classification, compensation and evaluation policies for all city employees;



      (11)   Monitor the financial condition of the city, estimate
present and future financial means;



      (12)   Prepare monthly reports on financial activities;



      (13)   Prepare monthly reports on administrative activities;



      (14)   Combine or consolidate job positions within departments
as necessary or prudent to maximize manpower utilization and efficiency;



      (15)   Recommend and administer policies governing purchasing
procedures and inventory control;



      (16)   Authorize the purchase of services, material and
equipment which do not require the taking of bids, provided that the items
are appropriated in the annual operating budget, capital improvements budget
or revenue sharing budget;



      (17)   Authorize shifts in departmental budget line items
provided overall departmental appropriations do not change;



      (18)   Investigate complaints concerning administrative
matters and personnel performance;



      (19)   Prepare and submit to the Mayor and City Council at the
end of each fiscal year a complete annual report on the finances and
administrative activities of the city; and



      (20)   Provide the Mayor and City Council with information,
data and leadership in matters of policy determination. In this area, the
Administrator shall take an active role in the pursuance of grants and other
monies for municipal use.



   (B)   Delegate to other administrative officers subject to the
Administrator's direction and supervision, the authority to exercise specific
duties and responsibilities as may be considered appropriate.



(1985 Code, § 2-103)




CITY CLERK




§ 32.20  APPOINTMENT; TERM; SALARY AS FIXED.



   A City Clerk shall be appointed by the City Council, and, shall hold
office indefinitely or until a successor is duly appointed and qualified. The
Clerk shall receive the amount of salary as is prescribed by the annual
budget ordinance.



(1985 Code, § 2-110)



§ 32.21  BOND.



   The City Clerk, prior to entering upon the performance of the duties of
the office, shall enter into a bond with good and sufficient surety,
conditioned for the faithful and honest performance of the duties of the
office. The cost of the bond shall be paid by the city.



(1985 Code, § 2-111)



§ 32.22  SUBJECT TO ORDERS, DIRECTIONS AND THE LIKE.



   The City Clerk shall be subject to the orders and directions of the
City Council and the City Administrator.



(1985 Code, § 2-112)



§ 32.23  GENERAL DUTIES.



   The City Clerk shall:



   (A)   Attend all meetings of City Council;



   (B)   Take minutes thereof, and record the same in a suitable book,
and keep an index book in connection therewith, in which shall be indexed the
subject matter of important matters in the proceedings of Council, with a
reference to the page of the record book where the matters appear;



   (C)   Lay before the Council all communications and other papers
addressed to it through the Clerk;



   (D)   Have the proceedings of Council promptly published in a local
newspaper when so required by Council;



   (E)   Have charge of and be responsible for the preservation of all
papers, records and documents of every description pertaining to the city;



   (F)   So arrange and file all the papers in packages or cases as
will facilitate access to them, arranging and filing same according to their
subject matter and numbering the packages or cases numerically;



   (G)   Keep an index book, in which shall be entered alphabetically
the names or subject matter of the papers and documents, and the number of
the package or case in which the same are to be found;



   (H)   Issue all notices, personal and general, which the interest,
convenience, laws and orders of the city require in the administration of its
government; and



   (I)   Communicate to the Council all information the officer may
acquire which may contribute to the efficiency of the government and the
welfare of the people.



(1985 Code, § 2-113)



§ 32.24  SIGNING AND ATTESTING ORDINANCES AND OTHER DOCUMENTS.



   The City Clerk shall sign and attest all ordinances, deeds, contracts
and other documents.



(1985 Code, § 2-114)



§ 32.25  KEEPING THE ORDINANCE BOOK.



   The City Clerk shall keep an ordinance book as a permanent record and
shall enter therein a copy of all ordinances enacted by the city.



(1985 Code, § 2-115)



§ 32.26  REMOVAL OF PAPERS OR DOCUMENTS FROM CLERK’S CUSTODY.



   No original paper or document of the city shall be taken out of the
custody of the City Clerk, except upon order of the Mayor or City
Administrator.



(1985 Code, § 2-116)



§ 32.27  CUSTODIAN OF SEAL.



   The City Clerk shall be the custodian of the City Seal.



(1985 Code, § 2-117)




CITY ATTORNEY




§ 32.45  APPOINTMENT.



   A City Attorney shall be appointed by the City Council.



(1985 Code, § 2-130)



§ 32.46  QUALIFICATIONS.



   The City Attorney shall possess the qualifications of and be a
practicing attorney duly licensed in the state.



(1985 Code, § 2-131)



§ 32.47  TERM.



   The City Attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council or
until a successor has been duly appointed and shall have qualified.



(1985 Code, § 2-132)



§ 32.48  GENERAL DUTIES.



   The City Attorney shall discharge all duties prescribed by the laws of
the state and shall exercise diligence that the City Council and the officers
of the city government do not fall into errors of law in the management of
the corporate affairs of the city.



(1985 Code, § 2-133)



§ 32.49  DUTY TO ATTEND COUNCIL MEETINGS.



   The City Attorney shall attend meetings of City Council when notified.



(1985 Code, § 2-134)



§ 32.50  DUTY TO ADVISE AND ASSIST MAYOR, COUNCIL AND CITY OFFICERS.



   When requested, the City Attorney shall give advice, direction and
assistance to the Mayor, City Council, standing committees and special
committees and all other officers duly charged with the administration of the
city government. The City Attorney shall likewise advise and assist the
police officers in the performance of their duties.



(1985 Code, § 2-135)



§ 32.51  PROSECUTION AND DEFENSE OF ACTIONS; APPEARANCE IN LEGAL
PROCEEDINGS.



   The City Attorney shall prosecute and defend all civil actions in which
the city may be a party and shall prosecute on behalf of the city, all
criminal cases in the Municipal Court whenever requested to do so by the
Mayor or Council. The City Attorney shall appear on behalf of the city and
its officers in all legal proceedings to which any have an interest as an
official of the city.



(1985 Code, § 2-136)



§ 32.52  DRAFTING ORDINANCES AND INSTRUMENTS; LEGAL CORRESPONDENCE.



   The City Attorney, when directed by the Council, shall prepare the
draft of any ordinance or instrument in writing which the Mayor or Council
may desire, and shall conduct the correspondence of the city on all legal
subjects.



(1985 Code, § 2-137)



§ 32.53  SALARY AS FIXED.



   The salary of the City Attorney shall be provided by the City Council
in the annual appropriation ordinance.



(1985 Code, § 2-138)



CHAPTER 33: CITY ORGANIZATIONS



Section




Administration Department




   33.001   Composition



   33.002   Compensation



   33.003   Finance Director; appointment



   33.004   Duties and powers



   33.005   Chain-of-command



   33.006   Property of Department




Police Department




   33.020   Composition



   33.021   Appointment



   33.022   Term of office



   33.023   Compensation as filed



   33.024   Removal or suspension



   33.025   Uniforms and equipment



   33.026   Powers generally



   33.027   Power to arrest



   33.028   Authority of Chief of Police over Department; generally



   33.029   Duties and responsibilities of the Chief of Police



   33.030   Sale of abandoned or stolen property



   33.031   Chain-of-command



   33.032   Orders and communications



   33.033   Obedience to Chief



   33.034   Supervision by Chief



   33.035   Duties of police officers



   33.036   Personal appearance



   33.037   Drinking on duty



   33.038   General demeanor



   33.039   Off-duty conduct




Fire Department




   33.055   Composition



   33.056   Appointment of Fire Chief



   33.057   Duties and powers of the Fire Chief; generally



   33.058   Duties of Assistant Chief; chain-of-command



   33.059   Volunteer Fire Department; membership



   33.060   Duties of members



   33.061   Uniforms and equipment of Fire Department personnel



   33.062   Compensation as fixed



   33.063   Firefighter’s Insurance and Inspection Fund; acceptance
of benefits



   33.064   Trustees



   33.065   Report to State Insurance Commissioner



   33.066   Membership in State Firefighter’s Association



   33.067   Receipt and disbursement of funds




Department of Public Works




   33.080   Composition



   33.081   Compensation as fixed



   33.082   Director of Public Works; appointment



   33.083   Duties and powers



   33.084   Chain-of-command



   33.085   Property of Department



Cultural Arts Commission



   33.100   Purpose



   33.101   Responsibilities



   33.102   Composition and functions




ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT




§ 33.001  COMPOSITION.



   There shall be an Administration Department of the city which is
responsible for the proper collection, accounting and distribution of the
funds of the city as well as all administrative functions as assigned by City
Council from time to time. The Administration Department shall consist of one
director and other personnel as, from time to time, may be deemed necessary
to ensure the proper custody of the city funds as well as to collect taxes,
business licenses, permits, fees and the like, and administer the same for
the city.



(1985 Code, § 2-150)



§ 33.002  COMPENSATION.



   The Finance Director and other Department personnel shall be
compensated in accordance with the city and Compensation Plan as determined
by annual budgetary appropriations.



(1985 Code, § 2-151)



§ 33.003  FINANCE DIRECTOR; APPOINTMENT.



   The Finance Director shall be appointed by the City Administrator with
the advice and consent of the Mayor and City Council.



(1985 Code, § 2-152)



§ 33.004  DUTIES AND POWERS.



   (A)   The Finance Director shall be personally responsible for the
collection, accounting and distribution of all city funds. The Finance
Director shall promptly execute all orders and observe all regulations
prescribed by the city and shall be responsible for ensuring that all orders
and regulations are obeyed and carried out. The Finance Director shall be
directly responsible and accountable to the City Administrator for the
organization, direction, efficiency, training, discipline and morale of the
Administration Department.



   (B)   The Finance Director shall assume the duties of Inspector for
the Department unless the Director shall appoint a competent employee of the
Department to act as Inspector.



   (C)   The Finance Director shall ensure that all books, records and
reports are maintained according to current applicable federal, state and
municipal laws.



   (D)   The Finance Director shall report annually, in writing, to the
City Administrator, setting forth the conditions and activities of the
Department. The Director shall periodically report to the City Administrator
on the matters as the City Administrator may deem necessary.



   (E)   The Finance Director shall submit to the City Administrator an
annual estimate of budgetary and other fiscal requirements of the Department.



(1985 Code, § 2-153)



§ 33.005  CHAIN-OF-COMMAND.



   The chain-of-command of the Administration Department shall be as
follows:



   (A)   City council (the whole Council);



   (B)   The Mayor (Chief Executive Officer);



   (C)   The City Administrator (Chief Administrative Officer);



   (D)   The Finance Director;



   (E)   Supervisory personnel; and



   (F)   General employees.



(1985 Code, § 2-154)



§ 33.006  PROPERTY OF DEPARTMENT.



   All property acquired by the Administration Department and issued to
any personnel of the Department shall remain the property of the city, and
shall be returned to the city whenever its return is requested by the
Director or the City Administrator. It shall be unlawful to refuse to return
the property when duly requested. Refusal to return the property when duly
requested shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable as provided in § 10.99
upon conviction.



(1985 Code, § 2-155)  Penalty, see § 10.99




POLICE DEPARTMENT




§ 33.020  COMPOSITION.



   The Police Department shall consist of one Chief and other personnel
as, from time to time, may be deemed necessary for the safety and good order
of the city.



(1985 Code, § 2-170)



§ 33.021  APPOINTMENT.



   (A)   Chief.  The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the City
Administrator with the advice and consent of the Mayor and City Council.



   (B)   Other police officers.  The other police officers of the
Department shall be appointed by the City Administrator upon the
recommendation of the Chief of Police.



(1985 Code, § 2-171)



§ 33.022  TERM OF OFFICE.



   Each police officer appointed by the city shall serve and continue to
serve for so long a period as the officer shall perform, the duties of the
office and shall not violate any rule, regulation or policy of the Department
or of the city.



(1985 Code, § 2-172)



§ 33.023  COMPENSATION AS FILED.



   The compensation for the services of each Police Department employee
shall be set in accordance with the city pay and Compensation Plan, within
the limitations of the annual appropriations for the Police Department.



(1985 Code, § 2-173)



§ 33.024  REMOVAL OR SUSPENSION.



   All Police Department employees are subject to removal or suspension in
accordance with the City Personnel Policy and Procedures Manual.



(1985 Code, § 2-174)



§ 33.025  UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   The Chief of Police, Assistant Chief of Police and all police
officers shall each be initially outfitted with a complete set of uniforms
and equipment. Any replacements will be furnished at the city's expense as
deemed necessary.



   (B)   All property issued to the Chief of Police, the Assistant
Chief of Police and police officers shall remain the property of the city and
shall be returned to the city whenever it is requested by the City Council.
Refusal to return the property when duly requested shall be a misdemeanor.



(1985 Code, § 2-175)



§ 33.026  POWERS GENERALLY.



   (A)   Each police officer shall be sworn in and thereupon shall be
invested with all the powers of police officers as established by S.C. Code
§ 5-7-110, as amended, within the corporate limits of the city and its
jurisdiction.



   (B)   Each police officer shall also have the power to carry out all
duties assigned to the officer by statute, ordinance, resolution, directive,
rule or regulation as is necessary, specifically or by implication.



(1985 Code, § 2-176)



§ 33.027  POWER TO ARREST.



   Every police officer, when required by state statute or ordinance of
the city, shall have the power and the duty to arrest any person, who, within
the corporate limits of the city and its police jurisdiction, shall be guilty
of, or shall be engaged in, any conduct which is in violation of any state
law or municipal ordinance.



(1985 Code, § 2-177)



§ 33.028  AUTHORITY OF CHIEF OF POLICE OVER DEPARTMENT; GENERALLY.



   Subject to pertinent laws and regulations, the Chief of Police shall
have authority over all units of the city Police Department and over all of
its members and employees. The Chief of Police may also promulgate to the
Department the orders or instructions, written or oral, which are not
inconsistent with state laws or municipal ordinances.



(1985 Code, § 2-178)



§ 33.029  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE.



   (A)   The Chief of Police shall be personally responsible to the
City Administrator for the execution of the police mission. The Chief shall
promptly execute an order and observe all regulations prescribed by the City
Administrator and shall be responsible that all orders and regulations are
obeyed and carried out.



   (B)   The Chief shall be directly and personally responsible to the
City Administrator for the organization, efficiency, training, discipline and
morale of the Police Department.



   (C)   The Chief shall keep the officer's office open and operating
during the time prescribed by the City Administrator.



   (D)   The Chief shall ascertain that the operation of the Police
Department and any special units under the Chief’s direct control mutually
support one another in all matters requiring support and that a high degree
of lateral cooperation and exchange of information is maintained.



   (E)   The Chief shall ascertain that all books and records are kept
in accordance with current applicable federal, state and municipal laws as
required for the proper performance of the Police Department.



   (F)   The Chief shall report annually in writing to the City
Administrator, setting forth the conditions and activities of the Police
Department. The Chief shall periodically report to the City Administrator on
the matters as the City Administrator may deem necessary. The Chief shall
submit to the City Administrator an annual estimate of budgetary and other
fiscal requirements of the Police Department.



(1985 Code, § 2-179)



§ 33.030  SALE OF ABANDONED OR STOLEN PROPERTY.



   (A)   The Chief of Police may sell at public auction any recovered
stolen property. The true owner of which cannot be ascertained after
reasonable effort, and may also sell at public auction the property as may
have been abandoned within the city where the true owner cannot be
ascertained after reasonable effort. The Chief of Police shall make a
diligent effort to ascertain the true owner of any abandoned or recovered
stolen property and shall advertise the property with the full description
thereof in a newspaper having general circulation in the city at least two
times prior to the sale.



   (B)   At any time after 60 days shall have elapsed after the
insertion of the first advertisement, the Chief may sell at public auction
the abandoned or recovered stolen property in question. The Chief shall turn
over all proceeds to the City Treasurer.



   (C)   At any time within one year after the sale of any abandoned or
recovered stolen property, the true owner may apply to the Chief of Police,
and after proper identification and proof of claim, recover the net sum
received from the sale, after the necessary expenses are deducted. The
property itself may be recovered after proper identification and proof of
claim if the claim is made prior to the sale. After the lapse of one year
after the sale, the net sum received from the abandoned property shall be
placed in the general fund of the city.



(1985 Code, § 2-180)



§ 33.031  CHAIN-OF-COMMAND.



   The chain-of-command and lines of authority shall be explicit as
follows:



   (A)   The whole Council;



   (B)   The Mayor (Chief Executive Officer);



   (C)   The City Administrator (Chief Administrative Officer);



   (D)   The Chief of Police;



   (E)   The Assistant Chief of Police;



   (F)   Command officers (lieutenant and above);



   (G)   Supervisory officers (corporals and sergeants); and



   (H)   Patrol personnel.



(1985 Code, § 2-181)



§ 33.032  ORDERS AND COMMUNICATIONS.



   (A)   All orders, directions and communications shall be in
accordance with the chain-of-command and shall not be contravened by anyone.



   (B)   No police officer shall be given an order except by the
officer's immediate superiors unless there is a recognized emergency and the
supervisory officers are absent or unavailable.



(1985 Code, § 2-182)



§ 33.033  OBEDIENCE TO CHIEF.



   (A)   The Chief of Police at all times shall be recognized and
respected by each member of the Department as the member's commander and
superior officer.



   (B)   All disregard, inattention or disobedience of the proper
general or special orders of the Chief shall be reported to the Chief of
Police for the Chief's action as determined by this subchapter.



(1985 Code, § 2-183)



§ 33.034  SUPERVISION BY CHIEF.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to properly
distribute to the members of the Department over the city in such manner as
to obtain the best results and most efficient service.



   (B)   The Chief shall initiate the programs as will provide the
Chief with information and reports, and the Chief shall maintain regular
contact with the police personnel.



(1985 Code, § 2-184)



§ 33.035  DUTIES OF POLICE OFFICERS.



   It shall be the duty of each police officer to arrest and/or report any
person for violating in any manner the laws or ordinances of the city, and
failure or neglect to do so shall make the officer liable to suspension or
discharge.



(1985 Code, § 2-185)



§ 33.036  PERSONAL APPEARANCE.



   (A)   Each police officer on duty shall maintain an appearance of
neatness, cleanliness and dignity. The officer's hair shall be trimmed
neatly, face shaved, body clean and nails pared.



   (B)   Each police officer shall be in uniform as the officer's
duties shall dictate and in keeping with the provisions of the Department,
the officer shall keep the uniform clean, pressed and in good repair, metal
and shoes cleaned and polished, and arms and equipment clean and in good
working order.



(1985 Code, § 2-186)



§ 33.037  DRINKING ON DUTY.



   No member of the Department on duty shall partake of any drink of any
kind which shall contain alcohol or other intoxicating liquor, except as may
be required in the line of duty.



(1985 Code, § 2-187)



§ 33.038  GENERAL DEMEANOR.



   Each member of the Police Department at all times shall conduct the
person's self in a quiet and orderly manner and with a deliberate and
efficient determination of enforcing the laws and ordinances of the city.



(1985 Code, § 2-188)



§ 33.039  OFF-DUTY CONDUCT.



   Each police officer while off-duty shall conduct the person's self in
the manner as to command the respect of the city. The officer shall wear no
uniform or part thereof while off duty unless the officer obtains permission
in writing from the Chief of Police.



(1985 Code, § 2-189)




FIRE DEPARTMENT




§ 33.055  COMPOSITION.



   The Fire Department shall consist of one Chief and the other personnel
as, from time to time, may be deemed necessary for the safety and good order
of the city.



(1985 Code, § 2-200)



Statutory reference:



   Fire Department, see S.C. Code §§ 5-25-20et seq.



§ 33.056  APPOINTMENT OF FIRE CHIEF.



   The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the City Administrator with the
advice and consent of the Mayor and City Council.



(1985 Code, § 2-201)



Statutory reference:



   Chief, see S.C. Code § 5-25-110



§ 33.057  DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE FIRE CHIEF; GENERALLY.



   (A)   The Fire Chief shall be personally responsible for the
execution of the fire safety mission of the city, and shall promptly execute
all orders and observe all regulations prescribed by the city and shall be
responsible for ensuring that all the orders and regulations are obeyed and
carried out. The Fire Chief shall be directly responsible and accountable to
the City Administrator for the organization, direction, efficiency, training,
discipline and morale of the Fire Department.



   (B)   The Fire Chief shall have complete control of operations and
activities at the scene of a fire, and control of the investigation of the
cause, origin and circumstances of fires.



   (C)   The Fire Chief shall assume the duties of Fire Inspector
unless the Chief shall appoint a competent employee of the Fire Department to
act as Fire Inspector.



   (D)   The Fire Chief shall ensure that all books, records and
reports are maintained according to current applicable federal, state and
municipal laws.



   (E)   The Fire Chief shall report annually, in writing, to the City
Administrator, setting forth the conditions and activities of the Fire
Department. The Fire Chief shall periodically report to the City
Administrator on the matters as the City Administrator may deem necessary.



   (F)   The Fire Chief shall submit to the City Administrator an
annual estimate of budgetary and other fiscal requirements of the Fire
Department.



(1985 Code, § 2-202)



§ 33.058  DUTIES OF ASSISTANT CHIEF; CHAIN-OF-COMMAND.



   (A)   In the absence of the Chief, it shall be the duty of the
Assistant Chief to take command and assume control of the operations of the
Fire Department.



   (B)   The chain-of-command of the Fire Department shall be as
follows:



      (1)   The Council assembled;



      (2)   The Mayor (Chief Executive Officer);



      (3)   The City Administrator (Chief Administrative Officer);



      (4)   The Fire Chief;



      (5)   Assistant Fire Chief;



      (6)   Command officers (captains, lieutenants and above);



      (7)   Supervisory personnel (engineers); and



      (8)   Firefighters.



(1985 Code, § 2-203)



§ 33.059  VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT; MEMBERSHIP.



   The Volunteer Fire Department of the city shall consist of the officers
and members as shall be necessary to carry out the fire safety mission of the
city. Any person who wishes to become a member of the Fire Department shall
submit an application for membership to the Fire Chief; upon the
recommendation of the Fire Chief and the approval of the City Administrator,
an applicant may become a member of the Volunteer Fire Department. The Fire
Chief, with the approval of the City Administrator, shall have the right to
remove any member at any time.



(1985 Code, § 2-204)



§ 33.060  DUTIES OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   The Volunteer Fire Department members shall be subject to call
to duty at any time, day or night, when needed to extinguish fires or any
other emergency that may arise. The members shall respond immediately to the
place as shall be designated as the central or meeting place, when a fire
alarm is given.



   (B)   At each fire, the Chief will call the roll or make a list of
the members present and preserve the same as a record in the Chief’s office.



(1985 Code, § 2-205)



§ 33.061  UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT OF FIRE DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL.



   (A)   The Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief and regular firefighters
shall each be furnished, during their term of office, with uniforms of the
type and color as may be prescribed from time to time.



   (B)   All property issued by the city to any firefighters shall
remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the city whenever
its return is requested by the Fire Chief or the City Administrator. It shall
be unlawful to refuse to return the property when duly requested. Refusal to
return the property when duly requested shall be deemed a misdemeanor.



(1985 Code, § 2-206)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 33.062  COMPENSATION AS FIXED.



   The Fire Chief and other regular Fire Department personnel shall be
compensated in accordance with the city pay and Compensation Plan as
determined by annual budgetary appropriations. The Volunteer Fire Department
members shall be compensated in accordance with the plan established for
compensation based on attendance at Fire Department functions, exercises and
operations.



(1985 Code, § 2-207)



§ 33.063  FIREFIGHTER’S INSURANCE AND INSPECTION FUND; ACCEPTANCE OF
BENEFITS.



   The city hereby accepts the benefits of S.C. Code §§ 38-57-10 through
38-57-210, as amended, relative to disposition of funds arising from
insurance companies doing business in the state.



(1985 Code, § 2-208)



§ 33.064  TRUSTEES.



   The Mayor, the City Administrator and the Chief of the Fire Department
are to be appointed trustees of the Firefighter's Insurance and Inspection
Fund, and they shall have control thereof and direct its disbursement under
the rules and regulations as may be adopted by them in accordance with state
law. All trustees shall serve without compensation.



(1985 Code, § 2-209)



Statutory reference:



   Trustees, see S.C. Code §§ 38-57-10et seq.



§ 33.065  REPORT TO STATE INSURANCE COMMISSIONER.



   The City Clerk shall file with the State Insurance Commissioner on or
before October 31 of each year on a form furnished by the Commissioner, a
certificate that the city has an organized Fire Department and also a list of
the equipment and other facts that may be required. Failure to submit the
certificate by the required date in any year will constitute a waiver of
rights in the fund for that year.



(1985 Code, § 2-210)



§ 33.066  MEMBERSHIP IN STATE FIREFIGHTER’S ASSOCIATION.



   The city shall be a member of the State Firefighter’s Association as
required for participation in the Firefighter’s Insurance and Inspection
Fund. The city shall pay to the treasurer of the State Firefighter's
Association, 5% of the gross proceeds received annually from the 1% tax on
fire insurance allocated to the city.



(1985 Code, § 2-211)



§ 33.067  RECEIPT AND DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.



   (A)   General.  The Finance Director is hereby authorized to
receive the benefits of the Firefighter's Insurance and Inspection Fund from
the County Treasurer via the State Treasurer. All money so collected shall be
set apart and shall be paid out only upon the orders of the Board of Trustees
under the rules and regulations adopted by it.



   (B)   Disbursements over $100.  Before any disbursements exceeding
$100 of the fund shall be made by the Finance Director of the city, the
Finance Director shall first submit to the supervising trustees of the State
Firefighter's Association, a statement of how the funds are to be expended
and shall receive from the trustees their written approval of the manner and
method by which the funds are to be disbursed. If a proposed disbursement is
to be expended legally and in accordance with the law, it shall be mandatory
upon the supervising trustees to give their approval. Failure on the part of
the Finance Director to comply with the foregoing shall make the Finance
Director liable on the officer's official bond.



   (C)   Use of funds.  No funds of the Firefighter's Insurance and
Inspection Fund shall be divided among Fire Department personnel in cash.
When the Fire Department, by a majority, shall provide for the expenditure of
any funds for the collective benefit and enjoyment of the entire Department,
it shall be mandatory for the local trustees and the state trustees of the
State Firefighter's Association to approve the expenditure. None of the funds
shall be expended in any manner for any purpose for which the city may be
legally liable.



(1985 Code, § 2-212)



Statutory reference:



   Disbursements, see S.C. Code § 38-57-210




DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS




§ 33.080  COMPOSITION.



   The Department of Public Works shall consist of a Director and other
personnel as from time to time may be deemed necessary to ensure a water
supply system for domestic and fire suppression purposes, provide for the
collection and removal of household refuse, the maintenance of storm water
structures, streets and sidewalks of the city and all other functions as
assigned by City Council from time to time, within the city.



(1985 Code, § 2-220)  (Ord. 94-006, passed 10-11-1994)



§ 33.081  COMPENSATION AS FIXED.



   The Director of Public Works and other Department personnel shall be
compensated in accordance with the city pay and Compensation Plan as
determined by annual budgetary appropriations.



(1985 Code, § 2-221)



§ 33.082  DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS; APPOINTMENT.



   The Director of Public Works shall be appointed by the City
Administrator with the advice and consent of the Mayor and City Council.



(1985 Code, § 2-222)



§ 33.083  DUTIES AND POWERS.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works shall be personally responsible
for the installation, operation, maintenance and good order of the water
system of the city, the collection and removal of household refuse, the
maintenance of storm water structures, streets and sidewalks of the city and
all other functions as are assigned from time to time. The Director shall
promptly execute all orders and observe all regulations prescribed by the
city and shall be responsible for ensuring that all orders and regulations
are obeyed and carried out. The Director shall be directly responsible and
accountable to the City Administrator for the organization, direction,
efficiency, training, discipline and morale of the Department of Public Works.



   (B)   The Director shall assume the duties of Inspector for the
Department unless the Director shall appoint a competent employee of the
Department to act as Inspector.



   (C)   The Director shall ensure that all books, records and reports
are maintained according to current, applicable federal, state and municipal
laws.



   (D)   The Director shall report annually, in writing, to the City
Administrator, setting forth the conditions and activities of the Department.
The Director shall periodically report to the City Administrator on the
matters as the City Administrator may deem necessary.



   (E)   The Director shall submit to the City Administrator an annual
estimate of budgetary and other fiscal requirements of the Department of
Public Works.



(1985 Code, § 2-223)  (Ord. 94-006, passed 10-11-1994)



§ 33.084  CHAIN-OF-COMMAND.



   The chain-of-command of the Department of Public Works shall be as
follows:



   (A)   City Council (the whole Council);



   (B)   The Mayor (Chief Executive Officer);



   (C)   The City Administrator (Chief Administrative Officer);



   (D)   The Director of Public Works;



   (E)   Supervisory personnel; and



   (F)   General employees.



(1985 Code, § 2-224)



§ 33.085  PROPERTY OF DEPARTMENT.



   All property acquired by the Department of Public Works and issued to
any personnel of the Department shall remain the property of the city, and
shall be returned to the city whenever its return is requested by the
Director or the City Administrator. It shall be unlawful to refuse to return
the property when duly requested. Refusal to return the property when duly
requested shall be deemed a misdemeanor.



(1985 Code, § 2-225)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CULTURAL ARTS COMMISSION



§ 33.100  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of the Cultural Arts Commission (CAC) is to
identify, describe, present and sustain higher order elements that enhance
the lives of its citizens and provide opportunities for citizens to
contribute to the development of the same.



   (B)   (1)   Toward that purpose, the CAC will identify, describe,
present and sustain the following:



         (a)   The purpose of the CAC, which will be to provide a
greater understanding and appreciation of the history of Goose Creek; and



         (b)   To enrich the lives of citizens by providing high
quality artistic and cultural events within the city.



      (2)   Toward that purpose, the CAC will research and present
the history and culture of Goose Creek, as well as plan and execute artistic
events within the city throughout the year; and



      (3)   Sustain a thriving artistic community by developing the
following projects:



         (a)   Historic features that explain the past and
potential of Goose Creek;



         (b)   1.   Visual elements that express citizen
understanding and interpretations of their community and its potentials;



            2.   Visual elements to honor the history of Goose
Creek and to inspire its future;



         (c)   1.   Auditory (musical and the like)
description and interpretation of important features and aspirations of the
community;



            2.   Provision of high quality musical events such
as concerts, chamber recitals, and music festivals, both professional and
student groups;



         (d)   Literary descriptions, interpretations and
aspirations of the Goose Creek community and its residents; and



         (e)   Provision of dance and theatrical performances to
enrich the lives of its citizens.



(Ord. 16-006, passed 2-9-2016)



§ 33.101  RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The duties of the CAC may include, but are not limited to, the
following:



   (A)   (1)   Planning, creation and oversight of a welcome
destination center to describe the community and orient visitations;



      (2)   Planning, creation and oversight of a welcome center and
Cultural Arts Commission office to describe the community and orient
visitations;



   (B)   Creating and overseeing a literary repository for past and
potential fiction and non-fiction in various genres that describes and
interprets the Goose Creek people and place;



   (C)   (1)   Creating and overseeing opportunities for individuals
and groups to present interpretations of their community and its
contributions to the state and nation;



      (2)   Creating and overseeing cultural and artistic events and
opportunities for both individuals and groups in the Goose Creek community;



   (D)   (1)   Seeking and exploiting opportunities to share the
Goose Creek legacy in schools and other institutions;



      (2)   Seeking and exploiting opportunities to enrich the lives
of Goose Creek residents and students through exposure to a thriving artistic
community;



   (E)   Planning, creating and overseeing historic and cultural
trails, centers and experiences to enrich and broaden the lives of visitors
and residents; and



   (F)   Ensure that the city has taken its place among neighboring
communities as a historic, cultural and artistically developed community in
order not only to attract residents and tourists, but also to enrich the
lives of its current citizenry.



(Ord. 16-006, passed 2-9-2016)



§ 33.102  COMPOSITION AND FUNCTIONS.



   The Cultural Arts Commission shall consist of seven residents of the
city, appointed by City Council to serve two-year terms at the pleasure of
City Council. The terms commence on the day of the appointment and continue
for two years or longer until City Council appoints a replacement.



(Ord. 16-006, passed 2-9-2016)



CHAPTER 34: FINANCE AND TAXATION



Section




General Provisions




   34.01   Fiscal year; budget and taxation



   34.02   Ad valorem tax homestead exemption



   34.03   Travel expense; policy statement



   34.04   Methods of payment



   34.05   Recovery of collection costs as a part of delinquent debts
collected pursuant to the Setoff Debt Collection Act




Purchasing Policies and Procedures




   34.20   Definitions



   34.21   Purpose



   34.22   Duties of purchasing agent



   34.23   Procedural regulations



   34.24   Emergency purchases



   34.25   Requisitions and estimates of future requirements



   34.26   Contracts, purchases and sales



   34.27   Open market purchases and sales



   34.28   Purchases of patented or proprietary articles



   34.29   Availability of funds



   34.30   Splitting requirements; illegal purchases



   34.31   Gratuities



   34.32   Debarment of irresponsible bidders



   34.33   Inspection



   34.34   Surplus, obsolete and waste commodities




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 34.01  FISCAL YEAR; BUDGET AND TAXATION.



   The fiscal year of the city shall begin on January 1 of each year and
shall end on December 31 in each year. Prior to the commencement of the
fiscal year, City Council shall adopt an annual operating budget, by
ordinance, which provides for the collection of revenues and payment of
expenses for the operation and debt retirement of the city. The budget
ordinance shall set the annual ad valorem tax rate and provide for the
procedure for the collection of the ad valorem taxes. The city may contract
for the collection of ad valorem taxes and adopt the procedures for
collection, delinquencies and penalties of the collecting agency, by
reference, in the budget ordinance.



(1985 Code, § 9-1)  (Ord. 86-21, passed 8-12-1986)



§ 34.02  AD VALOREM TAX HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION.



   Those persons eligible for homestead exemption in accordance with S.C.
Code § 12-37-250, as amended, and not in amounts exceeding those provided in
that section, shall be eligible for a homestead exemption from municipal ad
valorem taxes on real property in the city.



(1985 Code, § 9-2)



Editor's note:



   City ad valorem taxes are assessed and collected by the county, as
provided by state law



§ 34.03  TRAVEL EXPENSE; POLICY STATEMENT.



   The Mayor and City Council recognize that travel and attendance at
conferences and meetings is necessary and desirable in the proper and
official pursuit of city business. In furtherance of this policy statement,
the following constitutes the travel policy of the city.



   (A)   Approval of travel and attendance at conferences and
meetings.  Travel and attendance at conferences and meetings relating to
official city business by the Mayor and members of City Council shall have
the prior approval of the Mayor and City Council. Travel and attendance at
conferences relating to official city business by city employees shall have
the prior approval of the City Administrator, consistent with budgetary
allocations for travel.



   (B)   Payment of expenses for travel and attendance at conferences
and meetings.  The city will make payment for actual expenses incurred by
City Council and city employees for travel and attendance at conferences and
meetings. Expenses of spouses and family members attending the conferences
and meetings shall be the responsibility of the individual city official or
employee. The city will not pay for expenses incurred by spouses or family
members attending the conferences or meetings.



   (C)   Travel expenses eligible for payment.



      (1)   The city will pay for actual air or rail transportation,
cab fares to and from airports, hotel or motel room costs, conference
registration fees, meals and incidentals relating to approved travel.



      (2)   The use of city vehicles for travel is authorized if it
is less expensive to use a city vehicle than travel by air or rail service,
provided time constraints are not a factor in the travel.



      (3)   The use of a personal vehicle, at a reimbursement rate
provided by I.R.S. regulation, is authorized if the use is less expensive
than the use of a city vehicle, or a city vehicle is not available, or the
use is less expensive than air or rail service, provided time constraints are
not a factor in travel.



(1985 Code, § 9-3)



§ 34.04  METHODS OF PAYMENT.



   (A)   Advances for travel.  The City Administrator may issue
advance funds for travel upon the presentation of an estimated itemized
expense sheet by a city official or employee prior to receiving any advance
funds for approved travel. Upon completion of the approved travel, the city
official or employee shall submit an itemized expense sheet of actual costs,
with receipts, to the City Administrator and return any unused funds to the
city.



   (B)   Use of city credit card.  When it is possible, city officials
and employees shall use city credit cards for payment of actual costs
associated with approved travel. All receipts arising from the use of a city
credit card shall be submitted to the City Administrator immediately upon
returning from approved travel.



   (C)   Reimbursement.  City officials and employees may be
reimbursed for actual costs incurred for approved travel upon submitting a
detailed and itemized expense sheet, supported by proper receipts, to the
City Administrator.



(1985 Code, § 9-4)



§ 34.05  RECOVERY OF COLLECTION COSTS AS A PART OF DELINQUENT DEBTS
COLLECTED PURSUANT TO THE SETOFF DEBT COLLECTION ACT.



   (A)   The City of Goose Creek hereby imposes an administrative fee
as established by City Council and the current city budget on file with the
Finance Director and City Clerk to defray its internal costs of collection
for any delinquent debts that are sought to be collected pursuant to the
provisions of the Setoff Debt Collection Act, S.C. Code Ann. §§ 12-56-10 et
seq. This fee is hereby declared to be a collection cost that arises by
operation of law and shall be added to the delinquent debt and recovered from
the debtor.



   (B)   The City of Goose Creek hereby declares that the
administrative fee charged by the Municipal Association of South Carolina is
also a collection cost to the City of Goose Creek, which shall also be added
to the delinquent debt and recovered from the debtor.



   (C)   All ordinances in conflict with this section are hereby
repealed.



   (D)   This section shall be effective on the date of final reading,
provided however, that this section is declared to be consistent with prior
law and practice and shall not be construed to mean that any fees previously
charged to debtors as costs of collection under the Act were not properly
authorized or properly charged to the debtor.



(Ord. 06-020, passed 10-10-2006)




PURCHASING POLICIES AND PROCEDURES




§ 34.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGENCY, USING AGENCY.  Any of the departments, offices or other
organizational units of the city government.



   BIDDERS LIST.  A current file of sources of supply for articles
repetitively purchased for city use.



   CONTRACTUAL SERVICES.  Any telephone, electric light and power
services, towels, window washing and cleaning services, the rental of
equipment and machinery and other types of agreements under which the
contractor provides services which are required by the city government, but
not furnished by city employees. Contractual services do not include legal
advertising, and purchases of space for legal advertising shall not be
subject to the provisions of this chapter.



   DEFINITE QUANTITY CONTRACTS.  A contract whereby a contractor agrees
to furnish a specified quantity of supplies, materials or equipment at a
specified time.



   INDEFINITE QUANTITY CONTRACTS.  A contract whereby the city agrees to
obtain from a contractor all its requirements for specified supplies,
materials or equipment in an estimated, but undetermined, amount during a
prescribed period of time at a definite unit price or at a specified discount
from list or posted price.



   IRRESPONSIBLE BIDDER.  A bidder who fails to furnish, upon written
request, proof of responsibility, who has, as a vendor or contractor with the
city, repeatedly made slow or unsatisfactory deliveries, or who has violated,
or attempted to violate, the provisions of this chapter.



   PERSONAL SERVICES.  The services of attorneys, physicians, architects,
engineers, consultants or other individuals or organizations possessing a
high degree of technical skill, and offering the services on a fee basis.



   PRICE AGREEMENTS.  An agreement whereby a contractor agrees to supply
the city requirements for items, such as replacement parts for different
makes of mechanical or automotive equipment during a prescribed period of
time at a definite unit price, or at a specified discount from list or posted
price.



   PURCHASING AGENT.  The City Administrator or other duly designated
officer or employee.



   RESPONSIBLE BIDDER.  A bidder who has furnished, when requested,
information and data to prove that the bidder's financial resources,
production or services facilities, service reputation and experience are
adequate to make satisfactory delivery of supplies, materials, equipment or
contractual service on which the bidder bids and who has not violated, nor
attempted to violate, any provision of this chapter.



   SUPPLIES, MATERIAL, EQUIPMENT.  Any articles or things which shall be
furnished to or used by any department, including any printing, binding or
publication of stationery, forms, laws, journals and reports.



(1985 Code, § 9-20)



§ 34.21  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to secure for the city taxpayers the
advantages and economies which will result from centralized control over the
expenditure of city funds for supplies, materials, equipment and contractual
services via the application of modern, business-like methods.



(1985 Code, § 9-21)



§ 34.22  DUTIES OF PURCHASING AGENT.



   (A)   The purchasing agent purchases all supplies, materials,
equipment and contractual services required by the city.



   (B)   The purchasing agent submits to the City Council for award,
and thereafter executes contracts for all purchases of supplies, materials,
equipment and contractual services in amounts or estimated amounts as
designated by City Council.



   (C)   The purchasing agent negotiates contracts for personal
services and submits them for approval and award as provided in divisions (A)
and (B) above.



   (D)   The purchasing agent uses standard specifications whenever
they are applicable for purchase orders and contracts, and insures compliance
with the specifications through adequate inspection of deliveries.



   (E)   The purchasing agent may transfer between departments,
supplies, materials and equipment no longer needed by a holding department,
but which can be used by a receiving department.



   (F)   The purchasing agent exchanges, trades in or sells those
supplies, materials and equipment which are surplus, obsolete or unused and
are found by the City Council not to be required for public use.



   (G)   The purchasing agent develops, with the approval of the City
Attorney as to legal sufficiency, standard forms and conditions of
invitations to bid, purchase orders and contracts.



   (H)   The purchasing agent prescribes the use by the Departments of
other forms required to carry out the provisions of this chapter, and amends
or eliminates any such forms.



   (I)   Upon request of the City Council, and subject to its approval
of each transaction, the purchasing agent performs all delegable functions in
connection with the acquisition and disposal of real property.



   (J)   The purchasing agent reduces, to the maximum extent possible,
the number of purchase transactions by combining into bulk orders and
contracts the requirements of departments for common use items repetitively
purchased.



(1985 Code, § 9-22)



§ 34.23  PROCEDURAL REGULATIONS.



   The City Administrator is hereby authorized to prepare procedural
regulations to amplify the provisions of this chapter; to submit the
regulations and amendments to the City Council for approval and, to
promulgate and enforce compliance with the regulations including, but not
limited to:



   (A)   The procedure for handling bids including their custody and
safeguarding, opening and tabulation, rejection and re-advertising and the
procedure for determining the lowest responsible bidder;



   (B)   The procedure for securing from bidders the data necessary to
determine whether or not they are responsible;



   (C)   The procedure for inspection of deliveries of supplies,
materials, equipment and contractual services;



   (D)   The procedure for submitting requisitions for supplies,
materials, equipment and contractual services;



   (E)   The procedure for control and safeguarding of supplies,
materials and equipment in storerooms or at storage points including the
maintenance of a perpetual inventory system showing the quantitative amounts
and monetary values of the inventories; and



   (F)   The matters as may be necessary to give effect to provisions
of this chapter.



(1985 Code, § 9-23)



§ 34.24  EMERGENCY PURCHASES.



   (A)   An emergency shall be deemed to exist when a breakdown in
machinery or in an essential service occurs, or when unforseen circumstances
arise, including delays by contractors, transportation and an unanticipated
volume of work.



   (B)   If an emergency occurs during regular business hours, the
department head shall immediately notify the City Administrator who shall
determine the authorization of the necessary purchases. If the City
Administrator is unavailable, the department head shall notify the City Clerk
before making any emergency purchase. If an emergency occurs at any time
other than regular business hours, the department head may purchase directly
the commodities required, provided the following conditions are met:



      (1)   When the estimated cost of the emergency purchase
exceeds $200, the department head shall, whenever possible, secure
competitive telephone bids and order delivery to be made by the lowest
responsible bidder; and



      (2)   On every emergency purchase made, the department head
shall, within 24 hours, submit to the City Administrator, a requisition, a
tabulation of bids received, a delivery receipt and a written explanation of
the circumstances of the emergency.



(1985 Code, § 9-24)



§ 34.25  REQUISITIONS AND ESTIMATES OF FUTURE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All department managers shall submit to the City Administrator
requisitions for supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services
required for departmental operations within the limits of funds appropriated
therefor. The City Administrator may require department managers to justify
the quantity or quality of supplies, materials, equipment and contractual
services requisitioned.



   (B)   All department heads shall file with the City Administrator
estimates of their requirements for supplies, materials, equipment and
contractual services in the form, at the time and for the future periods as
the City Administrator shall prescribe.



(1985 Code, § 9-25)



§ 34.26  CONTRACTS, PURCHASES AND SALES.



   (A)   All purchases of, and contracts for, supplies, materials,
equipment and contractual services and all sales of personal property found
by the City Council not to be required for public use, shall be based,
whenever possible, on competitive bids. If the amount of the expenditure for
a contractual service or for a commodity normally obtained from the same
source of supply, or for a sale of personal property found by the City
Council not to be required for public use, is estimated to exceed $10,000,
contract bids shall be solicited by public notice and written contracts shall
be awarded, except when the services of central state purchasing are
utilized. The method and extent of public notice shall be prescribed by the
City Council. If newspaper advertisements are employed as public notice, the
notice shall include a general description of the commodities or services to
be purchased or the commodities to be sold, shall state where contract bids
and specifications may be secured, and shall specify the time and place for
opening of bids.



   (B)   The City Administrator shall, in addition, solicit bids from
prospective bidders, as listed on the bidders list, by sending them copies of
the newspaper notice or other notice as will acquaint them with the proposed
purchase or sale. All pending purchases or sales shall also, in all cases, be
advertised by posting a copy of the contract bid form on a public bulletin
board in or adjacent to the City Hall.



   (C)   (1)   All bids shall be submitted sealed to the City
Administrator on the official contract bid form and in an envelope, which
shall have indicated thereon the class of commodities to be purchased and the
established time for opening of bids. A tabulation of all bids received,
whether accepted or rejected, shall be open for public inspection during
regular business hours for a period of not less than 30 calendar days after
the bid opening.



      (2)   The City Administrator shall submit a copy of the
tabulation and all bids received to the City Council, together with the
Administrator's award. The City Administrator may reject any or all bids for
any or all commodities or contractual services included in the bid form and
may re-advertise for bids when the public interest will be served thereby,
but will report the action and the reasons therefor to the City Council. If
all bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, and if the
public interest will not permit the delay of re-advertising for bids, the
City Council may authorize the City Administrator to award the contract to
one of the tie bidders by drawing of lots in public, or to purchase the
commodities or contractual set vices in the open market, provided the price
paid in the open market shall not exceed the lowest contract bid price
submitted for the same commodity or contractual service. In all other cases,
the contract shall be awarded by the City Council to the lowest responsible
bidder for purchases and the highest responsible bidder for sales. In
determining the lowest or highest responsible bidder, the City Council and
the City Administrator shall take into consideration the quality offered and
its conformity with the specifications, the delivery and discount terms and
conditions of the bid, the service reputation of the bidder and other
information and data required to prove the bidder's responsibility.



   (D)   Contracts for personal property sales shall be awarded by the
City Council to the highest responsible bidder and shall be subject to all
other applicable requirements of this section.



   (E)   It shall be the duty of the City Administrator to discourage
uniform bidding by every possible means, and to endeavor to obtain full and
open competition on all purchases and sales. Accordingly, the City
Administrator shall require each bidder to accompany the bidder's bid with a
statement made under oath that the bidder has not been a party with other
bidders to an agreement to bid a fixed or uniform price. Violation of the
statement shall render void the bid of the bidders. Any disclosure to, or
acquisition by, a competitive bidder, in advance of the opening of the bids
of the terms or conditions of the bid submitted by another competitor shall
render the proceedings void and shall require re-advertising for bids.



   (F)   All contract forms shall be approved by the City Attorney as
to legality. All contracts shall be signed on behalf of the city by the City
Administrator. A copy of each signed contract shall be filed with the City
Clerk.



   (G)   No city real property shall be sold except by ordinance of the
City Council and after the publication of the notice of sale in a newspaper
of general circulation in the city at least seven days prior to the sale. The
notice shall contain a property description, the name of the purchaser and
the terms of and consideration for the sale.



(1985 Code, § 9-26)



§ 34.27  OPEN MARKET PURCHASES AND SALES.



   (A)   If the amount of the expenditure for a contractual service or
a class of commodities normally obtained from the same source of supply, or
for a sale of personal property found by the City Council not to be required
for public use, is estimated to be less than $10,000, it shall be an open
market transaction and shall not be subject to the requirements of § 34.26.
However, all open market transactions shall, whenever possible, be based on
at least three competitive bids.



   (B)   The City Administrator shall solicit bids by direct mail
requests to prospective bidders for the class of commodities being purchased
or sold as listed on the bidders list, and by posting a copy of the
invitation to bid on a public bulletin board in or adjacent to the City Hall.
However, bids may be solicited by telephone for open market purchases or
sales of less than $5,000.



   (C)   Written bids shall be submitted sealed to the City
Administrator in an envelope indicating the class of commodities being
purchased or sold, and the established time for opening of the bids. All
written bids shall be opened at the time and place stated in the invitation.
The City Administrator shall make a tabulation of all written and telephone
bids, and the records shall be open to public inspection for at least 30 days
after the date of the bid opening or telephone transaction.



   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, if the
purchase of supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services is less
than $500, the City Administrator, at the Administrator’s discretion only,
may waive the competitive bidding requirements of this section and may make
the purchases without calling for bids. The City Administrator shall not
delegate to any other city officer or employee the discretion of determining
whether a purchase involving an expenditure of less than $500 shall be based
on competitive bids. However, price and quality being equal preference shall
be given to responsible local bidders.



(1985 Code, § 9-27)



§ 34.28  PURCHASES OF PATENTED OR PROPRIETARY ARTICLES.



   (A)   When the city requires supplies, materials or equipment
produced by only one manufacturer, the City Administrator shall specify the
manufacturer's make or brand in the invitation to bid and shall obtain
competitive bids from authorized dealers or distributors of the manufacturer.
If the manufacturer is the only bidder and only source of supply, the City
Administrator is authorized to negotiate an open market purchase on contract
with the manufacturer at prices and on terms most advantageous to the city.



   (B)   When the city requires supplies, materials or equipment which
is patented or proprietary and which is obtainable in two or more equally
satisfactory and competitive makes, brands or types, the City Administrator
shall list the acceptable and competitive makes, brands or types in the
invitation to bid. The lists shall also include the phrase “or equal” to
permit bidders to bid on alternate or additional makes, brands or types. It
shall be incumbent on each bidder to prove to the satisfaction of the City
Administrator that the alternate or additional make, brand or type offered is
equal in quality or performance to those listed in the invitation to bid.



(1985 Code, § 9-28)



§ 34.29  AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS.



   Except in emergencies as provided for in § 34.24, no notice of award
of contract shall be issued, no contract shall be signed and no open market
purchase order shall be issued until the Finance Directorshall have certified
that the unexpended balance in the budget appropriation or appropriations
concerned is sufficient to defray the amount of the contract or purchase
order.



(1985 Code, § 9-29)



§ 34.30  SPLITTING REQUIREMENTS; ILLEGAL PURCHASES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any department of the city government
to split its requirements for supplies, materials, equipment and contractual
services into estimated amounts of less than $10,000 in order to evade the
provisions of § 34.26.



   (B)   If any department of city government purchases or contracts
for any supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services contrary to
the provisions of this chapter, the purchase or contract shall be void and of
no effect. The employee making the purchase or contract shall be personally
liable for the amount of the purchase or contract, and if already paid for
out of city funds, the amount therefor may be recovered in the name of the
city in an appropriate legal action.



(1985 Code, § 9-30)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 34.31  GRATUITIES.



   (A)   The acceptance of any gratuity in the form of cash,
merchandise or any other thing, except those items or things of nominal
value, by an official or employee of the city from any vendor or contractor,
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and shall be cause for removal or
other disciplinary action.



   (B)   The offer of any gratuity to any official or employee of the
city by any vendor or contractor, or prospective vendor or contractor, shall
be cause for declaring the individual or firm an irresponsible bidder and
debarring them from bidding as provided by § 34.32.



(1985 Code, § 9-31)



§ 34.32  DEBARMENT OF IRRESPONSIBLE BIDDERS.



   The City Administrator may determine and declare a bidder to be
irresponsible for the reasons cited in the definition thereof in §§ 34.30
and 34.31. If a bidder is determined to be irresponsible, the City
Administrator may remove the bidder from the bidder's list and may debar the
bidder from bidding for a reasonable period, but not less than one year. The
debarred bidder shall be furnished with a statement of the reason for the
action.



(1985 Code, § 9-32)



§ 34.33  INSPECTION.



   (A)   The receiving department shall inspect deliveries of supplies,
materials and equipment, or the furnishing of contractual services to insure
their conformance with the specifications set forth in the purchase order or
contract.



   (B)   The City Administrator shall have the authority to require
chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of
deliveries to the extent necessary to determine their quality and conformance
to the specifications.



(1985 Code, § 9-33)



§ 34.34  SURPLUS, OBSOLETE AND WASTE COMMODITIES.



   (A)   All departments shall submit to the City Administrator, at
times and in the form as the City Administrator shall prescribe, reports
showing stocks of all supplies, materials and equipment no longer used or
which have become obsolete, worn out or scrapped. The City Administrator
shall have authority to transfer any commodities, which are unusable to
another department in lieu of filling requisitions for the purchase of new or
additional stock of the same or similar articles.



   (B)   The City Administrator shall have the authority to sell all
the supplies, materials and equipment which cannot be used by any department
and has been bound by the City Council not to be required for public use, or
to exchange or trade in the articles in part or full payment for new
supplies, materials or equipment of a similar nature. Any sale, exchange or
trade shall be made in accordance with §§ 34.26 and 34.27, whichever is
applicable.



(1985 Code, § 9-34)



CHAPTER 35: CIVIL EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS



Section



   35.01   Definition



   35.02   Power to issue public proclamation and impose curfew



   35.03   Limitations on, and exemptions from, curfew



   35.04   Call of Council



   35.05   Conditions during state of emergency



   35.06   End of state of emergency and curfew



   35.07   Penalty for violation of provisions of proclamation



   35.08   Transfer of law enforcement officers to another
municipality; procedure



   35.09   Rights, powers and duties of the officers



§ 35.01  DEFINITION.



   A STATE OF EMERGENCY shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times of
great crisis, disaster, rioting, civil disturbance, catastrophe or for any
other reason, municipal public safety authorities are unable to maintain
pubic order or afford adequate protection for lives, safety, health, welfare
or property.



(1985 Code, § 6-1)



§ 35.02  POWER TO ISSUE PUBLIC PROCLAMATION AND IMPOSE CURFEW.



   In the event of a state of emergency threatening or endangering the
lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within the city or
threatening damage to or destruction of property, the Mayor is hereby
authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all
persons the existence of such a state of emergency, and in order to more
effectively protect the lives, safety and property of the city, to define and
impose a curfew applicable to all persons within the jurisdiction of the city.



(1985 Code, § 6-2)



§ 35.03  LIMITATIONS ON, AND EXEMPTIONS FROM, CURFEW.



   The Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to limit the application
of a curfew to any area specifically designated and described within the
jurisdiction of the city and to specific hours of the day and night, and to
exempt from the curfew police officers, firefighters, doctors, nurses and the
others as may be essential to the preservation of public order and
immediately necessary to serve the needs of the people within the city.



(1985 Code, § 6-3)



Statutory references:



   Emergency preparedness, see S.C. Code § 25-1-450



   Power to provide for security and the like, see S.C. Code § 5-7-30



§ 35.04  CALL OF COUNCIL.



   The City Council shall be called into session within 24 hours after a
state of emergency has been proclaimed by the Mayor.



(1985 Code, § 6-4)



§ 35.05  CONDITIONS DURING STATE OF EMERGENCY.



   During any state of emergency when a curfew has been defined and
imposed, it shall be unlawful for any person subject to curfew:



   (A)   To be or travel upon any public street, alley or roadway or
upon public property unless it is necessary to obtain medical assistance;



   (B)   To possess, off one's own premises, buy, sell, give away or
otherwise transfer or dispose of any explosive, firearms, ammunition or
dangerous weapon of any kind;



   (C)   To sell beer, wines or intoxicating beverages of any kind, or
to possess or consume the same off one's own premises; and/or



   (D)   To sell gasoline or any other similar petroleum products or
any other combustible or inflammable substances except as expressly
authorized by the provisions of the curfew imposed.



(1985 Code, § 6-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 35.06  END OF STATE OF EMERGENCY AND CURFEW.



   The Mayor shall proclaim the end of the state of emergency and curfew
as soon as circumstances warrant or when directed to do so by the City
Council.



(1985 Code, § 6-6)



§ 35.07  PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF PROVISIONS OF PROCLAMATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly violate the provisions
of any part of this chapter dealing with the state of emergency.



(1985 Code, § 6-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 35.08  TRANSFER OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS TO ANOTHER MUNICIPALITY;
PROCEDURE.



   The Mayor or Council may, upon the request of the governing body or
Mayor of any other municipality of the state, send any law enforcement
officers to assist the law enforcement officers of the requesting
municipality in the performance of their duties in case of emergency. A
complete record of the request together with the names of the officers sent
shall be recorded in the minutes of the next regular meeting of the Council.
The assistance shall be rendered only in emergencies, and the emergency shall
be declared by the Mayor of the requesting municipality, or, in the Mayor's
absence, the person normally acting in the Mayor's stead.



(1985 Code, § 6-8)



§ 35.09  RIGHTS, POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE OFFICERS.



   Law enforcement officers sent to another municipality pursuant to this
chapter shall retain the jurisdiction, authority, rights, privileges and
immunities, including coverage under worker's compensation laws, which they
had, and these shall be extended to and include the area in which like
benefits and authorities are or could be afforded, and the area between the
two municipalities when acting within the scope of the authority to make
arrests and to execute criminal process as is vested by law in the law
enforcement officers of the requesting municipality and of no other.



(1985 Code, § 6-9)



CHAPTER 36: COURT AND CRIMINAL PROCEDURE



Section




General Provisions




   36.01   Municipal Judge; appointment



   36.02   Associate judges; appointment



   36.03   Filling vacancy in office of judge



   36.04   Filling vacancy in office of associate judge



   36.05   Judges not to plead in cases heard by them; limitation on
practice in criminal causes



   36.06   Appointment and duties of Clerk of Court



   36.07   Attendance of police officer in court required



   36.08   Jurisdiction



   36.09   Powers and duties of judge



   36.10   Authority of judge to impose fine or imprisonment




Administrative Procedure




   36.25   When court to be held



   36.26   Authority of judges to issue rules for conduct of business



   36.27   Disposition of fines and forfeitures



   36.28   Forfeiture of bond by person not appearing



   36.29   Commencement of proceedings upon information



   36.30   Subpoena of witnesses



   36.31   Tampering with witnesses



   36.32   Enforcement of observance of decorum; punishment for insults
and disturbances



   36.33   Motions for new trial; right of appeal



   36.34   Reasons for granting new trial



   36.35   Appeals to court of general sessions by person convicted and
sentenced



   36.36   Bail while appeal pending



   36.37   Effect, upon appeal, of transcript of reporter’s notes of
testimony




Jury




   36.55   Empaneling of jury upon timely demand



   36.56   Drawing and composing juries; single trials, trial terms;
peremptory challenges



   36.57   Qualifications of jurors



   36.58   Neglect or refusal of juror to appear in obedience to venire




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 36.01  MUNICIPAL JUDGE; APPOINTMENT.



   The Municipal Judge shall be appointed by the Council to serve for a
term set by the Council not to exceed four years and until a successor is
appointed and qualified. The compensation of the Municipal Judge shall be
fixed by the Council. Before entering upon the discharge of the duties of the
office, the judge shall take and subscribe the oath of office prescribed by
Article VI, § 5, of the state Constitution.



(1985 Code, § 7-1)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 14-25-15



§ 36.02  ASSOCIATE JUDGES; APPOINTMENT.



   In addition to the Judge of the Municipal Court, the Council may also
appoint associate judges of the Municipal Court to serve for a term not to
exceed four years. The salary of the associate judges shall be determined by
the Council. The associate judges shall assist the judge of the Municipal
Court and shall perform the duties and preside over the sessions of the
Municipal Court, as shall be prescribed by the Mayor. The associate judges
may be members of the city's legal staff, temporarily appointed in that
capacity or may be another person trained and possessing experience in
Municipal Court procedures. When performing the duties, the associate judges
shall have all of the powers and responsibilities and be subject to the
limitations as provided for the judge of the Municipal Court under the
provisions of this code, except that the associate judge shall not regulate
the practices of the Municipal Court as described in §§ 36.25 and 36.26.



(1985 Code, § 7-2)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 14-25-25



§ 36.03  FILLING VACANCY IN OFFICE OF JUDGE.



   Whenever the office of judge of the Municipal Court shall become
vacant, a judge shall be appointed by the Council in the manner of original
appointment for the unexpired term.



(1985 Code, § 7-3)



Statutory reference:



   Filling vacancy, see S.C. Code § 14-25-25



§ 36.04  FILLING VACANCY IN OFFICE OF ASSOCIATE JUDGE.



   Whenever the office of associate judge of the Municipal Court shall
become vacant, an associate judge may be appointed by the Council by ballot,
in the manner of original appointment for the unexpired term.



(1985 Code, § 7-4)



§ 36.05  JUDGES NOT TO PLEAD IN CASES HEARD BY THEM; LIMITATION ON PRACTICE
IN CRIMINAL CAUSES.



   No judge shall be permitted to plead in a superior court in any case
which has been argued before or adjudged by the judge in the Municipal Court.
No Municipal Judge who is admitted to practice in the courts of the state
shall practice law in the Municipal Court.



(1985 Code, § 7-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 36.06  APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF CLERK OF COURT.



   A municipal employee shall be employed to serve as Clerk of the Court.
The Clerk of the Court shall keep the records and make the reports as may be
determined by the State Court Administrator.



(1985 Code, § 7-6)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 14-25-35



§ 36.07  ATTENDANCE OF POLICE OFFICER IN COURT REQUIRED.



   One of the officers of the police force shall be in constant attendance
in the Municipal Court and shall take proper measures for the safekeeping of
the prisoners and for carrying into effect the orders of the court. The Chief
of Police and police officers shall also be invested with the same powers and
duties as are provided for magistrates and constables.



(1985 Code, § 7-7)



Statutory reference:



   Powers and duties of Chief of Police and police officers, see S.C. Code
§ 14-25-55



§ 36.08  JURISDICTION.



   The Municipal Court shall have the following jurisdiction:



   (A)   Jurisdiction of all offenses committed within the corporate
limits of the city, which may be subject to the penalties of fines or
forfeiture not exceeding $500 plus assessments required by the State of South
Carolina, or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, and of all offenses which
are now or may hereafter be within the jurisdiction of magistrates.



   (B)   Jurisdiction of all criminal cases made under state law and
conferred upon magistrates, occurring within the corporate limits of the city.



(1985 Code, § 7-8)



Statutory reference:



   Similar previous, see S.C. Code §§ 14-25-45 and 14-25-65



§ 36.09  POWERS AND DUTIES OF JUDGE.



   The judge of the Municipal Court, or any duly authorized officer
holding the court, shall have the power to hear and determine motions for new
trials and arrest of judgment, to issue subpoenas for the attendance of
witnesses and warrants for the arrest of defendants, to swear witnesses, to
punish for contempt and to issue all other usual processes according to the
known and approved rules of the common law and statutes, in the discharge of
official duties.



(1985 Code, § 7-9)



Statutory reference:



   Similar statutory law, see S.C. Code § 14-25-45



§ 36.10  AUTHORITY OF JUDGE TO IMPOSE FINE OR IMPRISONMENT.



   When any person is found guilty of any offense, the judge may sentence
the person to pay a fine not exceeding $500 plus assessments required by the
State of South Carolina or serve a term not exceeding 30 days in jail.



(1985 Code, § 7-10)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 14-25-65




ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE




§ 36.25  WHEN COURT TO BE HELD.



   The Municipal Court shall be held weekly at the Municipal Court room,
within the discretion of the judge, at the hours as the judge may fix.



(1985 Code, § 7-20)



§ 36.26  AUTHORITY OF JUDGES TO ISSUE RULES FOR CONDUCT OF BUSINESS.



   (A)   The judges of the Municipal Court shall have the power to make
the rules and regulations not inconsistent with the laws of the land for
conducting the business of the Municipal Court as may be necessary for the
dispatch of the business, the preservation of order and the furtherance of
public justice.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect or refuse
to comply with the rules and regulations so made.



(1985 Code, § 7-21)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 36.27  DISPOSITION OF FINES AND FORFEITURES.



   All fines and forfeitures recovered and collected in the Municipal
Court for any offense whatever, shall belong to the city and be paid into the
Treasury thereof.



(1985 Code, § 7-22)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 14-25-85



§ 36.28  FORFEITURE OF BOND BY PERSON NOT APPEARING.



   In the Municipal Court, upon any charge made against any person
released on bond and not appearing when called, the judges of the Municipal
Court may order the bond forfeited.



(1985 Code, § 7-24)



§ 36.29  COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS UPON INFORMATION.



   (A)   All proceedings before the Municipal Court shall be commenced
on information under oath, plainly and substantially setting forth the
offense charged upon which, and only upon which, shall a warrant of arrest
issue.



   (B)   The information may be amended at any time before trial.



(1985 Code, § 7-25)



§ 36.30  SUBPOENA OF WITNESSES.



   The judges of the Municipal Court, on the application of any party to a
cause pending before the judges, shall issue a subpoena citing any person
whose testimony may be required in the cause to appear before the judge at a
certain time and place, to give evidence. The subpoena shall be served
personally at least one day before the attendance is required. If the person
shall neglect or refuse to attend, the judge may order the witness to be
brought before the court or, if any witness attending shall refuse to give
evidence, without good cause shown, the judge may commit the witness to jail
for not longer than 24 hours.



(1985 Code, § 7-26)



§ 36.31  TAMPERING WITH WITNESSES.



   Any person who shall, by any means whatsoever, bribe, persuade or
induce any witness to be absent from the Municipal Court or to fail to appear
and testify, when notified to do so, or who bribes, persuades or induces any
person to swear falsely on any trial, or who attempts to bribe, persuade or
induce any witness to be absent from court when properly notified to be
present, or to swear falsely on any trial, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1985 Code, § 7-27)



§ 36.32  ENFORCEMENT OF OBSERVANCE OF DECORUM; PUNISHMENT FOR INSULTS AND
DISTURBANCES.



   The judges of the Municipal Court shall have the power to enforce the
observance of decorum in Municipal Court while holding court, and for that
purpose may punish any person who shall, in the presence of the court, offer
an insult to the judges or a juror or who shall be wilfully guilty of an
undue disturbance of the proceedings before the court while sitting
officially, as for a contempt, by fine and imprisonment, either or both, not
exceeding $500 plus assessments required by the State of South Carolina or 30
days imprisonment.



(1985 Code, § 7-28)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to punish for contempt, see S.C. Code § 14-25-45



§ 36.33  MOTIONS FOR NEW TRIAL; RIGHT OF APPEAL.



   No motion for a new trial in the Municipal Court shall be heard unless
made within ten days from the rendering of the judgment. A timely motion for
a new trial shall stay the time for appeal until that motion os denied.



(1985 Code, § 7-29)



Statutory reference:



   Appeals, see S.C. Code § 14-25-95



§ 36.34  REASONS FOR GRANTING NEW TRIAL.



   The judge of the Municipal Court may grant a new trial in any case
tried in the Municipal Court for reasons for which new trials have usually
been granted in the courts of law of the state.



(1985 Code, § 7-30)



§ 36.35  APPEALS TO COURT OF GENERAL SESSIONS BY PERSON CONVICTED AND
SENTENCED.



   (A)   Every person convicted in the Municipal Court of any offense
whatever and sentenced may appeal from the sentence to the next term of court
of general sessions for the county. The appellant shall, within ten days
after sentence, serve written notice of appeal upon the judge who tried the
case, stating the grounds upon which the appeal is founded.



   (B)   Within 20 days after the service, the judge shall file the
notice in the office of the Clerk of the Court of general sessions, together
with a statement of all proceedings in the case. If the testimony was taken
in writing, a transcript of it shall be filed upon its completion, but in no
case later than 45 days after sentencing.



(1985 Code, § 7-31)



Statutory reference:



   Return in event of appeal, see S.C. Code § 14-25-105



§ 36.36  BAIL WHILE APPEAL PENDING.



   Upon service of the notice provided in § 36.35, the judges shall, on
demand of the defendant, admit the defendant to bail in the reasonable sum,
and with adequate surety as the judges may require, with conditions:



   (A)   To appear at the court appealed to and at any subsequent term
to which the case nay be continued, if not previously surrendered, and so
from term to term until the final decree, sentence or order of the court
thereon;



   (B)   To abide the final sentence, order or decree and not depart
without leave; and



   (C)   In the meantime to keep the peace and be of good behavior.



(1985 Code, § 7-32)



§ 36.37  EFFECT, UPON APPEAL, OF TRANSCRIPT OF REPORTER’S NOTES OF
TESTIMONY.



   In the taking of testimony and preparation of the record in cases of
appeal from the Municipal Court, the transcript of the notes of the testimony
taken on the trial by a sworn reporter, shall be held to be equivalent to
testimony signed by the witness.



(1985 Code, § 7-33)




JURY




§ 36.55  EMPANELING OF JURY UPON TIMELY DEMAND.



   In the trial of any case in the Municipal Court, upon the timely demand
for a jury, a jury shall be summoned and empaneled.



(1985 Code, § 7-40)



Statutory reference:



   Demand for jury, see S.C. Code § 14-25-125



§ 36.56  DRAWING AND COMPOSING JURIES; SINGLE TRIALS, TRIAL TERMS;
PEREMPTORY CHALLENGES.



   (A)   The drawing and composing of juries for single trials or terms
of court shall be conducted, mutatis mutandi, according to the statutes
relating to the drawing and composing of juries in magistrates’ courts,
except as otherwise specifically provided by this chapter. A person appointed
by the Municipal Judge who is not connected with the trial of the case for
either party shall draw out of compartment “A” of the jury box 30 names
and the list of names so drawn shall be delivered to each party or to the
attorney for each party.



   (B)   In addition to the procedure for drawing a jury list as
provided for in division (A) above, in those courts which schedule terms for
jury trials, the judge may select a jury list in the manner provided by this
section. Not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to a scheduled term of
jury trials, a person selected by the presiding judge shall draw at least 40
jurors.



   (C)   The names drawn pursuant to either divisions (A) or (B) above
shall be placed in a box or hat and individual names randomly drawn out one
at a time until six jurors and four alternates are selected. Each party shall
have a maximum of six peremptory challenges as to primary jurors and four
peremptory challenges as to alternate jurors and the other challenges for
cause as the court may permit. If for any reason it is impossible to select
sufficient jurors and alternates from the names drawn, names shall be
randomly drawn from compartment “A” until sufficient jurors and
alternates are selected.



   (D)   Where a jury is drawn and composed for a single trial, as
provided in division (A) above, the parties shall exercise peremptory
challenges in advance of the trial date, and only persons selected to serve
and alternates shall be summoned for the trial.



(1985 Code, § 7-42)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 14-25-165



§ 36.57  QUALIFICATIONS OF JURORS.



   All persons possessing the qualifications prescribed for jurors by the
laws of the state, and who have resided in the city for four months before
being sworn shall be liable to serve as jurors in the Municipal Court, saving
and reserving to all persons all lawful excuses and exemptions as in other
courts.



(1985 Code, § 7-43)



§ 36.58  NEGLECT OR REFUSAL OF JUROR TO APPEAR IN OBEDIENCE TO VENIRE.



   If any juror duly summoned shall neglect or refuse to appear in
obedience to any venire issued by the Municipal Court, and shall not, within
48 hours, render to the judge holding the court and issuing the venire a
sufficient reason for the delinquency, the juror shall be punished as for
contempt. A failure to pay forthwith the fine so assessed shall constitute a
contempt of court and be punished accordingly.



(1985 Code, § 7-44)



Statutory reference:



   Similar law, see S.C. Code § 14-25-185



CHAPTER 37: ELECTIONS



Section



   37.01   Municipal election authority



   37.02   Reimbursement of election costs



   37.03   When elections to be held



   37.04   Special elections



   37.05   Polling place, location and time open and closed



   37.06   Non-partisan election procedure



   37.07   Determination of election results under non-partisan
plurality method



   37.08   Time of taking office



   37.09   Terms of Mayor and Council



   37.10   Listing of candidates on ballot



   37.11   Results of elections



   37.12   Safeguarding the ballots



   37.13   Contest of election



   37.14   Later election in case of failure to hold when due, and the
like



§ 37.01  MUNICIPAL ELECTION AUTHORITY.



   (A)   The Berkeley County Voter Registration and Election Commission
shall advertise municipal elections, prepare and distribute ballots and
election materials, appoint managers of election for each polling place, and
otherwise supervise and conduct all municipal elections within the City of
Goose Creek.



   (B)   Immediately upon the closing of the polls at any municipal
election in the City of Goose Creek, the Berkeley County Voter Registration
and Election Commission shall begin to count and continuously count the votes
cast and make a statement of the whole number of the votes cast in such
election together with the number of votes cast for each candidate for Mayor
and Councilperson, canvas the vote and publicly display the unofficial
results.



   (C)   The Berkeley County Voter Registration and Election Commission
shall thereafter certify the results of the elections and transmit the
certified results to the Goose Creek City Council or an appointed authority
representing the city government as soon as practicable following the
certification.



   (D)   The Berkeley County Voter Registration and Election Commission
shall accept candidate filings and filing fees, including but not limited to
notices of candidacy and candidacy pledges, hear and decide protests, and
certify the results of municipal elections.



   (E)   The Berkeley County Voter Registration and Election Commission
shall utilize the current voting system operated by the county with the count
publicly conducted.



   (F)   The Berkeley County Voter Registration and Election Commission
shall take such other action as may be necessary or appropriate to conduct
municipal elections and certify the results. The Berkeley County Voter
Registration and Election Commission shall give notice of any special or
regular election in the city in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county or, in addition, in such other manner as it sees fit. Notice of
election for Mayor and Council shall be given at least 60 days prior to the
date of election. All other elections shall be given as provided by the code
of laws of the state. Notice shall include all necessary information
essential to the nomination or election process, to include, when
appropriate, the offices to be filled, dates of filing of petitions and
election, and polling place and poll manager.



(Ord. 09-006, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 37.02  REIMBURSEMENT OF ELECTION COSTS.



   (A)   The City of Goose Creek shall reimburse the Berkeley County
Voter Registration and Election Commission for all costs incurred in
providing ballots, advertising elections, printing costs, postage,
transportation costs, temporary help, programming charges, poll managers
compensation and other related additional expenses incurred in its conduct of
municipal elections in the City of Goose Creek, less filing fees collected by
the Berkeley County Voter Registration and Election Commission. If a protest
is filed or litigation is commenced in connection with the conduct of
municipal elections, the City of Goose Creek shall pay all court costs,
attorneys’ fees, court reporters’ fees and costs, and other costs and
expenses incurred in such protest or litigation or the defense thereof. The
Berkeley County Registration and Election Commission shall provide invoices
to the City of Goose Creek of all such costs and expenses incurred in the
conduct of Goose Creek municipal elections, protests, certifications of
results, litigation or other costs which may be incurred, even if not
specifically mentioned in this chapter. Further, the City of Goose Creek
shall provide payment upon such invoices within 30 days of receipt thereof.



   (B)   Requirements of method of nominating candidates of filing, and
filing fees.



      (1)   Candidates for the Offices of Mayor and City Council
shall file a statement of candidacy with the Berkeley County Voter
Registration and Election Commission not later than 12:00 noon, 60 days prior
to the election, but not sooner than 75 days prior to the election. A filing
fee of $150 shall be submitted with the statement of candidacy for the Office
of City Council. The filing fee for the Office of Mayor shall be the sum of
$300. The Berkeley County Voter Registration and Election Commission shall
verify the information in the statement for compliance with state and city
laws and place the name of the candidate on the ballot. All filing fees
received shall be used to defray the cost of the election.



      (2)   Any person declaring candidacy under this section who
cannot afford the required filing fee and who claims to be indigent shall
file a written appeal for relief with the Berkeley County Voter Registration
and Election Commission not later than 12:00 noon, 60 days prior to the
election, but not sooner than 75 days prior to the election.



   (C)   The Berkeley County Voter Registration and Election Commission
must examine the petitions of the candidates and determine the validity not
later than 30 days prior to the general or special election.



(Ord. 09-006, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 37.03  WHEN ELECTIONS TO BE HELD.



   The municipal general election for Mayor and Council shall be held on
the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November in even numbered
years and it is the intent of this provision that the municipal election
coincide with the general election for Federal, state, and county officers
and if there be any postponement of the general election as a result of
emergency or disaster, then at such time as the general election is held.



(Ord. 09-006, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 18-013, passed 7-10-2018)



§ 37.04  SPECIAL ELECTIONS.



   In case a vacancy shall occur in the Office of Mayor or any member of
the Council, an election shall be held to fill the vacancy provided the
vacancy occurs 180 days or more prior to the next general election. Any
special election which may be held shall be conducted according to the same
rules and regulations controlling the regular municipal elections.



(Ord. 09-006, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 37.05  POLLING PLACE, LOCATION AND TIME OPEN AND CLOSED.



   The location of the polls and the hours of opening and closing the
polls shall be according to the general election laws of the state at such
locations as may be published prior to the election.



(Ord. 09-006, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 18-013, passed 7-10-2018)



§ 37.06  NON-PARTISAN ELECTION PROCEDURE.



   All regular and special elections for the Office of Mayor and/or
Councilmember for the city shall be non-partisan elections held pursuant to
applicable state statutes. No political party affiliation shall be placed on
any ballot for any candidate. Public notice of all elections shall be given
at least 90 days prior to the elections.



(Ord. 09-006, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 37.07  DETERMINATION OF ELECTION RESULTS UNDER NON-PARTISAN PLURALITY
METHOD.



   The winners shall be determined by the nonpartisan plurality method set
forth in S.C. Code § 5-15-61;



   (A)   When more than one person is seeking election to a single
office, the candidate who receives the highest number of votes shall be
declared elected.



   (B)   When more persons are seeking election to two or more offices
(constituting a group) than there are offices to be filled, those candidates
receiving the highest number of votes, equal in number to the number of
offices to be filled, shall be declared elected.



(Ord. 09-006, passed 10-13-2009; Ord. 18-013, passed 7-10-2018)



§ 37.08  TIME OF TAKING OFFICE.



   Newly elected officers shall be qualified after at least 48 hours after
the closing of the polls. If the results of the election are contested, the
incumbent who fills the contested office shall hold over until the contestant
is finally determined. Elected officers shall take office 30 days after being
qualified by the Berkeley County Voter Registration and Election Commission.



(Ord. 09-006, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 37.09  TERMS OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL.



   The Mayor and City Council shall be elected for a term of four years.
The terms of Council shall be staggered so that not more than one half of the
Council and Mayor shall be elected in the same general election.



(Ord. 09-006, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 37.10  LISTING OF CANDIDATES ON BALLOT.



   All candidates for office shall be listed in alphabetical order under
the names of the office being sought, and all candidates shall be listed
without title. Nicknames shall not be used unless approved by the Berkeley
County Voter Registration and Election Commission. Insofar as possible, the
style of the general election ballot shall be the same as that prescribed in
the code of laws of the state for general elections. One space for each
office to be filled must be allowed for the voters to write in the name of
any qualified person for whom they may wish to vote.



(Ord. 09-006, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 37.11  RESULTS OF ELECTIONS.



   The managers of the municipal election shall officially certify the
results of the election to the Berkeley County Voter Registration and
Election Commission on the day following the election. The Berkeley County
Voter Registration and Election Commission shall officially declare the
results of the election within 72 hours following the close of the election.
The declaration shall be made to the Mayor and Council who shall officially
notify the candidates of the results.



(Ord. 09-006, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 37.12  SAFEGUARDING THE BALLOTS.



   After any municipal election has been conducted and the official
ballots have been duly conducted and tabulated, the Berkeley County Voter
Registration and Election Commission shall place the ballots into the
envelopes which shall be sealed and the envelopes containing the ballots
shall be placed into ballot boxes. The ballot boxes containing the ballots
shall be locked and placed in the city safe or other equally secure place.
The keys to the ballot boxes shall be placed in the custody of the Berkeley
County Voter Registration and Election Commission. The ballots shall be left
undisturbed in the city safe or other place unless the Berkeley County Voter
Registration and Election Commission shall order the ballots released for the
purpose of a contested election as provided by the laws of the state or for
conducting a recount as provided by the laws of the state. After the
proceedings of a contested election have been completed or adjourned for the
day, the ballots shall be redeposited in the city safe or other equally
secure place according to the procedure described above. If no appeals are
made or no contests filed, the Berkeley County Voter Registration and
Election Commission shall order, in writing, the ballots destroyed at the end
of the third week following the date of the election; provided that no
ballots shall be destroyed until all appeals have been decided.



(Ord. 09-006, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 37.13  CONTEST OF ELECTION.



   (A)   Within 48 hours after the closing of the polls, any candidate
may contest the result of the election as reported by the managers by filing
a written notice of the contest together with a concise statement of the
grounds therefor with the Berkeley County Voter Registration and Election
Commission. Within 48 hours after the filing of the notice, the Berkeley
County Voter Registration and Election Commission shall, after due notice to
the parties concerned, conduct a hearing on the contest, decide the issues
raised, file its report together with all recorded testimony and exhibits,
with the Clerk of Court of the county, notify the parties concerned of the
decision made and when the decision invalidates the election, the Council
shall order a new election as to the parties concerned.



   (B)   Neither the Mayor nor any member of Council shall be eligible
to pass on the issues arising in any contest in which the person is a party.



   (C)   Within ten days after notice of the decision of the Berkeley
County Voter Registration and Election Commission, any party aggrieved
thereby may appeal from the decision to the Court of Common Pleas. Notice of
appeal shall be served on the opposing parties or their attorneys and filed
in the office of the Clerk of Court within ten days. The notice of appeal
shall act as a stay of further proceedings pending the appeal.



(Ord. 09-006, passed 10-13-2009)



§ 37.14  LATER ELECTION IN CASE OF FAILURE TO HOLD WHEN DUE, AND THE LIKE.



   Whenever any election of the city shall fail of its purpose because of
a tie vote or otherwise, or whenever any election shall fail to be held for
any reason, the Berkeley County Voter Registration and Election Commission
shall, whenever the failure appears, proceed forthwith to appoint a day and
advertise for and hold another election and so continue to do so until the
purpose of the election has been attained.



(Ord. 09-006, passed 10-13-2009)



CHAPTER 38: PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES



Section



   38.01   Personnel policies and procedures; adopted by reference



§ 38.01  PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The City of Goose Creek’s personnel policies and procedures are
hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.



(1985 Code, Ch. 15)



TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter




      50.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT





      51.   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY





      52.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE DISPOSAL




CHAPTER 50: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT



Section




General Provisions




   50.001   Title



   50.002   Authority



   50.003   Jurisdiction



   50.004   Findings



   50.005   Purpose



   50.006   Construction and scope



   50.007   Rules of language and interpretation



   50.008   Relationship with other laws, regulations and ordinances



   50.009   Amendments



   50.010   Conflicting ordinances repealed



   50.011   Definitions




Organization and Administration




   50.030   City of Goose Creek Stormwater Management Program (SWMP)



   50.031   Coordination with other agencies



   50.032   Right-of-entry




Stormwater Quantity and Quality Management Requirements




   50.050   Regulations



   50.051   Prohibitions and exemptions



   50.052   Design and engineering standards



   50.053   Construction activity approval process



   50.054   Stormwater Design Standards Manual



   50.055   Ownership and participation



   50.056   Maintenance, construction, inspection and closeout



   50.057   Watercourse protection



   50.058   Notification of spills



   50.059   Cleanup procedures




Detection and Elimination of Illicit Discharges and Improper Disposal




   50.075   Illicit connections, illicit discharges and improper
disposal



   50.076   Detection of illicit connections and improper disposal



   50.077   Waste disposal prohibitions




Monitoring and Inspections




   50.090   Monitoring



   50.091   Inspections




Enforcement, Penalties and Abatement




   50.105   Enforcement



   50.106   Additional legal measures



   50.107   Criminal penalties



   50.108   Corrective action



   50.109   Stop work



   50.110   Application approval suspension and revocation




Variances, Appeals and Charges




   50.125   Design criteria



   50.126   Appeal process



   50.127   Funding



   50.128   Connection to conveyances



   50.129   Plan review



   50.130   Field inspection



   50.999   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 50.001  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the “Stormwater Management Ordinance
of the City of Goose Creek, South Carolina”.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.002  AUTHORITY.



   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred upon the
City of Goose Creek by the South Carolina Constitution, Act No. 194 of the
Acts and Joint Resolutions of 1971, enacted by the General Assembly of the
State of South Carolina, approved April 23, 1971, in S.C. Code §§ 4-9-30,
4-9-40, 5-7-30 and 5-7-60.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.003  JURISDICTION.



   The boundaries and jurisdiction of this chapter shall encompass those
portions of the incorporated City of Goose Creek, as they may exist from time
to time.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.004  FINDINGS.



   The Goose Creek City Council makes the following findings:



   (A)   Uncontrolled stormwater runoff may have a significant, adverse
impact on the health, safety and general welfare of the City of Goose Creek
and the quality of life of its citizens. The potential impacts of
uncontrolled stormwater can lead to the degradation of water quality and
general riverine ecosystem through excessive or illegal pollutant discharges,
erosion and flooding thereby limiting or removing its designated and
potential uses.



   (B)   The City of Goose Creek is required by federal law (33 U.S.C
§ 1342(p) and 40 C.F.R. 122.26) to obtain a NPDES permit from the South
Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control (“SCDHEC”) for
stormwater discharges from the City of Goose Creek Stormwater System. The
NPDES permit requires the City of Goose Creek to impose controls to reduce
the discharge of pollutants in stormwater to the maximum extent practicable
(MEP) using management practices, control techniques and system, design and
engineering methods and other provisions which are determined to be
appropriate for the control of the pollutants.



   (C)   Additionally, certain facilities that discharge stormwater
associated with an industrial activity, including construction activities,
are required by the South Carolina Code of Regulations 61-9-122 to obtain
NPDES permits for construction activities.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.005  PURPOSE.



   (A)   It is the purpose of this chapter to protect, maintain and
enhance water quality and the environment of the City of Goose Creek and the
short-term and long-term public health, safety and general welfare of the
citizens of the City of Goose Creek. This chapter is also designed to
minimize property damage by establishing requirements and procedures to
control the potential adverse effects of increased stormwater runoff and
related pollutant loads associated with both future development and existing
developed land. Proper management of stormwater runoff will further the
purpose of this chapter to insure a functional drainage system, reduce the
effects of development on land and stream channel erosion, attain and
maintain water quality standards, enhance the local environment associated
with the drainage system, reduce local flooding, maintain to the maximum
extent practical pre-developed runoff characteristics of the area in terms of
flow rate, volume and pollutant concentration and facilitate economic
development while mitigating associated pollutant, flooding, erosion and
drainage impacts.



   (B)   It is further the purpose of this chapter to direct the
development and implementation of a Stormwater Management Program (SWMP) and
to establish legal authority which authorizes or enables the City of Goose
Creek at a minimum to:



      (1)   Comply with state and federal requirements related to
stormwater management developed pursuant to the Clean Water Act, being 33
U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.;



      (2)   Prohibit illicit discharges to the City of Goose Creek
stormwater management systems and facilities and receiving waters;



      (3)   Control to the maximum extent practical, the discharge
to the City of Goose Creek stormwater management systems and facilities and
receiving waters of spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than
stormwater;



      (4)   Address specific categories of non-stormwater discharges
and similar other incidental non-stormwater discharges listed in the SWMP;



      (5)   Require erosion and sediment controls to protect water
quality on all applicable new and re-development projects both during and
after construction;



      (6)   Where necessary, require stormwater discharge rate and
volume control during and following development, redevelopment or
construction;



      (7)   Define and implement procedures of site plan review and
site inspection of all applicable construction projects within the City of
Goose Creek;



      (8)   Control the discharge from the City of Goose Creek
stormwater management systems and facilities and receiving waters of
pollutants in such quantity that water quality standards are met or to
otherwise address post-construction, long-term water quality. This includes
the necessary means needed to comply with state and federal regulations
regarding stormwater management quantity and quality;



      (9)   Define procedures for addressing citizen complaints of
stormwater-related issues within the City of Goose Creek;



      (10)   Provide for adequate long-term operation and
maintenance of Best Management Practices (BMPs);



      (11)   Prior to any review of construction activities within
the City of Goose Creek, require a letter from the office of the Department
of Health and Environmental Control’s (DHEC) Office of Ocean and Coastal
Resource Management that states the proposed project is consistent with the
Coastal Zone Management Plan;



      (12)   Carry out inspection, surveillance and monitoring
procedures necessary to determine compliance and noncompliance with permit
conditions, including the prohibition on illicit discharges to the City of
Goose Creek storm sewer system and receiving waters;



      (13)   Encourage the use of non-traditional strategies to
control stormwater discharges;



      (14)   Encourage the creation of stream buffers and
preservation of natural spaces to provide areas that could be used for flood
storage, stormwater treatment and control and recreation. The areas may be
required in special protection areas needed to protect, maintain or enhance
water quality and protect property from flooding problems;



      (15)   Develop, implement and enforce action plans to address
pollutant load reductions required in impaired water bodies and to work
towards compliance with total maximum daily loads (TMDLs) established by EPA
or SCDHEC and to work towards meeting water quality standards; and



      (16)   Enable enforcement of all authorizations.



   (C)   It is still further the purpose of this chapter to establish
review authority for the City of Goose Creek Department of Public Works for
establishing consistency of construction projects with the City of Goose
Creek SWMP.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.006  CONSTRUCTION AND SCOPE.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply throughout the
incorporated areas of the City of Goose Creek.



   (B)   The Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, shall be
primarily responsible for the coordination and enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter and the SWMP.



   (C)   The application of this chapter and the provisions and
references expressed herein shall be the minimum stormwater management
requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other
ordinances of the City of Goose Creek, or powers granted the City of Goose
Creek by the State of South Carolina statutes, including, without limitation,
the power to require additional or more stringent stormwater management
requirements. In additional protections, if site characteristics on new
development, redevelopment and existing developments indicate that complying
with these minimum requirements will not provide adequate designs or
protection for local property, residents or the environment, the property
owner, operator or person responsible for land disturbing activities is
required to provide additional and appropriate management practices, control
techniques, system design and engineering methods to attain an adequate level
of protection.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.007  RULES OF LANGUAGE AND INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   The word “shall” is mandatory; the word “may” is
permissive.



   (B)   The particular shall control the general.



   (C)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and
words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular,
unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.



   (D)   All public officials, bodies and agencies to which reference
is made are those of the City of Goose Creek, unless otherwise indicated.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.008  RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER LAWS, REGULATIONS AND ORDINANCES.



   Whenever the provisions of this chapter impose more restrictive
standards than are required in or under any other law, regulation or
ordinance, the requirements contained in this chapter shall prevail. Whenever
the provisions of any other law, regulation or ordinance require more
restrictive standards than are required in this chapter, the requirements of
the law, regulation or ordinance shall prevail.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.009  AMENDMENTS.



   The Goose Creek City Council, may, in its discretion and following
procedures specified by state law, amend or change this chapter or adopt
additional regulations or resolutions to implement this chapter, implement
the SWMP or to otherwise further the goal of protecting the quality of the
waters into which the City of Goose Creek storm sewer system outfalls.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.010  CONFLICTING ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions
of this chapter are hereby repealed. This chapter shall prevail in any and
all conflicts with guidelines, manuals or other publications.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.011  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT.  A person, firm, governmental agency, partnership or any
other entity who seeks to obtain approval under the requirements of this
chapter and who will be responsible for the land disturbing activity and
related maintenance thereof.



   AS-BUILT DRAWINGS.  Revised construction drawings that show in the
installed location of the new facilities on a project, including the
stormwater system. This term and RECORD DRAWINGS shall be synonymous.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS).  Any structural or non-structural
measure or facility used for the control of stormwater runoff, be it for
quantity or quality control. BMPS also includes schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, treatment requirements,
operating procedures and other management practices to control site runoff,
spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, drainage from raw material
storage or otherwise prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the state.



   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY.  Activity involving clearing,
grading, transporting, filling or any other activity which causes land to be
exposed to the danger of erosion, or which might create an alteration to an
existing drainage-way or other component of the stormwater system or facility.



   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY APPLICATION.  The set of drawings,
specifications, design calculations, SWPPP and other documents necessary to
demonstrate compliance with this chapter.



   DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.  The City of Goose Creek Department of
Public Works, the Director of Public Works or any of that Department's duly
authorized representatives or designees.



   DEVELOPER.  Any person, or others who acts in his or her own behalf,
that is required to submit an application for approval to disturb land or
encroachment and is thereafter responsible for maintaining compliance with
this chapter and conditions of the approved application.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of Public Works of the City of Goose Creek.



   EROSION.  The general process by which soils or rock fragments are
detached and moved by the action of wind, water, ice and gravity.



   EASEMENT.  An authorization by a property owner to the general public,
a corporation or a certain person or persons for the use of any designated
part of his or her property for a specific purpose.



   FLOOD/FLOODING.  A temporary rise in the level of water which results
in the inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL.  Any item or agent (biological, chemical or
physical) which has the potential to cause harm to humans, other living
organisms or the environment, either by itself or through interaction with
other factors.



   ILLICIT CONNECTION.  A connection to a City of Goose Creek stormwater
management system or facility which results in a discharge that is not
composed entirely of stormwater runoff except discharges pursuant to an NPDES
permit (other than the NPDES MS4 permit for the City of Goose Creek).



   ILLICIT DISCHARGE or ILLEGAL DISCHARGE.  Any activity which results in
a discharge to a City of Goose Creek stormwater management system, facility
or receiving waters that is not composed entirely of stormwater except:



      (1)   Discharge pursuant to a NPDES permit (other than the
NPDES for the City of Goose Creek); and



      (2)   Discharges resulting from the fire-fighting activities.



   IMPROPER DISPOSAL.  Any disposal other than through an illicit
connection that results in an illicit discharge, including, but not limited
to the disposal of used oil and toxic materials resulting from the improper
management of the substances.



   LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID).  A set of principles and design
components used to manage stormwater runoff by mimicking natural conditions
and limiting pollutant transport through source control.



   MAINTENANCE.  Any action necessary to preserve stormwater system
component, including conveyances, facilities and BMPs in proper working
condition, in order to serve the intended purposes set forth in this chapter
and to prevent structural failure of the components.



   MS4.  Municipal separate storm sewer system and includes all
conveyances, or system of conveyances, (including roads with drainage
systems, highways, right-of-way, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs,
gutters, ditches, man-made channels, storm drains, detention ponds and other
stormwater facilities) which inlets, transports, stores or treats stormwater
runoff and which is:



      (1)   Owned or operated by the City of Goose Creek;



      (2)   Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;



      (3)   Not a combined sewer system; and



      (4)   Not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW).



   NEW DEVELOPMENT or RE-DEVELOPMENT.  Any of the following actions
undertaken by any person, including, without limitation, any public or
private individual or entity:



      (1)   Division of a lot, tract or parcels or other divisions
by plat or deed;



      (2)   The construction, installation or alteration of land, a
structure, impervious surface or drainage facility;



      (3)   Clearing, scraping, grubbing or otherwise significantly
disturbing the soil, vegetation, mud, sand or rock of a site; or



      (4)   Adding, removing, exposing, excavating, leveling,
grading, digging, burrowing, dumping, piling, dredging or otherwise
disturbing the soil, vegetation, mud, sand or rock of a site.



   NPDES.  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.



   NPDES PERMIT.  The NPDES permit for stormwater discharges issued by
SCDHEC, pursuant to the Clean Water Act and the federal stormwater discharge
regulations (40 C.F.R. 122.26), that allows for restricting pollutant loads
as necessary to meet water quality standards.



   OPERATOR.  The person who is operating the property, including an
operator or person who is in charge of any activity related to land
disturbance, construction or post construction stormwater quality or quantity.



   OUTFALL or DISCHARGE POINT.  The point where a City of Goose Creek
stormwater management system or facility or other municipal and private
systems discharges to waters of the state and/or United States.



   OWNER.  The property owner, or any person who acts in his or her own
behalf, that submits an application for approval to disturb land or
vegetation or encroachment and the person, if so designated by default or on
legal documents, as the responsible party for maintenance of a stormwater
system(s) and facility(s).



   PERSON.  Any and all persons, natural or artificial and includes any
individual, association, firm, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, two or more persons having a joint or common interest, state or
federal or an agent or employee thereof, or any other legal entity.



   POLLUTANT.  Anything which may cause or contribute to exceedences of
water quality standards, including but not limited to sediment, bacteria,
nutrients, dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock,
sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged
into water.



   PROPERTY OWNER.  The legal owner of the property.



   RECEIVING WATERS.  Refers to any lakes, bays, sounds, ponds,
impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries,
marshes, inlets, canals, the Atlantic Ocean within the territorial limits of
the State of South Carolina and all other bodies of surface or underground
water, natural or artificial, public or private, inland or coastal, fresh or
salt.



   REGULATION.  Any regulation, rule or requirement prepared by and/or
adopted by the Goose Creek City Council pursuant to this chapter.



   SPILL.  Any accidental or purposeful discharge of any pollutants,
hazardous materials or other substance which is otherwise potentially
detrimental to the designated use of receiving water.



   STORMWATER.  Stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff and surface runoff
and drainage.



   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.  The collection, conveyance, storage, treatment
and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner to meet the objectives of this
chapter and its terms, including, but not limited to, measures that control
the increased volume and rate of stormwater runoff and water quality impacts
caused by human-made changes to the land.



   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS and FACILITIES.  Those natural and
man-made channels, swales, ditches, swamps, rivers, streams, creeks,
branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainage ways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, head
walls, storm sewers, lakes and other physical works, properties and
improvements which transfer, control, convey or otherwise influence the
movement of stormwater runoff, be it for quantity or quality control.



   SWMP.  The City of Goose Creek Stormwater Management Program, which
may describe the components to be used by the City of Goose Creek to control
stormwater discharges, address flooding and meet water quality standards.



   TMDL.  A regulatory value developed to represent the amount of a
pollutant that a water body can incorporate while meeting water quality
standards. TMDL are further defined as the legal document developed by EPA
and SCDHEC designating the pollutant load a permitted discharge is allowed to
input into a water body.



   VARIANCE.  The modification of the minimum stormwater management
requirements contained in this chapter and the SWMP for specific
circumstances where strict adherence to the requirements would result in
unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this chapter.



   WATERCOURSE.  Any natural or man-made conveyance used to transport
runoff from one location to the next.



   WATERSHED.  A drainage area or drainage basin contributing to the flow
of stormwater into a receiving watercourse or water body.



   WATER QUALITY.  Those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate
to the physical, chemical, biological or radiological integrity of water.



   WATER QUANTITY.  Those characteristics of stormwater runoff that
relate to the rate and volume of the stormwater runoff.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)




ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION




§ 50.030  CITY OF GOOSE CREEK STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM (SWMP).



   The SWMP, developed by the City of Goose Creek to implement the
purposes of this chapter, shall serve as the basis for directing the City of
Goose Creek's efforts to control stormwater. The SWMP is incorporated by
reference and is hereby a part of this chapter. The SWMP requirements are to
be complied with and shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.031  COORDINATION WITH OTHER AGENCIES.



   The Department of Public Works may coordinate the City of Goose Creek's
activities with other federal, state and local agencies, which manage and
perform functions relating to the protection of receiving waters through
written agreement. Authority not expressly reserved for other agencies or
restricted by statute is placed with the City of Goose Creek for the
protection and preservation of receiving waters. The Department of Public
Works should coordinate with state and federal agencies having jurisdiction.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.032  RIGHT-OF-ENTRY.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works or his or her designee, shall
have right-of-entry on or upon the property of any person subject to this
chapter issued hereunder. The Director of Public Works or his or her
designee, shall, upon showing satisfactory credentials, be provided ready
access to the necessary parts of the premises for the purposes of inspecting,
monitoring, sampling, inventorying, examining and copying of records, and
performing any other duties necessary to determine compliance with this
chapter. If access is not required by an emergency, access shall be granted
during the reasonable hours of 7 a.m. to 8 p.m.  Access occasioned in whole
or in part by an emergency causing actual or perceived risk of harm to
persons or property shall be granted at any time.



   (B)   Where the property owner or operator has security measures in
force requiring proper identification and clearance before entry onto the
premises, the person shall make necessary arrangements with the necessary
parties so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the Director
of Public Works, or his or her designee, will be permitted to enter without
delay for the purposes of performing the responsibilities identified in
division (A) above.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)




STORMWATER QUANTITY AND QUALITY MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS




§ 50.050  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works shall be responsible for
day-to-day coordination, implementation and enforcement of this chapter and
the SWMP, as well as the long-term management of the City of Goose Creek's
drainage.



   (B)   Without limitation, the Department of Public Works shall have
the following authority:



      (1)   To issue any approval, certification or license that may
be required to comply with this chapter;



      (2)   To deny a facility connection to a City of Goose Creek
stormwater management system or facility or discharge to waters of the state,
if state requirements and this chapter are not met;



      (3)   To create and enact the City of Goose Creek Stormwater
Design Standards Manual. The design manual may be used to convey design and
engineering standards, construction management processes and procedures and
other aspects necessary for compliance with this chapter. Goose Creek City
Council shall approve the original adoption and subsequent revisions of this
manual;



      (4)   To require the submittal of an application for all
applicable construction activities that result in a construction activities
altering an area of greater than or equal to one acre or other sites as
deemed necessary by the Stormwater Design Standards Manual. These
applications must include a plan to control stormwater pollutants and other
components detailed in the City of Goose Creek Stormwater Design Standards
Manual;



      (5)   To require the development of a Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan (SWPPP) for all applicable new and re-development projects
and enforcement of the SWPPP;



      (6)   To approve applicable construction activities and to
require as a condition of the approvals, structural or non-structural
controls, practices, devices, operating procedures or other mechanisms to
protect public and private property from flooding and erosion and attain
TMDL-mandated pollutant load reductions and water quality standards;



      (7)   To require performance bonds as necessary of any person
to secure that person's compliance with approval, certificates, licenses or
authorizations issued by the Department of Public Works pursuant to this
chapter, the SWMP and federal and state laws. The Department of Public Works
shall develop a process that organizes the closure of bonds and construction
projects to accommodate development phases and property ownership transfers;



      (8)   To conduct all activities necessary to carry out the
SWMP and other requirements included in this chapter, and to pursue the
necessary means and resources required to properly fulfill this
responsibility;



      (9)   To require appropriate post construction Best Management
Practices and appropriate continued maintenance of those Best Management
Practices;



      (10)   To determine appropriate fees, to impose penalties and
to take necessary and appropriate actions to enforce this chapter; and



      (11)   To require encroachment permits as necessary.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.051  PROHIBITIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall:



      (1)   Develop any land;



      (2)   Engage in any industry or enterprise;



      (3)   Construct, operate or maintain any landfill, hazardous
waste treatment, disposal or recovery facility or any other industrial or
related facility;



      (4)   Dispose of any hazardous material or toxic substance or
other pollutant; or



      (5)   Otherwise prevent the transport of sediment and other
pollutants associated with stormwater runoff beyond property boundaries,
without having provided for compliance with this chapter.



   (B)   In cases where an imminent threat to the health or safety of
the general public or the environment is suspected, the Director of Public
Works or his or her designee shall perform the responsibilities to determine
if immediate action is necessary. The responsibilities may be made with or
without the consent of the owner or operator. If consent is refused, the
Director of Public Works or his or her designee, may utilize the enforcement
measures authorized in this chapter to remove the threat. In such cases, the
owner or operator, as the case may be, shall reimburse the city for its
direct and related expenses. If the owner or operator, as the case may be,
fails to reimburse the city, the city is authorized to file a lien for the
costs against the property, file an action in magistrate or civil court for
recovery of incurred expenses and enforce the actions in magistrate or civil
court.



   (C)   The following development activities are exempt from the
provisions of this chapter.



      (1)   Land disturbing activities undertaken on forest land for
the production and harvesting of timber and timber products and conducted in
accordance with Best Management Practices and minimum erosion protection
measures, established by the South Carolina Forestry Commission pursuant to
S.C. Code § 48-18-70, as amended.



      (2)   Land disturbing activities on agricultural land for
production of plants and animals, including but not limited to: forages and
sod crops, grains and feed crops, tobacco, cotton and peanuts, dairy animals
and dairy products, poultry and poultry products, livestock, including beef
cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules or goats, including the breeding
and grazing of these animals, bees, fur animals and aqua-culture. The
construction of an agricultural structure that requires the disturbance of
one or more acres, such as, but not limited to, broiler houses, machine
sheds, repair shops, coops, barns and other major buildings shall require the
submittal and approval of a construction activity application prior to the
start of the land disturbing activity.



   (D)   Linear utility installation activities that are covered under
their own SCDHEC approved utility general permit requiring associated
assurance of proper stormwater management.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.052  DESIGN AND ENGINEERING STANDARDS.



   (A)   Design and engineering standards must define the desired level
of quality and performance for stormwater management systems on all
applicable construction activities in order to meet the purpose of this
chapter. The standards establish the minimum technical requirements needed to
express compliance through calculations, maps and drawings, or others as
necessary.



   (B)   The Department of Public Works is authorized to develop and
adopt policies, criteria, specifications and standards for the proper
implementation of the requirements of this chapter, federal and state laws
and the SWMP and to provide a sound technical basis for the achievement of
stormwater management, including water quality and quantity objectives. These
standards may be presented in a Stormwater Design Standards Manual.



   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner, operator
or person responsible for land disturbing activities to provide adequate
controls to meet the design and engineering standards.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.053  CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY APPROVAL PROCESS.



   (A)   A submittal shall be made for all applicable construction
activities for review by the Department of Public Works. The entire
application process and requirements may be described in a Stormwater Design
Standards Manual.



   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant (property
owner, operator or person responsible for construction activities) to provide
a complete application package that meets the requirements of this chapter,
the SWMP and other state and federal regulations.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.054  STORMWATER DESIGN STANDARDS MANUAL.



   (A)   The Department of Public Works is authorized to develop and
adopt a Stormwater Design Standards Manual.



   (B)   The manual may include design standards, procedures and
criteria for conducting hydro logic, hydraulic, pollutant load evaluations
and downstream impact for all components of the stormwater management system.



   (C)   Although the intention of the manual is to establish uniform
design practices, it neither replaces the need for engineering judgment nor
precludes the use of information not presented.



   (D)   Other accepted engineering procedures may be used to conduct
hydrologic, hydraulic and pollutant load studies if approved by the
Department of Public Works.



   (E)   The manual, if adopted, shall contain, at a minimum, the
following components:



      (1)   Construction activity application contents and approval
procedures;



      (2)   Construction completion and closeout processes;



      (3)   Hydrologic, hydraulic and water quality design criteria
(i.e., design standards) for the purposes of controlling the runoff rate,
volume and pollutant load. Suggested reference material shall be included for
guidance in computations needed to meet the design standards;



      (4)   Information and requirements for new and redevelopment
projects in special protection areas necessary to address TMDLs, known
problem areas and other areas necessary to protect, maintain and enhance
water quality and the environment of the City of Goose Creek and the public
health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Goose Creek;



      (5)   Construction document requirements;



      (6)   Minimum easement requirements; and



      (7)   Required and recommended inspection schedules and
activities for all components of the stormwater management system, including
construction-related BMPs.



   (F)   The manual shall be updated periodically to reflect the
advances in technology and experience gathered with time.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.055  OWNERSHIP AND PARTICIPATION.



   (A)   Property owners are responsible for maintaining stormwater
quantity and quality facilities and all conveyance structures located on
their property. Prior to the issuance of an approved application for
construction activity, the property owner shall execute a legal document
entitled “Covenants for Permanent Maintenance of Stormwater Systems”. The
property owner shall record the Covenants in the office of the Berkeley
County Register of Deeds. The location of the facility, the recorded location
of the Covenants document and a statement of the property owner's
responsibility for maintenance shall be included and also shown on a plat. In
the case of an operator other than the property owner, a copy of a
maintenance agreement between the operator and the property owner shall be
included with the Covenants, defining the operator's duties and
responsibilities and that the property owner shall be responsible for
maintenance activities upon the termination of the agreement.



   (B)   The property owner shall grant to the City of Goose Creek a
perpetual, non-exclusive, transferable easement, beginning or ending at a
public street or other access point that allows for public inspection and
emergency repair of all components of the drainage system, including all
conveyances and all water quantity and quality control facilities. At the
request of the Director of Public Works or his or her designee, the property
owner shall grant to the City of Goose Creek rights-of-way.



   (C)   Stormwater quantity and quality control facilities shall be
located so that required easements can be effectively used and ownership and
maintenance responsibility can be clearly defined in deeds and plats.



   (D)   Berkeley County and/or the South Carolina Department of
Transportation (SCDOT), shall be responsible for maintenance activities for
stormwater collection/conveyance systems associated with county/state
accepted public roads and projects.



   (E)   The City of Goose Creek may, in its sole discretion, either
accept or decline ownership and maintenance of all or part of a stormwater
system.



   (F)   The minimum maintenance requirements will be performed at
necessary intervals by the property owner or operator. Failure to perform the
activities will constitute a violation of this chapter.



   (G)   If a facility or any portion of the stormwater system is not
being maintained as required, the Director of Public Works, or his or her
designee, will notify the property owner or operator in writing. If property
owner or operator fails to repair or maintain the facility within the
allotted time, the Department of Public Works may authorize the work to be
performed by the City of Goose Creek or others. In such cases, the property
owner or operator shall reimburse the city for its direct and related
expenses. If the property owner or operator fails to reimburse the city, the
city is authorized to file a lien for the costs against the property, file an
action in magistrate or civil court for recovery of incurred expenses, and
enforce the actions in magistrate or civil court.



   (H)   A property owner or operator may hire or contract others to
perform necessary maintenance actions, but the City of Goose Creek will hold
the person named in the Covenants as the responsible party, should legal
actions described in division (G) above be necessary.



   (I)   When the Director of Public Works or his or her designee,
determines that additional storage capacity or pollution reduction beyond
that required by the applicant for on-site stormwater management is necessary
in order to enhance or provide for the public health, safety and general
welfare, to correct unacceptable or undesirable existing conditions or to
provide protection in a more desirable fashion for future development, the
City of Goose Creek may:



      (1)   Require that the applicant grant any necessary easements
over, through or under the applicant's property to provide access to or
drainage for a facility; and



      (2)   Require that the applicant obtain from the owners of
property over, through or under where the stormwater management facility is
to be located, any easements necessary for the construction and maintenance
of same.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.056  MAINTENANCE, CONSTRUCTION, INSPECTION AND CLOSEOUT.



   Maintenance of the stormwater management system is critical for the
achievement of its purpose of controlling stormwater runoff quantity and
quality and the short-term and long-term public health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the City of Goose Creek.



   (A)   A maintenance plan for the stormwater management system shall
be included in an application to perform a construction activity to cover
activities to be conducted during and after construction. As part of the
maintenance plan, the property owner or operator of the facility shall
specifically agree through signature of Covenants to be responsible for
keeping the system and facilities in working order. The Department of Public
Works shall develop procedures to provide reasonable assurance that
maintenance activities are performed for both public and privately maintained
systems. The Department of Public Works shall also define procedures for
transferring maintenance responsibilities to another entity.



   (B)   The Department of Public Works shall define procedures for
conducting site inspections during construction and until a stormwater
management system or facility is no longer in use. The inspections may be
performed by city staff, Berkeley County staff or an approved Inspector. The
City of Goose Creek has the authority to levy fines for inspections and
re-inspections as described in the Stormwater Design Standards Manual.



   (C)   As part of any application to perform a construction activity,
the applicant shall submit construction and BMP maintenance and inspection
schedules. Required and recommended schedules for BMP maintenance and
inspection are to be provided in the Stormwater Design Standards Manual.



   (D)   If the construction is to be phased, no stage work related to
the construction of stormwater management facilities shall commence until the
preceding stage of work is completed in accordance with an approved
application to perform a construction activity. The procedure for
construction phases beginning and ending and what constitutes the conditions
shall be developed.



   (E)   The applicant shall notify the Director of Public Works or his
or her designee, before commencing any work to implement the approved
construction activity application and upon completion of any phase or
designated component of the site. Notification schedules shall be provided
for in the Land Development Manual. All self-inspections, maintenance
actions, BMP replacements and changes to the approved application shall be
documented and presented upon request to the Director of Public Works or his
or her designee.



   (F)   The construction project completion and closeout process must
be completed by the Department of Public Works prior to any of the following
actions, as applicable:



      (1)   The use or occupancy of any newly constructed components
of the site;



      (2)   Final acceptance of any road into the official Berkeley
County and/or SCDOT road inventory or designation of road owner and
associated stormwater management system;



      (3)   Release of any bond held by the City of Goose Creek; and



      (4)   Approval and/or acceptance for recording of maps, plats
or drawings, the intent of which is to cause a division of a single parcel of
land into two or more parcels, and/or acceptable bonding is provided.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.057  WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.



   (A)   Every person owning or operating property through which a
watercourse passes shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse
within the property free of trash, debris and other obstacles that would
pollute, contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water through the
watercourse. In addition, the owner or operator shall maintain existing
privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that the
structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or physical
integrity of the watercourse.



   (B)   To assist in the compliance with state and federal laws and
regulations, the Department of Public Works may develop special protection
areas which require additional control of stormwater quality and quantity
than provided by minimum design standards. The areas may consist of
watersheds corresponding to established TMDLs, known flooding problems and
pollution impairments, or other areas necessary to protect, maintain and
enhance water quality and the environment of the City of Goose Creek and the
public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City of
Goose Creek. These areas can be expected to change with time as development
continues and as federal and state law demands.



   (C)   New stormwater systems created as the result of any new and
redevelopment project shall be connected to the existing drainage system in a
manner so as not to degrade the integrity of the existing system, whether
natural or man-made, and shall have demonstrated this to the Department of
Public Works prior to project closeout. Discharge points shall be confined to
connections with an existing natural or human-made drainage system. When
stormwater discharges are to flow into collection systems not owned and
maintained by the City of Goose Creek, the owners of these systems shall
maintain the right to disapprove new connections to their system.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.058  NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.



   (A)   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any
person responsible for a facility or operation and maintenance, or
responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has
information of any known or suspected release of materials which are
resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into
stormwater, the storm drain system or waters of the state, the person shall
take all necessary steps to discover, contain and cleanup any releases.



   (B)   The person shall also take immediate steps to protect against
future recurrences of the discharge. In the event of a release of hazardous
materials, including but not limited to oils, greases, engine fluids and
fuels, chemicals, herbicides and pesticides, and fertilizers, the person
shall immediately notify all necessary agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services.



   (C)   This shall include the City of Goose Creek Fire Department,
Police Department and Department of Public Works. The notifications of
hazardous spills shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to
the Department of Public Works within five business days of the spill event.



   (D)   In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, the
person shall record an on-site written record of the spill.



   (E)   The owner or operator of the establishment shall retain an
on-site written record of any and all spills that will include information on
cleanup measures taken and the actions to prevent its recurrence.



   (F)   The records shall be retained for at least five years.



   (G)   Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above
is a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.059  CLEANUP PROCEDURES.



   The City of Goose Creek may develop spill procedures on how spills are
cleaned up, and who is responsible for the cleanup, in terms of the
activities to be performed and cost of the actions.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)




DETECTION AND ELIMINATION OF ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND IMPROPER DISPOSAL




§ 50.075  ILLICIT CONNECTIONS, ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND IMPROPER DISPOSAL.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to connect any pipe, open
channel or any other conveyance system that discharges anything, except
stormwater or other approved discharges into a Department of Public Works
stormwater management system or facility or a water of the state.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to continue the operation of any
illicit connection regardless of whether the connection was permissible when
constructed. Improper connections in violation of this chapter must be
disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to the satisfaction of the
Director of Public Works or his or her designee, and any other federal, state
or local agencies or departments regulating the discharge.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to throw, drain or otherwise
discharge to a City of Goose Creek stormwater management system or facility
or to the waters of the state or to cause, permit or allow a discharge that
is composed of anything except stormwater or unpolluted water which is
approved by the Department of Public Works.



   (D)   The Department of Public Works shall develop procedures for
detecting, tracking and eliminating illicit discharges and improper disposals
to the stormwater system.



   (E)   The Director of Public Works or his or her designee, may
require controls for, or exempt from, the prohibition provision in divisions
(A), (B) and (C) above, the following, provided that a reasonable
determination is made that they are not a significant source of pollution:



      (1)   Unpolluted industrial cooling water, but only under the
authorization and direction of the Director of Public Works or his or her
designee and if appropriate Industrial NPDES permit is in place;



      (2)   Water line flushing, diverted stream flows, rising
ground waters and uncontaminated pumped ground waters, and uncontaminated
ground water infiltration;



      (3)   Discharges from potable water sources, foundation
drains, air conditioning condensation, landscape irrigation, springs, water
from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual car
washing, de-chlorinated swimming pool discharges, flows from riparian
habitats and wetlands and street wash water; and



      (4)   Discharges or flows from fire fighting.



   (F)   The Department of Public Works may develop procedures for
allowing other non-stormwater discharges.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)  Penalty, see § 50.999



§ 50.076  DETECTION OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS AND IMPROPER DISPOSAL.



   (A)   The Department of Public Works shall take appropriate steps to
detect and eliminate illicit connections to the City of Goose Creek
stormwater system, including the adoption of a program to screen illicit
discharges and identify their source or sources, perform inspections and levy
fines if not removed.



   (B)   (1)   The Department of Public Works shall take appropriate
steps to detect and eliminate improper discharges.



      (2)   These steps may include programs to screen for disposal,
programs to provide for public education and public information, inspection,
levying fines and other appropriate activities to facilitate the proper
management and elimination of illicit discharges.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.077  WASTE DISPOSAL PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep or
permit to be thrown, deposited, left or maintained, in or upon any public or
private property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, component
of the storm drain system or water of the United States, any refuse, rubbish,
garbage, litter, pet fecal matter or other discarded or abandoned objects,
articles and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to
pollution.



   (B)   Yard debris, including natural foliage, may be deposited in
the public right-of-way but not in or on any stormwater conveyance
structures, including inlets and gutters, but only if a collection service is
available.



   (C)   Wastes in proper waste receptacles may be placed in the street
for collection, but again only if collection by or through the City of Goose
Creek is in place.



   (D)   No waste or yard debris shall be placed in the street without
a collection service.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)  Penalty, see § 50.999



Cross-reference:



   Prohibitions on waste disposal, see also §§ 70.21 and 93.086




MONITORING AND INSPECTIONS




§ 50.090  MONITORING.



   The City of Goose Creek Department of Public Works may monitor the
quantity and concentration of pollutants in stormwater discharges from the
areas and/or locations designated in the City of Goose Creek's SWMP.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.091  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works or his or her designee, bearing
proper credentials and identification, may enter and inspect all properties
for regular inspections, periodic investigations, monitoring, observation
measurement, enforcement, sampling and testing, to effectuate the provisions
of this chapter and the SWMP programs. The Director of Public Works or his or
her designee, shall duly notify the owner of the property or the
representative on-site and the inspection shall be conducted at reasonable
times.



   (B)   Upon refusal by any property owner to permit an Inspector to
enter or continue an inspection, the Inspector shall terminate the inspection
or confine the inspection to areas concerning which no objection is raised.
The Director of Public Works or his or her designee, shall document the
refusal and the grounds for such and promptly seek appropriate compulsory
process.



   (C)   In the event that the Director of Public Works or his or her
designee reasonably believes that discharges from the property into a City of
Goose Creek stormwater management system or facility may cause an imminent
and substantial threat to human health or the environment, the inspection may
take place at any time and without notice to the owner of the property or a
representative on-site. The Inspector shall present proper credentials upon
reasonable request by the owner or representative.



   (D)   Inspection reports shall be maintained in a permanent file
located at the Department of Public Works.



   (E)   At any time during an inspection or at other times as the
Director of Public Works or his or her designee may request information from
an owner or representative, the owner or representative may identify areas of
his or her facility or establishment, material or processes that contain or
might reveal a trade secret. If the Director of Public Works or his or her
designee, has no clear and convincing reason to question the identification,
all material, processes and information obtained within the areas shall be
conspicuously labeled “Confidential – Trade Secret”. The trade secret
designation shall be freely granted to any material claimed to be such by the
owner or representative unless there is clear and convincing evidence for
denying the designation. In the event the Director of Public Works or his or
her designee does not agree with the trade secret designation, the material
shall be temporarily designated a trade secret, and the owner or
representative may request an appeal of the Director of Public Work's
decision in the manner in which all the appeals are handled in this chapter.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)




ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND ABATEMENT




§ 50.105  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   (1)   When the Director of Public Works or his or her
designee finds that work done for new development and redevelopment fails to
conform to the approved construction activity application, or that the work
has not been done, the Director of Public Works or his or her designee may,
as deemed necessary and after due process, by written notice of violation
(NOV), direct conformity to the approval(s). Actions may include:



         (a)   Issuing a written order to comply, to suspend work
or to revoke the approval issued;



         (b)   Seeking redress through legal action;



         (c)   Withholding the release of permanent electric
power to the site or certificate of occupancy;



         (d)   Withholding or revoking other permits related to
the site; and/or



         (e)   Levying fines.



      (2)   The NOV shall serve as a legal requirement to remove the
violation(s). The written NOV shall be provided to the owner or the person
responsible for land disturbing activities stating the nature of the
violation, the amount of time in which to correct deficiencies, the date on
which an inspection will be made to make sure that corrective action has been
performed and the proposed penalty structure if corrective action is not
taken by the inspection date. After the issuance of the NOV and following due
process, the Director of Public Works or his or her designee is hereby given
the authority to levy fines as described in this section.



   (B)   When the Director of Public Works or his or her designee
determines that an owner has failed to maintain a stormwater management
facility, written NOV shall be provided to the owner or the person in
possession, charge or control of the property stating the nature of the
violation, the amount of time in which to correct deficiencies, the date on
which an inspection will be made to make sure that corrective action has been
performed and the proposed penalty structure if corrective action is not
taken. It shall be sufficient notification to deliver the notice to the
person to whom it is addressed, or to deposit a copy of such in the United
States Mail, properly stamped, certified and addressed to the address used
for tax purposes. The NOV may address the entire site or a specific portion
of the site so as not to unduly impede the development of areas being managed
for the control of stormwater runoff and associated pollutants.



   (C)   When the Director of Public Works or his or her designee
determines that an owner of any property is causing or partially causing
flooding, erosion or noncompliance with water quality standards or this
chapter, upon providing valid proof of the impacts, the Director of Public
Works or his or her designee can require owners to remove the proven impact
in a concerted, prudent manner and restore the impacted property. A written
NOV shall be issued to the owner containing the information stated above.
Following the issuance of the NOV and due process, the Director of Public
Works or his or her designee is hereby given the authority to levy fines as
described in this section.



   (D)   The City of Goose Creek Attorney is hereby directed to take
all legal actions necessary to correct situations described in divisions (A),
(B) and (C) above, including actions that are necessary to remove from the
property the objectionable conditions constituting noncompliance with this
chapter.



   (E)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall impair the right or
ability of the City of Goose Creek Attorney to exercise any and all other
remedies available, of law or in equity, including without limitation, the
pursuit of injunctive relief, under emergency circumstances where there
exists the danger of bodily injury or death.



   (F)   The authorized enforcement agency, or its appointed agent, may
obtain injunctive relief to enjoin violations of the provisions of this
chapter, and any person damaged as a result of the violations may, upon a
proper showing of the damages, obtain payment therefor by a civil action.



   (G)   This chapter may be enforced by any other remedy of law or
equity that the City of Goose Creek is authorized to pursue, to include the
authorities and powers conferred to local governments by the General Assembly
of South Carolina. The penalties and other remedies provided in this chapter
are cumulative and not exclusive, and may be independently and separately
pursued against the same person for the activity constituting a violation of
this chapter. The enforcement of any remedy provided herein shall not prevent
the enforcement of any other remedy or remedies in other provisions of this
code or other laws and regulations.



   (H)   The City of Goose Creek shall provide due process into the
enforcement of violations so as to provide owners, operators and other
responsible parties the abilities to resolve the violations in a timely
manner before facing fines and civil and criminal penalties. It is the intent
of this chapter that violators be given appropriate due processes.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.106  ADDITIONAL LEGAL MEASURES.



   (A)   Where the City of Goose Creek is fined and/or placed under a
compliance schedule by the state or federal government for a violation(s) of
its NPDES permit, and the City of Goose Creek can identify the person(s) who
caused the violation(s) to occur, the City of Goose Creek may pass through
the penalty and cost of compliance to that person(s).



   (B)   The City of Goose Creek Attorney may institute injunctive,
mandamus or other appropriate action or proceedings at law or equity,
including criminal conviction, for the enforcement of this chapter or to
correct violations of this chapter, and any court of competent jurisdiction
shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent
injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of remedy or relief.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.107  CRIMINAL PENALTIES.



   In addition to any applicable civil penalties, any person who
willfully, with wanton disregard, or intentionally violates any provision of
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished within
the jurisdictional limits of magistrate court. Each day of a violation shall
constitute a new and separate offense.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.108  CORRECTIVE ACTION.



   In the event a violation of this chapter has not been corrected within
the applicable time period for correction, the City of Goose Creek, or its
contractor, may enter upon the lot or parcel of land and correct the
violation, and the costs incurred as a result of the action (including
inspection, administration, labor and equipment costs) shall be collected
from the bond, if in place and sufficient to cover the costs, or shall become
a lien upon the property and shall be collected in the same manner as the
City of Goose Creek taxes are collected.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.109  STOP WORK.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works, his or her designee or other
authorized personnel may issue a stop work order if it is found that a
construction activity is being conducted in violation of this chapter.



   (B)   (1)   The stop work order may allow or require correction
of notice of violation (NOV) issues, but shall otherwise stop all other
construction related activities. A stop work order may carry with it civil
penalties as well.



      (2)   Any person in violation of a stop work order is subject
to payment of all fees, bonds and penalties prior to the lifting of the stop
work order.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.110  APPLICATION APPROVAL SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   An approved construction activity application may be suspended or
revoked if one or more of the following violations have been committed:



   (A)   Violations of the conditions of the construction activity
application approval;



   (B)   Construction is not in accordance with the letter or intent of
the approved plans;



   (C)   Noncompliance with correction notice(s) or stop work order(s);



   (D)   The existence of an immediate danger to a downstream area in
the judgment of the Director of Public Works or his or her designee; and



   (E)   Other violations of this chapter.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)




VARIANCES, APPEALS AND CHARGES




§ 50.125  DESIGN CRITERIA.



   The Department of Public Works may grant a variance only upon a
determination that:



   (A)   The variance will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety and general welfare of the City of Goose Creek;



   (B)   The variance will not adversely affect the reasonable
development of adjacent property;



   (C)   The variance is justified because of topography or other
special conditions unique to the property involved, and the variance is not
requested due to mere inconvenience or financial disadvantage;



   (D)   The variance is consistent with the objectives of this chapter
and will not have the effect of nullifying the intent or purpose of this
chapter, or any other pertinent city, county or state statute; and



   (E)   (1)   A written request for a variance shall be required
and shall state the specific variance sought and the reasons, with supporting
data, a variance should be granted.



      (2)   The request shall include all information necessary to
evaluate the proposed variance.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.126  APPEAL PROCESS.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision, notice of violation or
denial of a variance by the Director of Public Works or his or her designee
may appeal the same by filing a written notice of appeal with the City
Administrator within 30 days of the issuance of the decision, notice of
violation or denial of a variance. The City Administrator will review the
appeal and will either reverse or preserve the previous decision. In either
case, the decision of the City Administrator will be in writing and will
state the rational for the appeal decision.



   (B)   The City Administrator shall hear and determine the appeals in
a quasi-judicial capacity within 45 days or other times as may be mutually
agreed upon and will render a decision within ten working days after the
appeal has been heard.



   (C)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Administrator
may appeal the decision to the Goose Creek City Council in accordance with
its rules and procedures.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.127  FUNDING.



   In addition to all other charges, fees and penalties, the City of Goose
Creek shall have the right to develop and impose a stormwater service fee to
fund implementation of this chapter and its associated programs and plans.
Establishment and revision of the fees shall be approved by the Goose Creek
City Council.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.128  CONNECTION TO CONVEYANCES.



   The Department of Public Works shall have the right to establish a
schedule of appropriate fees for any person or property owner establishing a
new discharge to waters of the state within the City of Goose Creek or to a
wet weather conveyance. The fee shall be payable as part of any application
regulating the discharge of stormwater runoff (i.e. plan review fees).
Application fees shall be established on the basis of facility classes
relating to the quantity and quality of approved discharge. Establishment and
revision of the fees shall be approved by the Goose Creek City Council.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.129  PLAN REVIEW.



   Costs associated with plan review of land development construction
documents, other than those routinely performed by the Department of Public
Works, may be assessed a fee representing the cost in labor, equipment and
materials expended in the conduct of the review. Establishment and revision
of the fees shall be approved by the Goose Creek City Council.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.130  FIELD INSPECTION.



   Costs associated with field inspection and re-inspections of land
development or construction activities other than those routinely performed
by the Department of Public Works as part of compliance monitoring may be
assessed a fee representing the cost in labor, equipment and materials
expended in the conduct of the inspection. Establishment and revision of the
fees shall be approved by the Goose Creek City Council.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



§ 50.999 PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine of not more than $500 for each violation. Each separate day of a
violation constitutes a new and separate violation.



(Ord. 07-017, passed 11-13-2007)



CHAPTER 51: PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY



Section




General Provisions




   51.01   Definition



   51.02   Required users; notice to connect



   51.03   Private system; authorized use



   51.04   Illegal sale from private or commercial systems



   51.05   Application and installation of water service



   51.06   Unauthorized connections or use



   51.07   Interference with water system



   51.08   Obstruction of and damage to city property



   51.09   Pollution



   51.10   Prohibited connection




Pipes




   51.25   Unapproved pipes



   51.26   Extension of service lines




Service




   51.40   Metered service



   51.41   Owner’s responsibility for repairs and the like



   51.42   Cut-offs



   51.43   Non-liability for defective service; service termination



   51.44   Locked meters



   51.45   City’s right-of-entry



   51.46   Rates and charges; on file



   51.47   Billing for water service



   51.48   Service termination for non-payment



   51.49   Defective meters




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 51.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   USER.  Any family or business furnished water for any purpose by the
city through its water line.



(1985 Code, § 12-20)



§ 51.02  REQUIRED USERS; NOTICE TO CONNECT.



   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city
and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now
located, or may in the future be located, a public water main of the city's,
is hereby required at the owner's expense to install suitable water service
facilities therein and to connect the facilities directly with the city water
system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days
after date of official notice to do so, provided that the public water main
is within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line.



(1985 Code, § 12-21)



§ 51.03  PRIVATE SYSTEM; AUTHORIZED USE.



   (A)   Where a public water main is not available under the
provisions of § 51.02, the property owner may connect to a private water
well system.



   (B)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private water
well system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Department of
Health and Environmental Control. No private water well system shall be
installed unless the system is properly designed by a professional engineer
registered in the state.



   (C)   At the time as city water becomes available to a property
served by a private water well system, as provided above, a direct connection
shall be made to the city water main in compliance with this chapter, and the
private water well facilities shall be disconnected from the potable water
supply main.



   (D)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private water well
facilities at no expense to the city.



   (E)   When a city water supply connection becomes available, the
water supply main shall be connected to the water system within 90 days.



(1985 Code, § 12-22)



§ 51.04  ILLEGAL SALE FROM PRIVATE OR COMMERCIAL SYSTEMS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person served with water from the city to
operate a private or commercial water distribution system for the purpose of
the sale or resale of water without the express written consent of the city.



(1985 Code, § 12-23)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.05  APPLICATION AND INSTALLATION OF WATER SERVICE.



   (A)   The owner shall make application for water service on a form
furnished by the city. The application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the Director.



   (B)   The owner or the owner's agent shall, after receiving written
approval of the permit application for the connection of an existing
building, construct a water service pipe to the property line at the highway
or right-of-way line at the location designated by the city. The open end
shall be plugged to prevent the entry of debris or damage to the threads.
Five to six feet of pipe trench immediately behind the valve on the owner's
property shall be left open for adjustment of the elevation of the line to
affect the connection of the meter and box used. The owner shall be
responsible for protection of the open trench and closing of the trench after
the meter and box are installed and connected. All excavations for water
service pipe installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and
lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways
and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be
restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.



   (C)   The applicant for the water service pipe permit shall notify
the Director when the water service pipe is ready for inspection and
connection to the public water distribution system. The connection shall be
made under the supervision of the Director or the Director's representative.



   (D)   The size, alignment, materials and construction of a water
service pipe and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes and other applicable rules
and regulations of the city.



   (E)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and
connection of the water service pipe shall be borne by the owner. The owner
shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the water service pipe.



(1985 Code, § 12-24)



§ 51.06  UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS OR USE.



   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections
with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public water main or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining the proper permit to do so.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person who has no contract,
agreement, license or permission with or from the city for the use of water
belonging to or furnished by the city, to withdraw water or cause water to be
withdrawn from the water mains or pipes of the city for the person's use or
the use of any other person. Upon discovering such a case, the city shall
have the right to terminate service without notice.



(1985 Code, § 12-25)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code §§ 5-31-1140et seq.



§ 51.07  INTERFERENCE WITH WATER SYSTEM.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere or tamper with or
open, for any purpose whatever, any of the property, appurtenances, mains or
fire hydrants of the water system of the city without having first obtained
the proper permission to do so from an authorized representative of the city.
Upon discovering such a case, the city shall have the right to terminate
service without notice.



(1985 Code, § 12-26)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   See S.C. Code §§ 5-31-20 and 5-31-1110



§ 51.08  OBSTRUCTION OF AND DAMAGE TO CITY PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to obstruct, damage
or in any way tamper with any pipe, fire hydrant, public drinking fountain or
any other appurtenance of the water system of the city. Upon discovering such
a case, the city shall have the right to terminate service without notice.



(1985 Code, § 12-27)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 5-31-1130



§ 51.09  POLLUTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to pollute the water
supply of the city.



(1985 Code, § 12-28)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.10  PROHIBITED CONNECTION.



   No person shall connect a potable water line directly to a sanitary
sewer or private well system.



(1985 Code, § 12-29)  Penalty, see § 10.99




PIPES




§ 51.25  UNAPPROVED PIPES.



   Old water service pipes shall not be used in connection with new
buildings.



(1985 Code, § 12-30)



§ 51.26  EXTENSION OF SERVICE LINES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to extend service pipes attached to
the city's mains and water supply on any premises without first obtaining
permission thereof in writing from the city, and before any worker or plumber
shall perform any work connected with the extension of the service pipes,
written permission for the extensions shall be obtained.



(1985 Code, § 12-31)  Penalty, see § 10.99




SERVICE




§ 51.40  METERED SERVICE.



   All water service shall be furnished upon a metered basis, except to
public fire hydrants and automatic sprinkler systems. The owner shall install
an indicator check assembly on all buildings requiring an independent
sprinkler system or water line for fire service. A separate and independent
meter and water service pipe shall be provided for every building. Each
building section, as determined by common occupancy, shall be considered as a
separate building for the purpose of water service and use charges. An
application agreement must be signed, tap fee and deposit paid before a meter
is installed and water turned on. The owner or lessee shall protect the meter
from injury and shall be liable for loss of the meter or damage thereto
excluding deterioration.



(1985 Code, § 12-32)



§ 51.41  OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPAIRS AND THE LIKE.



   Owner, lessee or renter shall be obligated to and liable for the
expense of all repairs, replacements and relocations necessary to water
service pipes. When a leak occurs between the meter and the main, the city
shall repair it. When a leak occurs between the end of the meter connection
(house side) and the house or building served, the leak shall be immediately
repaired by the owner, lessee or renter at the person's expense. The owner,
lessee or renter shall be charged for all water metered, whether used or
wasted, provided the leak is not from the meter connection.



(1985 Code, § 12-33)



§ 51.42  CUT-OFFS.



   All cut-offs at the meter must be made by a city employee, except in an
emergency occurring during hours when city employees are off duty.



(1985 Code, § 12-34)



§ 51.43  NON-LIABILITY FOR DEFECTIVE SERVICE; SERVICE TERMINATION.



   The city shall not be liable for any deficiency or failure in the
supply of water for any cause whatsoever. Any efforts or attempts to bypass
meters or to avoid payment of just charges shall be deemed sufficient to
justify and authorize the city to terminate service at once and without
notice.



(1985 Code, § 12-35)



§ 51.44  LOCKED METERS.



   When a house is vacated, the meter must be read and locked by a city
employee. The owner of any vacant house, for which the meter is requested to
be left intact, shall be liable for no less than the monthly service charge.



(1985 Code, § 12-36)



§ 51.45  CITY’S RIGHT-OF-ENTRY.



   Employees of the city shall have the right, at all reasonable hours of
the day, to have access to water pipes and meters on the premises of the
customers, for the purpose of examining, repairing, reading or replacing
meters or water lines.



(1985 Code, § 12-37)



§ 51.46  RATES AND CHARGES; ON FILE.



   All tap fees, deposits, monthly charges, late payment charges and other
fees and charges relating to the city water system are as prescribed from
time to time by the City Council and filed in the office of the City Clerk.



(1985 Code, § 12-38)



§ 51.47  BILLING FOR WATER SERVICE.



   A bill for water consumed during the billing period shall be rendered
on the first day of the month following the date of billing. The bill shall
be due and payable upon receipt. Bills for water service shall be past due if
not paid on or before day 15 of the same month.



(1985 Code, § 12-39)



§ 51.48  SERVICE TERMINATION FOR NON-PAYMENT.



   (A)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue water service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills.  The city water bills shall
contain, in addition to the title, address, and telephone number of the water
billing department, clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the
effect:



      (1)   All bills are due and payable on or before the date set
forth on the bill; and



      (2)   That if any bill is not paid by or before the date
specified on the water bill, a late notice will be mailed indicating if the
bill is not paid by the 25th of the month, service will be discontinued for
nonpayment.



      (3)   The city has the right pursuant to the South Carolina
Setoff Debt Collection Act to collect any delinquent sum due through offset
of the state income tax refund including all fees.



   (B)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue water
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated
only after all bills for service then due have been paid.  An administrative
fee may be paid at the time of reinstatement or will be added to the next
month’s bill.



   (C)   The Department of Public Works (DPW) will check to insure
unpaid accounts remain disconnected the following business day and verify the
meter does not indicate water consumption.  If the meter indicates water
consumption, the meter will be locked and rechecked within the next five
business days.



   (D)   When a meter is rechecked and the lock is broken or missing,
the meter will be pulled and a cut lock fee, pulled meter fee and reconnect
fee will be assessed to the account.  All balances to include all applicable
fees must be paid in full for water service to be reinstated.



(1985 Code, § 12-40)



§ 51.49  DEFECTIVE METERS.



   In the event a water meter becomes defective, the customer shall be
charged at an average rate of consumption as shown by the meter for the three
previous months.



(1985 Code, § 12-41)



CHAPTER 52: GARBAGE AND REFUSE DISPOSAL



Section



   52.01   Definitions



   52.02   Deposit of certain refuse for collection prohibited



   52.03   Liquids in garbage prohibited



   52.04   Containers



   52.05   Solid waste containerization and removal



   52.06   Assessments; collection of charges



§ 52.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARBAGE.  Organic waste matter, both animal and vegetable. Also small
cans, bottles, rags, boxes, small dead animals and any other similar waste.



   REFUSE (LITTER).  Un-containerized food, paper, small pieces of metal,
wood, plastic and glass.



   REFUSE (TRASH).  All ashes, leaves, grass, bushes, vines, tree
branches, large pieces of metal (old appliances and vehicles), tin and wood
with no piece exceeding five inches in diameter and 12 feet in length.



   REFUSE (UNSIGHTLY LITTER and GROWTH).  Any unsightly, unhealthful or
unsanitary accumulation of litter (defined above), and growth of grass,
bushes, weeds, vines, leaves and the like, on both private and public
property.



(1985 Code, § 12-50)



§ 52.02  DEPOSIT OF CERTAIN REFUSE FOR COLLECTION PROHIBITED.



   Ashes, discarded building materials, rocks, bricks or dead animals
shall not be deposited for garbage collection. These items shall be disposed
of at the owner's expense. Bulk pickup service shall be available to
residents for old furniture, mattresses, appliances and large pieces of metal
provided the Streets and Sanitation Department is notified in advance.



(1985 Code, § 12-51)



§ 52.03  LIQUIDS IN GARBAGE PROHIBITED.



   All garbage and refuse shall be drained of liquid before being
deposited for collection.



(1985 Code, § 12-52)



§ 52.04  CONTAINERS.



   Refuse containers shall be provided by the owner, tenant, lessee or
occupant of the premises. Refuse containers shall be maintained in good
condition. Any container having ragged or sharp edges, or any other defect
which may hamper or injure the person collecting the contents thereof, shall
be promptly replaced upon notification by the Streets and Sanitation
Department. Failure to do so within five days of the notification shall
constitute grounds for prosecution or termination of collection service.



(1985 Code, § 12-53)



§ 52.05  SOLID WASTE CONTAINERIZATION AND REMOVAL.



   All residences, commercial establishments, churches and institutions
located within the city, and those located outside the city that are serviced
by the city, shall have containerization and meet the standards and
specifications for solid waste as established and approved by City Council,
and as on file with the City Clerk.



(1985 Code, § 12-54)



§ 52.06  ASSESSMENTS; COLLECTION OF CHARGES.



   (A)   The city shall levy a sanitation tax on single-family occupied
residential real property to defray the cost of providing refuse collection
and disposal. The tax shall be assessed as provided for in the annual budget
ordinance adopted by City Council.



   (B)   The city shall make charges to commercial businesses,
institutions and churches for refuse collection and disposal, in such manner,
as is established and approved by City Council, with a schedule of the
charges and regulations to be on file with the City Clerk.



   (C)   In the event of a failure to pay, the city will enforce the
penalties and provide for collection in the same manner as regards the
collection of property taxes.



(1985 Code, § 12-55)



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter




      70.   GENERAL REGULATIONS





      71.   STANDING AND PARKING





      72.   PARADES, PROCESSIONS AND OTHER GATHERINGS




CHAPTER 70: GENERAL REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   70.01   Adoption of state law regulating traffic



   70.02   Compliance with chapter




Provisions of Chapter




   70.15   Drivers of governmental vehicle not exempt from this chapter



   70.16   Special or emergency regulations



   70.17   Unnecessary use of signaling device



   70.18   Riding on outside of vehicle



   70.19   Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles prohibited



   70.20   Inspection of vehicles; enforcement of chapter



   70.21   Throwing glass or nails on street; removal



   70.22   Obstructions to vision at street intersections; generally



   70.23   Obstruction by trees and shrubs



   70.24   Speed restrictions; animals ridden or driven on streets;
human powered vehicles



   70.25   When decrease required



   70.26   Obstructing intersection or crosswalk with vehicle



   70.27   Careless driving



   70.28   Operation of unsafe vehicle



   70.29   “U” turns



   70.30   Signs, signals and markings; traffic lanes



   70.31   Prima facie evidence




Bicycles, Roller Skates and Other Recreational Vehicles




   70.45   Use of coasters or toy vehicles on roadways



   70.46   Roller skating



   70.47   Manner of parking bicycle



   70.48   Riding bicycle on sidewalks




Specific Cars




   70.65   Metallic license plate for taxicab or other public car




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 70.01  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW REGULATING TRAFFIC.



   Unless otherwise specifically covered by this chapter, all of the
provisions and requirements of the general law of the state regulating
traffic on highways, as contained in S.C. Code Title 56, Chapter 5, as
amended, and insofar as the provisions can have application within the city,
are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set out
therein. All persons within the city shall strictly comply with all of the
regulations imposed hereby, when so applicable.



(1985 Code, § 17-1)



§ 70.02  COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER.



   It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required in this chapter.



(1985 Code, § 17-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions as to state law, S.C. Code § 56-5-730




PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER




§ 70.15  DRIVERS OF GOVERNMENTAL VEHICLE NOT EXEMPT FROM THIS CHAPTER.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle
owned by or used in the service of the United States government, the state,
county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any driver to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or
by state statute.



(1985 Code, § 17-3)



Statutory reference:



   Exemption of road workers, S.C. Code § 56-5-800



§ 70.16  SPECIAL OR EMERGENCY REGULATIONS.



   The Chief of Police, with the approval of the City Administrator, shall
have authority to make, promulgate and enforce special or emergency traffic
regulations, including the designation of one-way streets, dangerous
intersections where traffic shall be required to slow or stop, school zones,
safety zones, parking meter zones and regulations as to parking, non-parking
and time limits for parking and cause to be erected or placed signs, signals
and other traffic control devices and restrict parking for the purpose of
enforcing the same. Any person failing or refusing to obey any regulation
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1985 Code, § 17-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Devices required to be placed, S.C. Code § 56-5-940



§ 70.17  UNNECESSARY USE OF SIGNALING DEVICE.



   No signaling device shall be sounded except as a necessary warning of
danger, and then only by giving a short blast and not more often than is
necessary.



(1985 Code, § 17-5)



§ 70.18  RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE.



   No person shall ride on the outside of any vehicle, nor anywhere except
within the body thereof.



(1985 Code, § 17-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.19  BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM MOVING VEHICLES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while the vehicle is
in motion.



(1985 Code, § 17-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.20  INSPECTION OF VEHICLES; ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.



   All officers of the Police Department may stop, examine and inspect any
vehicle which they may have reasonable cause to believe to be violating any
of the terms of this chapter or state Motor Vehicle Code and to require the
vehicles to be measured and weighed, or other examination as may be proper or
necessary to be made and to compel immediate compliance with all provisions
of this chapter.



(1985 Code, § 17-8)



Statutory reference:



   Safety inspections, S.C. Code § 56-5-5310



§ 70.21  THROWING GLASS OR NAILS ON STREET; REMOVAL.



   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit upon any street or sidewalk,
any glass bottles, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, paper, trash or any other
substance, and any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown upon
any street any destructive or injurious material, shall immediately remove
the same or cause it to be removed.



   (B)   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street
or highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon
the street from the vehicle.



(1985 Code, § 17-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Prohibitions on waste disposal, see also §§ 50.077 and 93.086



§ 70.22  OBSTRUCTIONS TO VISION AT STREET INTERSECTIONS; GENERALLY.



   On corner lots in the city, there shall be no obstruction to vision
between a height of two feet and a height of ten feet, measured above the
average elevation of the existing surfaces of the intersecting streets at
their center lines, within the area formed by joining points on the property
lines, measured as follows; provided, however, this restriction shall not
apply to buildings in business districts:



   (A)   On property lines abutting streets 50 feet or less in
right-of-way width, the points on the property lines shall be not less than
25 feet from the lot corner; and



   (B)   On property lines abutting streets more than 50 feet in
right-of-way width, the points on the property lines shall be 50 feet from
the lot corner.



(1985 Code, § 17-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.23  OBSTRUCTION BY TREES AND SHRUBS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to plant, place or cause to grow any tree
or shrub on any roadway or street right-of-way, or in any area between a
sidewalk and a curb of the street or roadway within the city, except as
authorized by the city. Furthermore, the City Council is authorized to order
the removal of any tree or shrub growing in the areas upon a determination by
the Chief of Police that the tree or shrub is hazardous to traffic.



   (B)   Every bush, tree, plant or other article which obstructs clear
view of traffic is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the Director
of Streets and Sanitation is hereby empowered and directed to remove or trim
the same to alleviate the nuisance, without notice.



(1985 Code, § 17-11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.24  SPEED RESTRICTIONS; ANIMALS RIDDEN OR DRIVEN ON STREETS; HUMAN
POWERED VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall drive, ride an animal or operate a vehicle
propelled by human power at a speed or under conditions that the animal or
vehicle shall not at all times be under full control and capable of being
brought to a full stop if circumstances require.



   (B)   In making a turn or crossing an intersection, no animal shall
be ridden or driven and no vehicle shall be propelled at a speed in excess of
five mph.



(1985 Code, § 17-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.25  WHEN DECREASE REQUIRED.



   The fact that the speed of a vehicle is within the limits set out
herein shall not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when
approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a
curve or when special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other
traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions, and speed shall be
decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or
other conveyance on or entering the street in compliance with legal
requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.



(1985 Code, § 17-13)



§ 70.26  OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTION OR CROSSWALK WITH VEHICLE.



   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless
there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk
to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without obstructing the
passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.



(1985 Code, § 17-14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.27  CARELESS DRIVING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle
without care and caution and full regard for the safety of persons and
property.



   (B)   Any person failing so to do shall be guilty of careless
driving or riding.



   (C)   The driving of any vehicle when the same, or any of its
appliances is not in proper or safe condition, shall be prima facie evidence
of careless driving.



(1985 Code, § 17-15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.28  OPERATION OF UNSAFE VEHICLE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move, or for the owner
to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any street, any vehicle
or combination of vehicles which is in the unsafe condition as to endanger
any person or property or which does not contain those parts or is not at all
times equipped with lights, mirrors, safety glass, bumpers, mufflers, horns,
tires, brakes, steering and other equipment in proper condition and
adjustment as required by the laws of the state, or which is equipped in any
manner in violation of the laws of the state.



(1985 Code, § 17-16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 56-5-4410



§ 70.29  “U” TURNS.



   No “U” turn shall be made on any street except where authorized by
an official sign, and only when the movement can be made with safety and
without interfering with other traffic.



(1985 Code, § 17-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   As to turning vehicle so as to proceed in opposite direction upon curve
and the like, see S.C. Code § 56-5-2140



§ 70.30  SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS; TRAFFIC LANES.



   The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to temporarily mark off traffic
lanes on streets and parts of streets indicating and directing the flow of
traffic, when, in the officer's judgment, the action is necessary. The Chief
of Police may secure all signs and markers necessary to implement the
officer's directions and place them on any street or part of street when he
or she deems it necessary.



(1985 Code, § 17-18)



§ 70.31  PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE.



   The existence of signs and markers at any place within the city shall
be prima facie evidence that the signs were placed or erected by, and at the
direction of, the Chief of Police and in accordance with the provisions of
the chapter.



(1985 Code, § 17-19)




BICYCLES, ROLLER SKATES AND OTHER RECREATIONAL VEHICLES




§ 70.45  USE OF COASTERS OR TOY VEHICLES ON ROADWAYS.



   No person riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar
device shall go upon any roadway.



(1985 Code, § 17-20)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.46  ROLLER SKATING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to skate or use roller
skates/blades/boards/on the roads, streets or sidewalks in the commercial
districts of the city. It shall be lawful for any person to skate or use
roller skates/blades/boards on hiker/biker trails wherever located in the
city during daylight hours only, however, pedestrians shall have the
right-of-way. It shall be lawful for any person to skate or use roller
skates/blades/boards on the roads, streets and sidewalks in the residential
districts of the city, during daylight hours only, however, pedestrians shall
have the right-of-way. Due care shall be exercised at all times and at no
time shall the person or persons skating or using skates/blades/boards block
or impede vehicular traffic.



(1985 Code, § 17-21)  (Ord. 01-003, passed 3-13-2001)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 70.47  MANNER OF PARKING BICYCLE.



   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the
roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the
bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in the manner as to afford the
least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.



(1985 Code, § 17-22)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.48  RIDING BICYCLE ON SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk, unless the sidewalk is
designated for bicycle use by proper sign and markings.



(1985 Code, § 17-23)  Penalty, see § 10.99




SPECIFIC CARS




§ 70.65  METALLIC LICENSE PLATE FOR TAXICAB OR OTHER PUBLIC CAR.



   The owner of each vehicle licensed as a taxicab or other public car
shall obtain and cause to be affixed to the rear of the vehicle in a
conspicuous place, a metal plate to be furnished by the city, which plate
shall have on it words “Public Car” and the public car license number and
be of substantially similar design as, but of a different color from, the
state license plate, and the color of the plate to be changed annually.



(1985 Code, § 17-24)



CHAPTER 71: STANDING AND PARKING



Section



   71.01   Unauthorized moving of parked vehicles



   71.02   Parking prohibited for certain purposes



   71.03   Parking within lines indicating parking space



   71.04   Trucks or vehicles more than 20 feet long



   71.05   Unattached trailers



   71.06   Minimum width of roadway required to be free for traffic



   71.07   Passenger zones and loading zones



   71.08   Loading and unloading passengers



   71.09   Running engines or other equipment while stopped or standing
on street



   71.10   Bus stops and taxicab stands



   71.11   Responsibility for illegal parking



   71.12   Impounding unoccupied and unattended vehicles



   71.13   Issuance of traffic citations



   71.14   Consequences of failure to comply with traffic citations



   71.15   Restrictions on cancellation or solicitation of cancellation
of traffic citation or summons



   71.16   Obstructing street side mailboxes and newspaper receptacles;
access and egress to properties



   71.17   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places



§ 71.01  UNAUTHORIZED MOVING OF PARKED VEHICLES.



   No person shall move a vehicle not owned by the person into any
prohibited area or away from a curb the distance as is unlawful.



(1985 Code, § 17-30)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.02  PARKING PROHIBITED FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES.



   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in such manner as to create a
public nuisance upon any street for the purpose of:



   (A)   Displaying it for sale;



   (B)   Advertising of any nature whatsoever; and



   (C)   Washing, greasing and repairing the vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.



(1985 Code, § 17-31)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.03  PARKING WITHIN LINES INDICATING PARKING SPACE.



   Wherever lines have been painted to indicate parking space, vehicles
shall be parked entirely within those lines.



(1985 Code, § 17-32)



§ 71.04  TRUCKS OR VEHICLES MORE THAN 20 FEET LONG.



   No person shall stand or park a bus, truck or other vehicle having an
overall length of more than 20 feet upon any street for a period of more than
one hour, except that the bus, truck or other vehicle may be stopped or
parked for the length of time as may be necessary for the pickup and loading
or unloading and delivery of passengers or materials. For the purpose of this
section, a trailer and its tractor unit shall be considered one vehicle.



(1985 Code, § 17-33)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.05  UNATTACHED TRAILERS.



   No person shall park a trailer or allow the same to stand at any point
upon any street unless the motor vehicle unit is at all times attached to the
trailer.



(1985 Code, § 17-34)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.06  MINIMUM WIDTH OF ROADWAY REQUIRED TO BE FREE FOR TRAFFIC.



   No person shall stand or park any vehicle upon a street in such a
manner as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway
for the free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a driver shall stop
when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or
signals or a police officer.



(1985 Code, § 17-35)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   For state law requiring that unobstructed width of highway opposite a
standing vehicle be left for free passage of vehicles when stopping, standing
or parking outside of business or residence districts, see S.C. Code §
56-5-2510



§ 71.07  PASSENGER ZONES AND LOADING ZONES.



   (A)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or
period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of
passengers in any place marked as a passenger loading zone.



   (B)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose
or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or
pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a loading zone during
hours when the provisions applicable to loading zones are in effect. In no
case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.



(1985 Code, § 17-36)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.08  LOADING AND UNLOADING PASSENGERS.



   No operator of a vehicle shall load or unload passengers, except when
the vehicle is stopped at the curb, and then only when the movement can be
made with safety.



(1985 Code, § 17-37)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.09  RUNNING ENGINES OR OTHER EQUIPMENT WHILE STOPPED OR STANDING ON
STREET.



   No person shall allow the engine or other mechanical equipment on a
motor vehicle stopped or standing on a public street to continue to operate
longer than five minutes, unless movement of the vehicle is prevented by
traffic control signals or is physically blocked by other vehicles.



(1985 Code, § 17-38)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.10  BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS.



   (A)   The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park upon
any street at any place other than at a bus stop or taxicab stand,
respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any
vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking regulations for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading
or unloading passengers.



   (B)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus
in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any stop or
stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that
the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when
the stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or
about to enter the zone.



(1985 Code, § 17-39)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.11  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ILLEGAL PARKING.



   No person shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the
person's name to stand or park on any street in the city in violation of any
of the regulations of the city for the standing or parking of vehicles.



(1985 Code, § 17-40)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.12  IMPOUNDING UNOCCUPIED AND UNATTENDED VEHICLES.



   Any unoccupied and unattended vehicle found violating the terms of this
chapter may be removed and impounded by any police officer or duly authorized
person and shall be surrendered to the duly identified owner thereof only
upon payment of cost of impounding.



(1985 Code, § 17-41)



Statutory references:



   Abandoned vehicles, see S.C. Code, §§ 56-5-5810et seq.



   Impounding and disposition, see S.C. Code §§ 56-5-1610et seq.



§ 71.13  ISSUANCE OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS.



   A police officer finding any vehicle parked or standing in violation of
any city ordinance or state law may, in lieu of immediately issuing a summons
to its owner or driver, affix in a conspicuous place on the vehicle a traffic
citation requiring the owner or driver to post a specified bond within ten
days at a specified location within the city.



(1985 Code, § 17-42)



§ 71.14  CONSEQUENCES OF FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH TRAFFIC CITATIONS.



   The traffic citation authorized by § 71.13 shall contain a warning
that if the bond required by the citation is not posted within ten days, it
shall be increased by an additional specified amount and that failure to
comply with the requirements of the citation shall result in the issuance of
a summons.



(1985 Code, § 17-43)



§ 71.15  RESTRICTIONS ON CANCELLATION OR SOLICITATION OF CANCELLATION OF
TRAFFIC CITATION OR SUMMONS.



   No person shall cancel or solicit the cancellation of any traffic
citation or summons.



(1985 Code, § 17-44)



§ 71.16  OBSTRUCTING STREET SIDE MAILBOXES AND NEWSPAPER RECEPTACLES;
ACCESS AND EGRESS TO PROPERTIES.



   No person shall park a vehicle on the public street or right-of-way if
it would block, obstruct or otherwise interfere with access to street side
mailboxes, newspaper receptacles, or trash or refuse receptacles or
containers. No person shall park, stop or stand any vehicle on a public
street or right-of-way if it blocks or obstructs any portion of the driveway
of a person, except with permission of the property owner who owns, or the
tenant who rents, the driveway.



(Ord. 08-003, passed 1-8-2008)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.17  STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.



   No operator of a vehicle shall park or allow the vehicle to remain
standing in areas posted as fire lanes.



(Ord. 90-16, passed 9-11-1990)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 72: PARADES, PROCESSIONS AND OTHER GATHERINGS



Section




General Provisions




   72.01   Definitions



   72.02   Compliance with conditions of permit and laws



   72.03   Driving through parades



   72.04   Parking on parade route



   72.05   Obstructing or interfering with parades




Permits




   72.20   Required; exceptions



   72.21   Application; filing



   72.22   Form and contents; late filing



   72.23   Notice of denial



   72.24   Alternate permits



   72.25   Appeal upon denial



   72.26   Standards for issuance



   72.27   Contents



   72.28   Notification of city officials upon issuance of permit



   72.29   Revocation



   72.30   Possession of permit by Parade Chairperson




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 72.01  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ASSEMBLY or OUTDOOR PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.  Any exhibition,
demonstration, presentation, display, rally, assembly, service or ceremony,
including lecturing, preaching, public speaking or entertaining, or any other
similar display for any purpose upon any street, sidewalk, park or public
property within the city involving more than 50 persons.



      PARADE.  Any procession, march or assembly for any purpose
wherein the participants travel by foot, vehicle or otherwise in or upon any
street, park, sidewalk or other public property within the city.



      PARADE PERMIT.  A permit as required by this section.



   (B)   Reference.  Any reference to PARADE in §§ 72.20 through
72.30, inclusive, shall also mean ASSEMBLY or OUTDOOR PUBLIC ASSEMBLY as set
out herein above.



(1985 Code, § 17-50)  (Ord. 93-004, passed 7-1-1993)



§ 72.02  COMPLIANCE WITH CONDITIONS OF PERMIT AND LAWS.



   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations.



(1985 Code, § 17-51)



§ 72.03  DRIVING THROUGH PARADES.



   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons
comprising a parade when the vehicles or persons are in motion or
conspicuously designated as a parade, except that this portion shall not
apply to single file parades on the sidewalk areas of the city, where
vehicular traffic and those constituting the parade shall be required to obey
all traffic control signals unless otherwise directed by a police officer.



(1985 Code, § 17-52)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.04  PARKING ON PARADE ROUTE.



   The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonably
necessary, to prohibit or restrict parking of vehicles along a street or part
thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade.



(1985 Code, § 17-53)



§ 72.05  OBSTRUCTING OR INTERFERING WITH PARADES.



   No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede or interfere
with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal
participating or used in a parade.



(1985 Code, § 17-54)  Penalty, see § 10.99




PERMITS




§ 72.20  REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start
any parade, assembly, or outdoor public assembly unless a parade permit shall
have been obtained from the Chief of Police. Any person engaging in any
parade, assembly, or outdoor public assembly for which a parade permit has
been issued shall not violate any of the conditions or provisions of the
permit.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to:



      (1)   Funeral processions;



      (2)   Students going to and from school classes or
participating in educational activities, providing the conduct is under the
immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; and



      (3)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its
functions.



(1985 Code, § 17-60)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.21  APPLICATION; FILING.



   (A)   A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an
application with the Chief of Police on forms provided by the officer.



   (B)   An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the
Chief of Police not less than three days, nor more than 30 days, before the
date on which he or she is proposed to conduct a parade.



(1985 Code, § 17-61)



§ 72.22  FORM AND CONTENTS; LATE FILING.



   (A)   The application for a parade permit shall set forth the
following information:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the person
seeking to conduct the parade;



      (2)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf
of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorizing and responsible head
of the organization;



      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who
will be the Parade Chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct;



      (4)   The date on which the parade is to be conducted;



      (5)   The route to be traveled, the starting point and the
termination point;



      (6)   The approximate number of persons who, and animals and
vehicles which will constitute the parade. The types of animals and
description of the vehicles;



      (7)   The hours during which the parade will start and
terminate;



      (8)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or
only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;



      (9)   The location by streets of any assembly areas for the
parade;



      (10)   The time at which the units of the parade will begin to
assemble at any areas;



      (11)   The interval of space to be maintained between units of
the parade;



      (12)   If the parade is designed to be held by, or on behalf
of, or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit
shall file with the Chief of Police a communication in writing from the
person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for
the permit on the person's behalf; and



      (13)   Any additional information which the Chief of Police
shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a
permit should be issued.



   (B)   The Chief of Police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall
have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less
than three days before the date the parade is proposed to be conducted.



(1985 Code, § 17-62)



§ 72.23  NOTICE OF DENIAL.



   The Chief of Police shall act upon the application for a parade permit
within two days after the filing thereof. If the Chief of Police disapproves
the application, the officer shall mail to the applicant within two days
after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of the action
stating the reasons for denial of the permit.



(1985 Code, § 17-63)



§ 72.24  ALTERNATE PERMITS.



   (A)   The Chief of Police, in denying an application for a parade
permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a day,
at a time or over a route different from that named by the applicant.



   (B)   An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall,
within two days after notice of the action of the Chief of Police, file a
written notice of acceptance with the Chief of Police.



   (C)   An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements
of, and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this division.



(1985 Code, § 17-64)



§ 72.25  APPEAL UPON DENIAL.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial
of a parade permit to the City Council.



   (B)   The appeal shall be taken within 48 hours after notice. The
City Council shall act upon the appeal at its next regularly scheduled
meeting, but no later than 20 days from the time of receipt of the appeal.



(1985 Code, § 17-65)



§ 72.26  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.



   The Chief of Police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder
when, from a consideration of the application and from the other information
as may otherwise be obtained, the officer finds that:



   (A)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of other traffic, pedestrian and vehicular,
contiguous to its route;



   (B)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so
great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the city;



   (C)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly
points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection of areas contiguous to the assembly areas;



   (D)   The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement
of fire fighting equipment en route to a fire;



   (E)   The conduct of the parade will not be reasonably likely to
cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create
a disturbance;



   (F)   The parade will be scheduled to move from its point of origin
to its point of termination expeditiously, without unreasonable delays en
route and without passing by any location more than once; and



   (G)   If the parade is to be solely on the sidewalk areas of the
city, that the parade shall be in single file only of persons participating,
with no animals, vehicles or other non-human objects except reasonably sized
signs individually carried in the line of procession.



(1985 Code, § 17-66)



§ 72.27  CONTENTS.



   Each parade permit shall state the following information:



   (A)   Starting time;



   (B)   Minimum speed;



   (C)   Maximum speed;



   (D)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between units of
the parade;



   (E)   The portion of the streets to be traversed that may be
occupied by the parade;



   (F)   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions
thereof; and



   (G)   The other information as the Chief of Police shall find
necessary for the enforcement of this chapter.



(1985 Code, § 17-67)



§ 72.28  NOTIFICATION OF CITY OFFICIALS UPON ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the Chief of Police
shall send a copy thereof to the following:



   (A)   The Mayor and City Administrator;



   (B)   The Fire Chief; and



   (C)   The general manager or responsible manager of each public
transportation utility, the regular routes of whose vehicles will be affected
by the route of the proposed parade.



(1985 Code, § 17-68)



§ 72.29  REVOCATION.



   The Chief of Police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit
issued hereunder upon the violation of the standards for issuance as set
forth in § 72.26.



(1985 Code, § 17-69)



§ 72.30  POSSESSION OF PERMIT BY PARADE CHAIRPERSON.



   The Parade Chairperson or other person heading or leading the activity
shall carry the parade permit upon the person during the conduct of the
parade.



(1985 Code, § 17-70)



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter




      90.   ANIMALS AND FOWL





      91.   FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION





      92.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY





      93.   HEALTH AND SANITATION





      94.   SMOKING





      95.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE




CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS AND FOWL



Section



   90.01   Definitions



   90.02   Enforcement



   90.03   Maximum number of dogs and/or cats allowed per residence



   90.04   Restraint



   90.05   Nuisance; animal(s)



   90.06   Animal care



   90.07   Rabies control; inoculation



   90.08   Rabid animals



   90.09   Seizure of animals at-large; disposition



   90.10   Redemption



   90.11   Adoption



   90.12   Injured, diseased and dead animals



   90.13   Slaughterhouse and the like; prohibited



   90.14   Removal of dog and cat excrement required; exceptions



   90.15   Beekeeping



§ 90.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONMENT or MALTREATMENT.  A situation in which an owner or person
charged with the responsibility of an animal does not provide or arrange for
adequate food, water, shelter and care, transfer ownership to a responsible
person or does not provide for humane disposal of the animal.



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.  Any person employed by the city as the
enforcement officer of the provisions of this chapter.



   ANIMAL SHELTER.  Any premises designated by the city for the purpose
of impounding, care or destruction of animals found in violation of this
chapter.



   ANIMALS.  Any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, which shall
be held to include all brute creatures.



   APIARY. The assembly of one or more colonies of bees at a single
location.



   AT-LARGE.  An animal not under the restraint and control of its owner,
as required by the provisions of this chapter, and off of the owner's real or
personal property limits.



   BEEKEEPER. A person who owns or has charge of one or more colonies of
bees.



   COLONY. An aggregate of bees consisting principally of workers, but
having, when perfect one queen and at times drones, brood, combs, and honey.



   HIVE. The receptacle inhabited by a colony that is manufactured for
that purpose.



   HONEY BEE. All life stages of the common domestic honey bee, apis
mellifera species.



   INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES.  The injection, subcutaneously,
intramuscularly or otherwise, of antirabic vaccine as approved by the State
Department of Health and Environmental Control and by the United States
Department of Agriculture-Veterinary Biologics Division.



   OWNER.  Any person who:



      (1)   Has a right of property in an animal;



      (2)   Keeps or harbors an animal or who has it in the person's
care or acts as its custodian; and



      (3)   Permits an animal to remain on or about any premises
occupied by the person.



   PET.  All mammals of the order carnivores, four months or more of age.
This includes dogs, cats and related carnivorous animals.



   PUBLIC NUISANCE.  Any animal found at-large, making loud or
objectionable sounds, chasing vehicles or pedestrians, behaving in any manner
which is deemed to be doing damage to property or to public health and
well-being, is known to have bitten one or more persons, has been determined
by the Animal Control Officer to be detriment to public health, welfare or
safety or that constitutes a physical threat to human beings or to other
animals by virtue of its specific training or demonstrated behavior.



   RESTRAINT.  Any animal secured by a leash or lead under the control of
a responsible person and obedient to that person's commands, or within the
real or personal property limits of its owner.



   SPAYED FEMALES.  Any female dog or cat which has been operated on to
prevent conception.



   VICIOUS ANIMAL.  Any animal:



      (1)   With a known propensity, tendency or disposition to
attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of
human beings or domestic animals;



      (2)   That attacks a human being or domestic animal without
provocation; or



      (3)   That is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the
purpose of fighting, or that is trained for fighting.



(1985 Code, § 4-1)  (Ord. 94-005, passed 9-13-1994; Am. Ord. 17-021, passed
10-10-2017)



Statutory reference:



   Definitions, see S.C. Code §§ 47-1-10, 47-3-10, 47-3-410 and 47-5-20



§ 90.02  ENFORCEMENT.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Animal Control
Officers of the city, as follows.



   (A)   The above shall respond to complaints regarding animals.



   (B)   Persons empowered to enforce this chapter shall have the
authority to destroy any animal which appears to be vicious and may endanger
their safety or the safety of other persons or pets.



   (C)   The Animal Control Officers, may if necessary, obtain a search
warrant to enter any premises upon which it is suspected a violation of this
chapter exists. The officer may then demand to examine the animal and take
possession of the animal when, in the officer's opinion, it requires removal
from the premises.



   (D)   No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest the Animal
Control Officers in the execution of their duties, or seek to release any pet
in the custody of the Animal Control Officers except as provided herein.



   (E)   When an animal is found in violation of any one point of this
chapter, it need not be impounded; but the Animal Control Officers, at their
discretion, may issue to its owner, a municipal ordinance summons for the
violation.



   (F)   Any person reporting a violation of this chapter must produce
personal identification to a responding officer, who will make it a matter of
public record.



   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make a false statement
to anyone with enforcement powers in regard to this chapter, in an attempt to
deny ownership or possession of an animal.



(1985 Code, § 4-2)  (Ord. 94-005, passed 9-13-1994)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.03  MAXIMUM NUMBER OF DOGS AND/OR CATS ALLOWED PER RESIDENCE.



   (A)   A total of three dogs and/or cats may be kept or harbored at
any residence without a permit. Up to six dogs and/or cats may be kept or
harbored at any residence, provided the owner of the residence obtains a
permit from the city for the additional dogs and/or cats over three. The
permit fee, for each additional dog and/or cat, shall be $25 annually. A
permit, issued pursuant to the provisions of this section, is issued on a
conditional basis and may be revoked upon conviction of a public nuisance
offense as set out in § 90.05.



   (B)   A person whose conditional permit is revoked shall reduce the
number of dogs and/or cats kept or harbored at a residence to no more than
three dogs and/or cats, and the person will be denied the right to reapply
for a conditional permit for a period of two years from the time of
revocation. The Animal Control Officers of the city shall have the authority
to revoke a conditional permit as provided in this section, however, any
person aggrieved by this provision shall have the right to appeal the
revocation to the City Administrator whose decision shall be final.



   (C)   A person cited for having more than three dogs and/or cats
that are not permitted will be denied the opportunity to obtain a permit
when, in the opinion of the Animal Control Officer, the failure to obtain a
permit was willful. Upon such a determination by the Animal Control Officer,
the person shall be required to reduce the number of dogs and/or cats kept or
harbored to no more than three dogs and/or cats, and the person shall be
denied the right to apply for a conditional permit for a period of two years.



(1985 Code, § 4-3)  (Ord. 94-005, passed 9-13-1994)



§ 90.04  RESTRAINT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any animal
to permit the same to run-at-large at any time within the city. All animals
shall be secured by a leash or lead under the control of a responsible person
and obedient to that person's commands when the animal(s) are off or removed
from the real or personal property limits of its owner.



   (B)   No domestic animal shall be permitted to be on school grounds,
in a shopping area or similar public place unless on a leash at all times.



   (C)   The owner shall confine, within a building or secure
enclosure, every vicious animal and shall not take the animal out of the
building or enclosure unless the animal is securely muzzled and under
restraint.



   (D)    No person shall fail to exercise proper care and control of
the person's animals to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance.



   (E)   Every female pet in heat shall be confined in a building or
secure enclosure in such manner that the pet does not create a nuisance by
attracting other pets. This shall not be construed so as to prevent contact
with other pets for the purpose of planned breeding.



(1985 Code, § 4-4)  (Ord. 94-005, passed 9-13-1994)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law as to dogs, see S.C. Code § 47-3-50



§ 90.05  NUISANCE; ANIMAL(S).



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess or
maintain an animal in such a manner as to constitute or allow it to become a
public nuisance.



   (B)   In addition, the following acts or actions by an owner of any
animal are hereby declared to be a public nuisance under this section and to
be unlawful:



      (1)   Failure to exercise sufficient restraint necessary to
control an animal as required by the provisions of this chapter;



      (2)   Allowing or permitting an animal to damage the property
of anyone other than its owner, including, but not limited to, turning over
garbage containers or damaging vegetation;



      (3)   Maintaining a vicious animal;



      (4)   Maintaining animals in unsanitary conditions which are
dangerous to the animal or the public health, welfare or safety;



      (5)   Maintaining his or her premises or other property in a
manner that is offensive, annoying or dangerous to the health, safety or
welfare of the public because of the number, density or location of the
animals on the owner's premises or other property (see § 137.03(I));



      (6)   Allowing or permitting an animal to bark, whine, howl or
yowl, in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion, or make other noise in
such a manner so as to result in a serious annoyance or interference with the
reasonable use and enjoyment of adjoining or nearby properties;



      (7)   Keeping an animal that is diseased and dangerous to
public health;



      (8)   Keeping an animal that habitually or repeatedly chases,
snaps at, attacks or barks at pedestrians, bicycles or vehicles; and



      (9)   Failing to confine or control a female pet in heat in
such a manner as not to create a nuisance by attracting other animals.



(1985 Code, § 4-5)  (Ord. 94-005, passed 9-13-1994)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.06  ANIMAL CARE.



   (A)   No owner shall fail to provide the person's animals with
sufficient, good and wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection
from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and with
humane care and treatment.



   (B)   No person shall beat, cruelly ill treat, torment, overload,
overwork or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate or permit any
dogfight or other combat between animals or between animals and humans.



   (C)   No owner of an animal shall abandon the animal.



   (D)   No person except a licensed veterinarian who is qualified to
perform such an operation shall crop a dog's ears.



   (E)   No person shall give away any live animal, reptile or bird as
a prize for, or an inducement to enter, any contest, game or other
competition, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement or offer the
vertebrate as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the
offer was for the purpose of attracting trade.



   (F)   Any person operating a motor vehicle who strikes a domestic
animal shall stop at once and render the assistance as may be possible and
shall immediately report the injury or death to the animal's owner. In the
event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, the operator shall at once
report the incident to the Police Department.



   (G)   No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether
mixed with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any
animal, provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on the
person's own property common rat poison mixed with vegetable substances.



   (H)   It shall be unlawful to raise or keep chickens or any kind of
fowl, other than pigeons, parakeets, parrots, mynah birds and canaries within
the city.



   (I)   It shall be unlawful to raise or keep horses, cattle, sheep,
goats, swine and other farm animals within the city.



   (J)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or any other person
willfully to injure or kill any animal by any means causing it unnecessary
fright or pain, and it shall further be unlawful for the owner or any person,
by neglect or otherwise, to cause or allow any animal to endure pain,
suffering or injury.



(1985 Code, § 4-6)  (Ord. 94-005, passed 9-13-1994)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.07  RABIES CONTROL; INOCULATION.



   (A)   No person shall own, keep or harbor any pet within the city
for longer than 60 days unless the pet has been inoculated against rabies, as
provided herein. Any animals, wild or otherwise, for which there is no known
rabies vaccination, that can carry and transmit the rabies virus, shall be
prohibited from being kept or harbored within the city limits.



   (B)   The pet shall have received, as evidenced by a certificate
which has not expired, an inoculation from a licensed graduate veterinarian
using a vaccine which has been approved by the State Department of Health and
Environmental Control.



   (C)   A certificate of the State Department of Health and
Environmental Control of pet rabies vaccination will be issued by a licensed
graduate veterinarian for each pet, stating the name and address of the
owner, the name, breed, color and markings, age, sex of animal and the
veterinary or pharmaceutical control number of the vaccination.



   (D)   Coincident with the issuance of the certificate, the licensed
graduate veterinarian shall also furnish a serially numbered metal license
tag bearing the same number and year as the certificate. The metal license
tag shall bear the name of the veterinarian who administered the vaccination
and shall at all times be attached to a collar or harness worn by the pet for
which the certificate and tag has been issued, except when the pet is in an
enclosed confinement.



   (E)   The owner shall have a valid certificate of rabies inoculation
readily available for inspection by competent authority at all times.



   (F)   In the event that a rabies tag is lost, the owner will obtain
a duplicate tag without delay.



   (G)   If there is a change in ownership of a pet during the valid
period of immunization, the new owner must have the current certificate of
inoculation transferred to the owner's name.



   (H)   A certificate of rabies immunization issued by a licensed
veterinarian from another state will be accepted as valid evidence provided
it is less than one year old.



(1985 Code, § 4-7)  (Ord. 94-005, passed 9-13-1994)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law, see S.C. Code § 47-5-60



§ 90.08  RABID ANIMALS.



   (A)   Whenever an animal is affected by rabies, suspected of being
affected by rabies or has been bitten by an animal known or suspected to be
affected by rabies, the owner of the animal or any person having knowledge
thereof, shall forthwith notify the Animal Control Officer and the County
Health Department, stating precisely where the animal may be found.



   (B)   The Animal Control Officer, in conjunction with the Health
Department, shall arrange for the supervised confinement of any animal which
has bitten a person. The confinement may be on the premises of the owner if
the owner will sign an agreement assuming total responsibility for the safe
confinement of the animal. Confinement may be at the animal shelter, a
private animal shelter, veterinary hospital or Humane Society shelter at the
owners’ option and expense.



   (C)   Any animal which has bitten a person must be confined for a
period of at least ten days. The County Health Department or the Animal
Control Officer will be permitted by the owner to determine whether the
animal shows symptoms of rabies. No person shall obstruct or interfere with
the Animal Control Officer or the County Health Department in making the
examination.



   (D)   The County Health Department shall serve notice, in writing,
upon the owner of an animal known to have been bitten by an animal known or
suspected of being affected by rabies, requiring the owner to confine the
animal for a period of not less than six months, except that animals properly
treated with antirabic vaccine shall be confined for a period of not less
than three months.



(1985 Code, § 4-8)  (Ord. 94-005, passed 9-13-1994)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.09  SEIZURE OF ANIMALS AT-LARGE; DISPOSITION.



   (A)   Any domestic animal running-at-large may be taken up by the
Animal Control Officers, or any of the persons empowered to enforce this
chapter, and transported to the animal control shelter and there confined in
a humane manner until redeemed or disposed of as hereinafter provided.



   (B)   Immediately after impounding any domestic animal, the Animal
Control Officer shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner of its
impoundment and to inform the owner of the conditions whereby the owner can
regain custody of the animal.



   (C)   Animals not claimed by their owners, after notification or
attempted notification before the expiration of five days, shall become the
property of the animal shelter and may be humanely destroyed or placed for
adoption at the discretion of the animal shelter.



   (D)   It shall be the duty of the animal shelter to keep accurate
and detailed records of seizures and disposition of all animals coming into
its custody.



   (E)   Any animal determined to be abandoned by the Animal Control
Officer shall be impounded by the animal shelter.



(1985 Code, § 4-9)  (Ord. 94-005, passed 9-13-1994)



Statutory reference:



   Quarantine of dogs found at-large, see S.C. Code §  47-3-40



§ 90.10  REDEMPTION.



   (A)   Resume possession of animal.  The owner shall be entitled to
resume possession of an impounded animal, except as herein provided in the
cases of certain animals, upon compliance with the rabies vaccination and
proper identification requirements and the payment of redemption fees herein
set forth.



   (B)   Apply for redemption.  The owner of an impounded animal must
apply for the redemption of the animal. The animal may not be released unless
authorized by the Animal Control Officer with assurance from the owner that
proper care and custody will be maintained.



   (C)   Redemption fees.  The fees as established and approved by
City Council, and on file with the City Clerk, shall be collected from the
owner by the Animal Control Officer and turned over to the Finance Director.



(1985 Code, § 4-10)  (Ord. 94-005, passed 9-13-1994)



§ 90.11  ADOPTION.



   (A)   Any animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter may,
at the end of the legal detention period, have its title transferred to the
Humane Society, the SPCA or be adopted by a person deemed to be a responsible
and suitable owner, who will agree to comply with the provisions of this
chapter. All required fees must be paid at the time of adoption.



   (B)   No un-spayed female pet, which has been impounded by reason of
its being a stray, shall be allowed to be adopted from the animal shelter,
unless the prospective owner has arranged to have the pet spayed or unless
this requirement is waived by the Animal Control Officer.



(1985 Code, § 4-11)  (Ord. 94-005, passed 9-13-1994)



§ 90.12  INJURED, DISEASED AND DEAD ANIMALS.



   (A)   Anyone who strikes a pet with a motor vehicle or bicycle and
injures or kills the pet must, if the owner thereof cannot be found, notify
the Animal Control Officer immediately. The Animal Control Officer will then
take the necessary steps to provide for the proper treatment or disposal of
the pet.



   (B)   The city is authorized to enter into agreements with licensed
veterinarians for the care of injured pets. If the owner cannot be located,
the city will pay for reasonable expenses incurred.



   (C)   Any pet received by a veterinarian in critical condition from
wounds, injuries or disease may be destroyed at the veterinarian's discretion
if the owner cannot be contacted within 12 hours. If the pet is suffering
great pain, it may be destroyed immediately.



   (D)   The owner of any pet which dies shall immediately provide for
its burial or cremation if the owner knows of its death and the location of
its remains. If the owner fails to do so within three hours, the Animal
Control Officer shall arrange for the disposal and the owner shall be
required to pay the cost thereof.



   (E)   The city shall collect, or cause to be collected, all dead
domestic animals found on public grounds or highways of the city. If the
animal is identifiable, the city will notify the owner of the animal as soon
as practical.



   (F)   No person shall kill, or cause to be killed, any rabid animal,
or one suspected of having been exposed to rabies or which has bitten a
person, nor remove the animal from the jurisdiction of the county without
written permission of the Health Department. An exception to the preceding
requirement is in the event of the possibility of the animal's escape or
additional biting, in which case the animal is to be killed and the County
Health Department notified immediately.



   (G)   (1)   In the event a suspect stray animal has bitten a
person, the animal will be seized and the county Health Department contacted
for necessary forms for processing.



      (2)   The animal will then be taken to a consenting
veterinarian who will euthanize the animal and remove the head.



      (3)   Once the head is removed, the county Health Department
will pick up and ship the head to the state authorities for examination.



(1985 Code, § 4-12)  (Ord. 94-005, passed 9-13-1994)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.13  SLAUGHTERHOUSE AND THE LIKE; PROHIBITED.



   No person shall be licensed or allowed to establish, in any manner or
form, any butcher pen, slaughterhouse, abattoir or to butcher or slaughter
cattle, swine, goats or calves within the city or in close proximity to the
city as to cause discomfort, danger of infection or unpleasant odors to come
within the city.



(1985 Code, § 4-13)  (Ord. 94-005, passed 9-13-1994)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.14  REMOVAL OF DOG AND CAT EXCREMENT REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping or having custody
or control of a dog or cat to fail to remove immediately the dog/cat's
excrement from any public or private property other than property owned or
occupied by the person owning, keeping or having custody or control of the
dog or cat. The provisions of this section shall not apply to seeing-eye dogs
used by blind persons or to dogs used by police officers for law enforcement
or tracking purposes.



(1985 Code, § 4-14)  (Ord. 98-003, passed 7-14-1998)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.15  BEEKEEPING.



   In regards to the keeping of bees on residential property:



   (A)   No person is permitted to keep more than the following numbers
of colonies on any lot within the city, based upon the size o configuration
of the apiary lot:



      (1)   One-half acre or smaller lot; two colonies;



      (2)   Larger than one-half but smaller than three-fourths
acre; lot four colonies;



      (3)   Larger than three-fourths acre lot but smaller than one
acre lot; six colonies;



      (4)   One acre but smaller than five acres; eight colonies; and



      (5)   Larger than five acres; no restriction.



   (B)   Hives shall be located at least 20 feet from all property
lines. The opening of the hive shall be oriented away from adjoining
properties;



   (C)   For colonies located within 25 feet of a property boundary, a
flyway barrier at least six feet in height consisting of a solid wall, fence,
or dense hedge parallel to the property line and extending ten feet beyond
the apiary in each direction is required;



   (D)   Hives not being actively maintained shall be removed.



(Ord. 17-021, passed 10-10-2017)



CHAPTER 91: FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION



Section




General Provisions




   91.01   Fire service outside city; limitations on rendering



   91.02   Liability of city



   91.03   Adoption of Fire Codes



   91.04   Fire causing danger



   91.05   Obstructing fire equipment



   91.06   Congregating at fires



   91.07   Riding on city fire equipment



   91.08   Tampering with fire equipment



   91.09   Adoption of the standard Fire Prevention Code




Fire Inspections; Unsafe Conditions




   91.25   Annual building inspections



   91.26   Quarterly building inspections



   91.27   Reports of investigation



   91.28   Fire hazards to be remedied



   91.29   Unsafe buildings condemned; removal and the like



   91.30   Fire investigation



   91.31   Recordation of fire reports




Fireworks; Explosives




   91.45   Explosives; permit



   91.46   Prohibition on use of fireworks



   91.47   Toy caps and the like; excepted



   91.48   Other exceptions



   91.49   Public displays; authorized



   91.50   Permits



   91.51   Sale of fireworks prohibited



   91.52   Transportation and storage of fireworks



   91.53   Identification and marking of fireworks



   91.54   Storage near flammable material



   91.55   Unlawful trespass by projectile




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 91.01  FIRE SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY; LIMITATIONS ON RENDERING.



   No fire protection service shall be rendered outside the city by the
Fire Department, except under the following conditions:



   (A)   To protect property within the city threatened by fire from
outside the city;



   (B)   Where human life is in danger;



   (C)   To provide mutual aid fire protection under the terms of
mutual aid agreements entered into by the city; and



   (D)   Fire protection service calls made outside the city shall be
answered only when, in the discretion of the Fire Chief or fire officer in
charge, the call will not jeopardize the safety or property of persons within
the corporate limits of the city.



(1985 Code, § 10-1)



§ 91.02  LIABILITY OF CITY.



   Section 91.01 shall not be construed to bind the city to answer any
fire call outside of the city when the absence of firefighters and equipment
would jeopardize persons or property within the city, and the provisions of
§ 91.01 shall not be construed to make the city liable for any fire damage
inside or outside the city.



(1985 Code, § 10-2)



§ 91.03  ADOPTION OF FIRE CODES.



   The National Fire Codes, 1984 Edition of the National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) and all subsequent amendments thereto, are hereby adopted
by the city as the Fire Regulations and Fire Prevention Code of the city, and
the provisions of the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if
set out at length herein.



(1985 Code, § 10-3)



§ 91.04  FIRE CAUSING DANGER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to ignite, kindle or set
any fire that creates a substantial risk of injury to any person or damage to
property of another within the city.



(1985 Code, § 10-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.05  OBSTRUCTING FIRE EQUIPMENT.



   No person shall park any vehicle or otherwise cause any obstruction to
fire equipment at a fire or at an entrance to the fire station.



(1985 Code, § 10-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.06  CONGREGATING AT FIRES.



   It shall be unlawful for any persons to congregate in the streets at
the scene of a fire in such a manner as to interfere with the Fire Department.



(1985 Code, § 10-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.07  RIDING ON CITY FIRE EQUIPMENT.



   It shall be unlawful for unauthorized persons to ride on any city fire
equipment at any time without the consent of the Fire Chief.



(1985 Code, § 10-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.08  TAMPERING WITH FIRE EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to use or
tamper with any equipment of the Fire Department without the express consent
of the Fire Chief.



   (B)   EQUIPMENT shall be construed to mean all vehicles,
firefighting apparatus, supplies, facilities or other material belonging to
the Fire Department.



(1985 Code, § 10-8)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.09  ADOPTION OF THE STANDARD FIRE PREVENTION CODE.



   The Standard Fire Prevention Code, 1991 Edition, as published by the
Southern Building Code Congress International, is hereby adopted and shall
have full force and effect within the corporate limits of the City of Goose
Creek, South Carolina.



(Ord. 93-002, passed 4-20-1993)




FIRE INSPECTIONS; UNSAFE CONDITIONS




§ 91.25  ANNUAL BUILDING INSPECTIONS.



   At least once in each year, the Chief of the Fire Department or a
deputy shall make a general inspection of all public buildings in the
corporate limits of the city and ascertain if the laws and ordinances in
reference to fire protection are complied with. It shall be the duty of the
Chief of the Fire Department to notify the occupant and owner of all premises
of any defects or hazards found in this general inspection and see that they
are properly corrected.



(1985 Code, § 10-20)



§ 91.26  QUARTERLY BUILDING INSPECTIONS.



   Once in every three months, the Chief of the Fire Department or a
deputy shall make a personal inspection of every public building within the
fire limits and shall especially inspect the attic if applicable. The
Inspector shall make other inspections as may be required by the State Fire
Marshal and report all defects or hazards found in any building, upon a form
furnished to the Fire Chief by the State Fire Marshal. The Chief of the Fire
Department shall notify the owner or occupant of buildings of any defects or
hazards and notify them to correct the same within a reasonable time.



(1985 Code, § 10-21)



§ 91.27  REPORTS OF INVESTIGATION.



   The Chief of the Fire Department shall report before February 15 of
each year, the number and dates of general and quarterly inspections during
the preceding year ending December 31, upon forms furnished by the State Fire
Marshal and furnish the other information and make the other reports as shall
be called for by the State Fire Marshal.



(1985 Code, § 10-22)



Statutory reference:



   Inspections by Chief, see S.C. Code §§ 5-25-120et seq.



§ 91.28  FIRE HAZARDS TO BE REMEDIED.



   Upon discovery of a fire hazard by the Fire Chief or a designated
representative, the owner or occupant of the property which constitutes a
fire hazard, or the owner or occupant of the property in or on which a fire
hazard exits, shall be notified in writing by the Fire Chief and directed to
begin work to remedy the hazardous condition within five working days after
notice, which work shall continue until the condition is remedied. Failure to
remedy the hazardous condition shall be deemed a misdemeanor.



(1985 Code, § 10-23)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.29  UNSAFE BUILDINGS CONDEMNED; REMOVAL AND THE LIKE.



   The Fire Chief shall have the power to condemn, as unsafe, any building
which constitutes a fire hazard. The Fire Chief shall also have the power to
require that the owner or occupant of any unsafe building begin work to
render the same safe or remove it within five working days after notice to
that effect has been sent by the Fire Chief to the owner or occupant. The
work will continue until the buildings have been rendered safe or removed.



(1985 Code, § 10-24)



§ 91.30  FIRE INVESTIGATION.



   The Fire Chief shall investigate all fires and file a report with the
State Fire Marshal showing how, in the Chief's opinion, each fire originated.



(1985 Code, § 10-25)



§ 91.31  RECORDATION OF FIRE REPORTS.



   (A)   The Fire Chief shall keep a record which shall show the date,
circumstances and origin of every fire that occurs.



   (B)   The record shall also contain the name of the owner and
occupant of the building in which the fire originated and the kind and value
of the property destroyed or damaged.



(1985 Code, § 10-26)




FIREWORKS; EXPLOSIVES




§ 91.45  EXPLOSIVES; PERMIT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, store, fire or
explode at any time within the city, any dynamite or other explosive
substances or compounds, except with special permission of the City Council
or Fire Chief.



(1985 Code, § 10-30)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.46  PROHIBITION ON USE OF FIREWORKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to fire, shoot or discharge any
fireworks of any description within the city, except on Independence Day
(July 4), Christmas Eve, Christmas Day, New Years Eve, New Year’s Day and
as otherwise provided in this chapter.



(1985 Code, § 10-31)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.47  TOY CAPS AND THE LIKE; EXCEPTED.



   (A)   The term FIREWORKS shall not include toy paper pistol caps
which contain less than 25/100 grains of explosive compounds, toy pistols,
toy canes, toy guns or other devices using paper caps.



   (B)   The sale and use of these items shall be permitted at all
times.



(1985 Code, § 10-32)



§ 91.48  OTHER EXCEPTIONS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall apply:



   (A)   To the manufacture, storage, sale or use of signals necessary
for the safe operation of railroads or other public or private transportation;



   (B)   To illumination devices for photographic use;



   (C)   To the military or naval forces of the state or nation;



   (D)   To peace officers; and



   (E)   To the sale or use of blank cartridges for ceremonial,
theatrical or athletic events, nor as applying to the transportation or use
of fireworks solely for agricultural purposes.



(1985 Code, § 10-33)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 23-35-10



§ 91.49  PUBLIC DISPLAYS; AUTHORIZED.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the shipping,
sale, possession and use of fireworks for public display, and the items of
fireworks which are to be used for public display only, and which are
otherwise prohibited for sale and use within the city shall include, display
shells designed to be fired from mortars and display set pieces of fireworks
classified by the regulations of the interstate Commerce Commission as
“Class B Fireworks” and shall not include the items of commercial
fireworks as cherry bombs, tubular salutes, repeating bombs, aerial bombs and
torpedoes.



(1985 Code, § 10-34)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Permissible fireworks, see S.C. Code § 23-35-10



§ 91.50  PERMITS.



   Any person desiring to hold a public display of fireworks shall first
secure from the City Council, a written permit to hold the display at least
ten days prior to the date of display.



(1985 Code, § 10-35)



Statutory reference:



   Permits, see S.C. Code § 23-35-60



§ 91.51  SALE OF FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for persons to sell, or offer for sale or give
away, any fireworks within the corporate limits of the city.



(1985 Code, § 10-36)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.52  TRANSPORTATION AND STORAGE OF FIREWORKS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for persons to possess, store or
transport within the city, any fireworks other than the permissible fireworks
herein enumerated. The permissible fireworks consist of ICC Class C,
“Common Fireworks” only, in the regulations of the Interstate Commerce
Commission, for the transportation of explosives and other dangerous
articles, and shall include the following:



      (1)   Roman candles, the total pyrotechnic composition of
which shall not exceed 20 grams each in weight;



      (2)   Bottle type rockets, the pyrotechnic composition of
which shall not exceed 20 grams each in weight;



      (3)   Cylindrical fountains, the total pyrotechnic composition
of which shall not exceed 75 grams each in weight and the inside diameter of
which shall not exceed three fourths inch;



      (4)   Cone fountains, the total pyrotechnic composition of
which shall not exceed 50 grams each in weight;



      (5)   Wheels, the total pyrotechnic composition of which shall
not exceed 60 grams in weight for each driver unit, but there may be any
number of drivers on any one wheel and the inside bore of driver tubes shall
not be over one half inch;



      (6)   Illuminating torches and colored fire in any form, the
total pyrotechnic composition of which shall not exceed 100 grams each in
weight;



      (7)   Sparklers, the total pyrotechnic composition of which
shall not exceed 100 grams each in weight;



      (8)   Firecrackers and salutes with casings, the external
dimensions of which do not exceed one and one half inches in length and one
fourth inch in diameter, and other items designed to produce an audible
effect, the total pyrotechnic composition of which do not exceed two grams
each in weight; and



      (9)   Items composed of a combination of two or more articles
or devices of the above enumerated approved items.



   (B)   No component of any device listed in this section, which is
designated to produce an audible effect, shall contain pyrotechnic
composition in excess of two grains in weight excluding propelling or
expelling charges.



(1985 Code, § 10-37)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 23-35-30



§ 91.53  IDENTIFICATION AND MARKING OF FIREWORKS.



   No permissible articles of common fireworks enumerated in § 91.52
shall be possessed, stored or transported in the city, unless they shall be
properly named to conform to the nomenclature of § 91.52 and unless they are
certified as “common fireworks” on all shipping cases and by imprinting
on the article to be of sufficient size and so positioned as to be readily
recognized by law enforcement authorities and the general public.



(1985 Code, § 10-38)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 23-35-20



§ 91.54  STORAGE NEAR FLAMMABLE MATERIAL.



   Fireworks shall not be stored in a place of business where paint, oils,
varnishes, turpentine or gasoline or other flammable substances are kept in
unbroken containers, unless in a separate and distinct section or department
of the store.



(1985 Code, § 10-39)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 23-35-110



§ 91.55  UNLAWFUL TRESPASS BY PROJECTILE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause any projectile to land
upon or go over the property of another without the permission of that
property owner. PROJECTILE shall include, but is not limited to, any
fireworks, arrow, bullet or rocket. A person shall be guilty of this offense
even if there is no intent to cause a projectile to land upon or go over the
property of another. The general penalty clause of the Code of Goose Creek,
South Carolina, shall be applicable to this section.



(Ord. 08-002, passed 1-8-2008)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 92: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY



Section




General Provisions




   92.01   Construction and maintenance by railroad companies; street
crossings and drains



   92.02   Obstructions; generally



   92.03   Leaving crates and the like on streets and sidewalks



   92.04   Display of merchandise



   92.05   Encroaching fences



   92.06   Excavation permit required



   92.07   Danger signals at excavations or obstructions



   92.08   Draining water, slops and other liquid onto streets or
sidewalks



   92.09   Breaking and/or destroying curbing prohibited; permit
required



   92.10   Posting of house or building numbers mandatory




Use By Private Utilities




   92.25   Definitions



   92.26   Filing gross receipts report; payment of street rental fee;
delinquency; exemptions



   92.27   Examination of records; audit



   92.28   Use constitutes privilege



   92.29   Privilege revocable



   92.30   Right to purchase utility; purchase procedure



   92.31   Privilege not exclusive



   92.32   Compliance with law



   92.33   Reservation of right to modify regulations



   92.34   Interference with private property



   92.35   Restoration of surface; relocation of equipment



   92.36   Safety inspections; remedying unsafe conditions



   92.37   Indemnification agreement



   92.38   Permitting use of equipment by others; punishment for
unauthorized use of streets and the like



   92.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 92.01  CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE BY RAILROAD COMPANIES; STREET
CROSSINGS AND DRAINS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every officer, agent or representative
of every railroad company entering the city to construct and keep in good
repair, under the direction of the Director of Public Works and subject to
the Director's approval, the roadbed of all public streets and sidewalks
across or along the roadbed of each the railroad company, and for a
reasonable distance on each side thereof.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of every officer, agent or representative
of every railroad company with tracks entering the city to construct and
maintain all necessary drains along, across or under its roadbed or along any
public street or sidewalk, under the direction of the Director of Public
Works and subject to the Director's approval.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of every officer, agent or representative
of every railroad company to do and perform, at the expense of every railroad
company, all the work required in divisions (A) and (B) above, under the
direction and subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works within
five days from notice by such to the officer, agent or representative
thereof, orally or in writing, so to do.



(1985 Code, § 16-1)



§ 92.02  OBSTRUCTIONS; GENERALLY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place any obstruction on or in
any way to obstruct any street, alley, bridge, ditch or public right-of-way;
provided, that this section shall not apply to any employee of the city,
county or state while the employee is immediately and actively engaged in the
maintenance, improvement or construction of any street, sidewalk or public
way in the city; nor to utility companies or others performing work thereon
with permission from the city.



(1985 Code, § 16-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.03  LEAVING CRATES AND THE LIKE ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place and leave upon
any of the streets or sidewalks of the city, any box, barrel, package, crate,
bale or other obstruction.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to persons leaving articles in
containers on the right-of-way, except overnight, for collection by the city.



(1985 Code, § 16-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.04  DISPLAY OF MERCHANDISE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place any merchandise or other
chattels of display upon the streets or sidewalks within the city.



(1985 Code, § 16-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.05  ENCROACHING FENCES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect any fence that encroaches
upon any street or public right-of-way of the city, or to build any fence
along the line of a street or right-of-way before having the line of the
street or right-of-way identified by the appropriate official of the city.



(1985 Code, § 16-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.06  EXCAVATION PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, cut or make any
excavation in any paved or clayed street or sidewalk of the city for any
purpose without a permit.



(1985 Code, § 16-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.07  DANGER SIGNALS AT EXCAVATIONS OR OBSTRUCTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any trench, ditch
or excavation or obstruction in or on any street, sidewalk or public place of
the city to remain open between sunset and sunrise, unless the trench, ditch
or excavation has a sufficient number of lights properly displayed around it
as danger signals to prevent accidents to persons or property.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or extinguish
any light which may be placed as a signal at night to warn persons of danger
from ditches, trenches, building materials, scaffolds, excavations,
impediments or obstacles of any description whatsoever in the city.



(1985 Code, § 16-8)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.08  DRAINING WATER, SLOPS AND OTHER LIQUID ONTO STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry water or any slops or
liquid of any kind, from any store or residence or other building by means of
a drain, pipe or otherwise, so that the same shall fall or flow upon any part
of any street or sidewalk of the city; provided, that sprinkling of a street
to lay dust is not hereby forbidden.



(1985 Code, § 16-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.09  BREAKING AND/OR DESTROYING CURBING PROHIBITED; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to break or destroy the curbing of
any city street or to otherwise deface the same, or to construct any entrance
into property on any of the paved streets of the city unless the person shall
have first obtained a permit.



(1985 Code, § 16-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.10  POSTING OF HOUSE OR BUILDING NUMBERS MANDATORY.



   (A)   It shall be mandatory that the owner, occupant or agent post
the assigned house or building number of each and every structure within the
city, within 30 days of adoption of this section.



   (B)   House or building number will be a minimum of three inches in
height, of a coloration contrasting to the background surface and posted on
or near the front entrance to each structure in a location clearly visible
from the street.



   (C)   The cost of placement and maintenance of numbers shall be
borne by the property owner.



(1985 Code, § 16-11)  (Ord. 88-06, passed 7-12-1988)




USE BY PRIVATE UTILITIES




§ 92.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PERSON.  As defined in § 10.03, except, however, the state, city and
their departments and agencies.



   UTILITY.  Any person providing telegraph, telephone, electric, gas,
cable television, sewer or water services within the city or to its
inhabitants, with fixtures in the public streets, public properties or public
rights-of-way. This definition is to be nonexclusive of other activities.



(1985 Code, § 16-20)



§ 92.26  FILING GROSS RECEIPTS REPORT; PAYMENT OF STREET RENTAL FEE;
DELINQUENCY; EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Any utility, except those owned or operated by the city or
other governmental agency, using or maintaining any telegraph, telephone,
electric, gas, cable television, sewer or water poles, wires, cables,
conduits, pipes, manholes or other fixtures in or on any of the public
streets, public property or public rights-of-way, which are subject to the
control of the city, shall on or before January 31 of each year, file with
the City Clerk a sworn report of the gross receipts from business conducted
by the person within the city for the preceding 12-month period ending
December 31 of the prior year.



   (B)   As a condition to further occupancy and use of the public
streets, public property or public rights-of-way, every utility occupying or
using the public properties shall pay to the city for the privilege an annual
rental charge equal to 3% of the gross receipts received by the person from
its business conducted within the city for the 12-month period ending
December 31 of the prior year. The annual rental charge shall be paid to the
city on or before March 15 of each year.



   (C)   For non-payment of all or any part of the fees, the City Clerk
shall collect a late penalty in the following manner: 5% of the unpaid fee
for each month or portion thereof after the due date until paid.



   (D)   Payment of the fee and acceptance by the city shall constitute
a temporary license subject to the terms of this chapter.



   (E)   This chapter shall not apply to the state or its departments
and agencies, or departments and agencies of county government or of the city
which operate exclusively for public benefit and without profit.



(1985 Code, § 16-21)



§ 92.27  EXAMINATION OF RECORDS; AUDIT.



   The City Clerk may direct that the books and financial records of the
utility be examined by a designated representative and shall be empowered to
require an audited report of gross receipts prepared by a certified public
accountant from the utility.



(1985 Code, § 16-22)



§ 92.28  USE CONSTITUTES PRIVILEGE.



   (A)   The annual rental charge for the privilege of using the public
streets, public property and public rights-of-way of the city provided herein
is not charged as a tax, but is made for the special privilege enjoyed by the
utility using the public streets, public property or public rights-of-way of
the city in the conduct of its business.



   (B)   The charges are in addition to all ad valorem and business
license taxes and all taxes of whatsoever nature otherwise levied or charged
against the utility; provided, however, that utilities otherwise subject to
the terms and conditions of this chapter as a condition of their use of the
public streets, public property or public rights-of-way shall be exempted
therefrom upon the adoption of an ordinance of the city of a written
agreement granting a franchise-license to the utilities of limited duration.



(1985 Code, § 16-23)



§ 92.29  PRIVILEGE REVOCABLE.



   This chapter does not grant a permanent and irrevocable right to any
utility to use the public streets, public property and public rights-of-way
of the city. The city expressly reserves the right to cancel the privileges
granted hereunder and refund the unearned rental charges paid to the city at
any time and upon 90 days written notice to users of the public streets,
public property and public rights-of-way.



(1985 Code, § 16-24)



§ 92.30  RIGHT TO PURCHASE UTILITY; PURCHASE PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Upon the cancellation by the city of the privileges granted
hereunder, any utility using the public streets, public property or public
rights-of-way shall be deemed to have consented to grant to the city, at its
election, the right to purchase and take over the utility system and its
properties, within the city upon the payment of a fair market value, less
depreciation.



   (B)   In the event of disagreement as to the values, each party
shall appoint a qualified person with the two persons so appointed selecting
a third.



   (C)   These three persons so selected shall have the powers given to
a Board of Arbitration by the laws of the state and shall agree on the value
of the utility within the city.



   (D)   Any party dissatisfied with the award may appeal as provided
by the laws of the state.



   (E)   The utility shall not receive any value for its temporary
privilege to use the public streets, public properties or public
rights-of-way.



   (F)   Upon the exercise of this option by the city, the utility
shall, upon receipt of written notice, transfer to the city possession and
title to all facilities and properties of its business within the city, free
and clear of all liens and encumbrances not agreed to be assumed by the city
in lieu of some portion of the valuation.



(1985 Code, § 16-25)



§ 92.31  PRIVILEGE NOT EXCLUSIVE.



   The use and occupancy by a utility of the public streets, public
property or public rights-of-way hereunder shall not be exclusive, and the
city reserves the right to allow other utilities similar uses and occupancy.



(1985 Code, § 16-26)



§ 92.32  COMPLIANCE WITH LAW.



   (A)   Nothing contained herein is intended to relieve or excuse any
person from any requirement of law or ordinance of the city, except as
specifically provided herein.



   (B)   Utilities shall at all times be subject to the lawful exercise
of the police powers of the city.



(1985 Code, § 16-27)



§ 92.33  RESERVATION OF RIGHT TO MODIFY REGULATIONS.



   The city specifically reserves the right to enact or modify
restrictions or regulations affecting the erection and maintenance of poles,
wires, pipes, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other appurtenances
in, over and under the streets and public properties of the city, as the city
may deem proper from time to time, including the relocation of same, all in
accordance with applicable laws and regulations.



(1985 Code, § 16-28)



§ 92.34  INTERFERENCE WITH PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   All equipment, fixtures and properties located or maintained to
utilities pursuant to the terms of this chapter in the public streets or
public properties or public rights-of-way of the city, shall be so located as
to minimize interference with other structures and to minimize interference
with the rights of private properties adjoining any of the public streets or
public properties or public rights-of-way.



(1985 Code, § 16-29)



§ 92.35  RESTORATION OF SURFACE; RELOCATION OF EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   Restoration.  In case of any disturbance of pavement,
sidewalk, driveway, ornamental vegetation or other surfaces by the utility
pursuant to its use of the public streets, public properties and public
rights-of-way, the utility shall, at its own cost and expense, and in a
manner approved by the City Engineer, replace and restore all paving,
sidewalk, driveway or surface of any street or alley disturbed in as good
condition as before the work was commenced, in a safe and sound condition,
and shall maintain the restoration in an improved condition for a period of
five years.



   (B)   Relocation and removal.  Utilities using the public streets,
public property or public rights-of-way pursuant to this chapter shall, at
their own expense and at the direction of the city, relocate and remove their
appliances, fixtures or equipment at any time public necessity requires the
relocation or removal because of the appliances, fixtures or equipment
unreasonably interfering with or restricting the effective or safe use of the
public street, public property or public right-of-way.



   (C)   Removal or existing facilities.  Any poles, wires, cables,
underground conduits, manholes, pipes or other fixtures or equipment erected
or located by persons in, along, across, above, over and under the public
streets, public properties or public rights-of-way of the city, prior to the
effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, must have
been removed within three months after the effective date of the ordinance
unless the utility shall have obtained permission for use of the public
streets, public properties or public rights-of-way prior thereto in
accordance with the terms of this chapter.



(1985 Code, § 16-30)



§ 92.36  SAFETY INSPECTIONS; REMEDYING UNSAFE CONDITIONS.



   (A)   The City Fire Chief, Building Inspector, Electrical Inspector,
Police Chief or the other appropriate official as may be designated by the
city, shall have the power and it shall be the official's duty to examine and
inspect all appliances, fixtures and equipment located within or on the
public streets, public properties and public rights-of-way pursuant to this
chapter.



   (B)   Whenever the appliance, fixture or equipment is found to be
unsafe or unfit for the purpose intended, the person using, possessing or
maintaining same shall be notified and shall be required to place same in a
safe condition.



(1985 Code, § 16-31)



§ 92.37  INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT.



   All utilities shall, for their use of the public streets, public
properties and public rights-of-way of the city under the terms of this
chapter, agree to save the city harmless from all loss sustained by the city
on account of any suit, judgement, execution, claim or demand whatsoever,
resulting from negligence on the part of the utilities in their use of the
public streets, public properties and public rights-of-way of the city, in
accordance with the terms of this chapter.



(1985 Code, § 16-32)



§ 92.38  PERMITTING USE OF EQUIPMENT BY OTHERS; PUNISHMENT FOR UNAUTHORIZED
USE OF STREETS AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   No person or utility which has been or may be granted
permission to erect or maintain in any public street, public property or
public right-of-way, any poles or fixtures, conduits or cables, pipes, wires
or other equipment for the distribution of its services, either above or
below the ground, shall permit the equipment or fixtures to be used for any
purpose by any other utility or person, without the express written consent
of the city.



   (B)   Any equipment or fixture which is supported, fastened to or
carried by any pole or poles, fixtures, conduits or cable, pipes, wires or
other equipment in the city at the present time belonging to a person or
utility which is not licensed by the city to use the public streets, public
properties or public rights-of-way shall have been removed, and the violation
of this provision shall have been discontinued within 90 days of the date of
ratification of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived.



(1985 Code, § 16-35)



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   General.  Any person violating any provision of this chapter
for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Posting of house of building numbers mandatory.  Failure to
post the assigned number within the prescribed time shall be judged a
violation, and the owner, upon conviction in the Municipal Court, may be
fined no more than $500 plus assessments required by the State of South
Carolina and/or sentenced to 30 days imprisonment.



(1985 Code, § 16-11)  (Ord. 88-06, passed 7-12-1988)



   (C)   Punishment for non-payment of rental.  Every utility which
shall operate any business without payment of the rental charges provided
herein, shall be subject to a fine of $500 plus assessments required by the
State of South Carolina for each day that the utility shall conduct business
using and occupying the public streets, public properties or public
rights-of-way without payment of the rental charge, provided that utilities
who are natural persons may alternatively be sentenced to imprisonment for a
period of 30 days for each day of the violation. Notwithstanding the
imposition of fines or punishment herein established for violation of this
chapter, all rental charges which become due and owing to the city under the
terms of this chapter may be recovered by the city in a court of competent
jurisdiction by suit filed therein.



(1985 Code, § 16-33)



   (D)   Punishment for failure to file report.  Every utility and its
local manager or agent failing or refusing to make the report required by §
92.26, or failing or refusing to allow the examination or submit the report
provided for in section § 92.27, shall, upon conviction in the Municipal
Court, be fined no more than $500 plus assessments required by the State of
South Carolina, and every utility who is a natural person violating the
provisions may alternatively be sentenced to 30 days imprisonment. Every
day's failure or refusal as mentioned in this section shall be deemed a
separate offense.



(1985 Code, § 16-34)



   (E)   Permitting use of equipment by others; punishment for
unauthorized use of streets and the like.  Every utility and its local
manager or agent, failing or refusing to comply with division (B) above by
removal of the non-licensed fixtures or equipment in the public streets,
public property or public rights-of-way, shall upon conviction in the
Municipal Court, be fined no more than $500 plus assessments required by the
State of South Carolina and every utility who is a natural person violating
the provision may alternatively be sentenced to 30 days imprisonment. Every
day's failure or refusal as mentioned in this section shall be deemed a
separate offense.



(1985 Code, § 16-35)



CHAPTER 93: HEALTH AND SANITATION



Section




Administration




   93.001   Title



   93.002   Scope



   93.003   Purposes



   93.004   Application of code



   93.005   Authority



   93.006   Enforcement



   93.007   Right-to-enter



   93.008   Appeals



   93.009   Validity and separability



   93.010   Compliance with other ordinances



   93.011   Persons responsible




Rules of Construction and Definitions




   93.025   Rules of construction



   93.026   Definitions




The Adoption of Rules and Regulations of the South Carolina
Department of Health and Environmental Control




   93.055   Adoptions



   93.056   Food handling establishments



   93.057   Burning garbage and the like



   93.058   Abandoned wells




Solid Waste Collection and Disposal




   93.075   Responsibility



   93.076   Prohibited waste



   93.077   Solid waste collection



   93.078   Placement requirements; household solid waste



   93.079   Bundling of solid waste



   93.080   Solid waste containerization and removal



   93.081   Use of non-standard containers



   93.082   Service for owners requiring additional containerization
for household refuse



   93.083   Owners, agents and tenants responsibility



   93.084   Refusal of service



   93.085   Frequency of solid waste collection



   93.086   Assessment rates for city residents




Sewage Disposal




   93.100   Occupancy of premises without proper system



   93.101   Building contracts to provide for sewage disposal



   93.102   Use of septic tanks



   93.103   Connection to sewer




Nuisances




   93.145   Public nuisances prohibited



   93.146   Enumeration of public nuisances affecting health



   93.147   Public nuisances affecting public safety




Abatement




   93.160   Notice to abate involving great a1vd immediate danger



   93.161   Abatement by the city involving violations without great or
immediate danger



   93.162   Procedure to appeal abatement decision




Miscellaneous Provisions




   93.175   Throwing refuse and the like on city property



   93.176   Tattooing



   93.177   Hours of operation for commercial refuse or waste collector
restricted




Junk; Junkyards




   93.190   Definitions



   93.191   Abandonment of refrigerators; removal of door or lock
required



   93.192   Junk in residential districts



   93.193   Junk in commercial districts



   93.194   Impound lots



   93.195   Enforcement



 



   93.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Nuisances, see Chapter 137



ADMINISTRATION



§ 93.001  TITLE.



   (A)   Provisions in the following sections shall be known as the
"Health and Sanitation Code" of the City of Goose Creek, hereinafter referred
to as "this code". This code shall include sections governing:



      (1)   Administration authority, enforcement, right-to-enter
and penalties; and



      (2)   Definitions.



   (B)   Adoption of rules and regulations of the South Carolina
Department of Health and Environmental Control:



      (1)   Solid waste collection and disposal;



      (2)   Sewage disposal; and



      (3)   Nuisances.



   (C)   The City of Goose Creek shall hereinafter be referred to as
"the city".



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.002  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this code shall govern the minimum conditions and
standards for and the disposal or collection of solid waste, the disposal of
sewage and the prohibition of nuisances within the corporate limits of the
city, including all zoning classifications and districts as follows.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.003  PURPOSES.



   (A)   Health and sanitation. The adoption and purposes of the city's
health and sanitation standards are:



      (1)   To establish a minimum standard of upkeep and care of
property in order to protect, promote and improve the public health, safety,
convenience, order, appearance, and general welfare of the city through the
enforcement of health and sanitation standards;



      (2)   To prevent negligence which can lead to blight, decay,
depreciation of property value(s) and a loss of community pride and
confidence;



      (3)   To keep the city clean, healthy, beautiful and to
prevent future sanitation and health problems from occurring;



      (4)   To fix the responsibilities of owners, operators and
occupants of properties and premises inside the city; and



      (5)   To provide for the administration, enforcement and
penalties of this code.



   (B)   Adoption of rules and regulations of the South Carolina
Department of Health and Environmental Control Board. The adoption and
purpose of rules and regulations of the South Carolina Department of Health
and Environmental Control is to establish a minimum criteria governing, but
not limited to the sanitary conditions for eating and drinking
establishments, food processing plants, including dairy products, that will
promote the safe and sanitary handling of the products being produced,
processed, packaged or delivered; and to protect the health and general
welfare of the citizens of the city.



   (C)   Solid waste. The adoption and purposes of the solid waste
article are to:



      (1)   To establish a minimum standard for the collection and
disposal of the city's solid waste in order to promote, protect and improve
the public health through the enforcement of good and sound collection and
disposal methods, and to prevent public nuisances and unhealthy conditions;



      (2)   To prevent negligence which can lead to decay,
depreciation of property values and loss of community pride and confidence;



      (3)   To keep the city clean, healthy, beautiful and to
prevent future sanitation and health problems from occurring; and



      (4)   To affix the responsibilities of owners, operators and
occupants of the homes, businesses and vacant properties.



   (D)   Sewage disposal. The adoption and purposes of the sewage
disposal article are to establish a minimum standard for the collection and
disposal of the sewage within the city, to promote and enhance the sanitary
conditions of the city and to prevent the presence and spread of infectious
diseases caused by the improper disposal of sewage.



   (E)   Nuisances. The adoption and purpose of § 93.145 through §
93.147 is to establish a minimum standard to reduce or eliminate public
nuisances so as to:



      (1)   Promote pride within the community;



      (2)   To enhance the city's goal as a livable community;



      (3)   To fix the responsibilities of property owners, agents
and tenants; and



      (4)   To retain or enhance property.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.004  APPLICATION OF CODE.



   (A)   Adoption of rules and regulations of the South Carolina
Department of Health and Environmental Control. Any establishment that
engages in the preparation, processing, packaging, manufacturing, delivery or
serving of any food and/or drink shall perform the function in accordance
with the provisions of this code and all laws of the county, state and
federal governments governing the same.



   (B)   Solid waste. Any collection or disposal of solid waste which
may be caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code, shall
be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the federal
government, the state, Berkeley County and any other applicable codes as used
by the city.



   (C)   Sewage disposal. Any collection, treatment or disposal of
sewage which may be caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this
code shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the
city, county, state and federal governments and any other applicable codes as
used by the city.



   (D)   Nuisances. As a result of a routine complaint from any citizen
or an inspection by the city, a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be
considered a violation of this code and shall be corrected upon notification
pursuant to the provisions of this code and any other laws of the city,
county, state or Federal governments.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.005  AUTHORITY.



   It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director or his or her duly
authorized representative(s) to determine whether any condition exists or
activity is being practiced which violates this code. The cause for
inspections shall be formed either by citizen complaints or staff
observations.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.006  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The city, or its representative, shall enforce this code and
shall take necessary actions to ensure that all violations are corrected to
comply with this code.



   (B)   Should it become necessary, the city will remove the violation
from the property and the cost for the removal shall become the
responsibility of the property owner.



   (C)   If the cost for removal shall go unpaid, the same shall become
a lien upon the property and shall be collected in the manner prescribed for
the collection of delinquent taxes. The property owner shall also be liable
for prosecution pursuant to this code.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.007  RIGHT-TO-ENTER.



   The city, or its representative, shall have the right-to-enter onto any
premise at any reasonable time for the purpose of making an inspection or
investigation as required by this code, subject to the constitutional
restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused, the
city is authorized to apply to the courts for a search warrant based on
probable cause.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.008  APPEALS.



   There shall be no appeals to this code except those provided by the
courts.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.009  VALIDITY AND SEPARABILITY.



   If any section or provision of this code shall be declared invalid by a
court of law, the declaration shall not affect any other section or provision
of this code which shall continue in full force and effect and to this end,
the sections and provisions of this code are hereby declared severable.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.010  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.



   No license or permit issued by any municipal, county, state or Federal
agency or any certification of compliance, shall constitute a defense against
any violation of any other local ordinance of law that is applicable to any
structure or premises, lot, property or vehicle; nor shall any provision
herein relieve any owner, operator or occupant from complying with any other
provision, nor any official of the city from enforcing any other provision.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.011  PERSONS RESPONSIBLE.



   Any person with direct or indirect control over the premises is
responsible for compliance with this code whether that person is an owner,
tenant, occupant, agent, independent contractor or manager.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS



§ 93.025  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   In the construction of this code, the provision in § 10.04 shall be
observed. In addition, definitions found in this section shall be applicable
to this section of the code only.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.026  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED. To give up control of, or to cease from intending or
attempting to protect, maintain or use any vehicle, property, premise or junk
within the city.



   ABANDONED PROPERTY. Any derelict or wrecked property which has been
left abandoned or unprotected from the elements and shall include inoperative
or partially dismantled, trailers, boats, machinery, appliances, furniture,
construction materials and other similar articles used in or in conjunction
with the home, property or vehicle.



   ANIMAL WASTE (MANURE). Animal excreta, including cleanings from barns,
stables, corrals, all pens or conveyances used for stabling, transporting or
penning of animals, fowl or reptiles.



   ASHES. Any residue, hot or cold, that occurs and remains due to burning
or other similar mamler of combustion.



   BLIGHT. Any one or more of the following conditions or activities:



      (1)   Abandoned building or structure;



      (2)   Attractive nuisance, as in a property which is in an
unsecured state so as to potentially constitute an attraction to children,
vagrants, criminals or other unauthorized persons or so as to enable persons
to resort thereto for the purpose of committing a unlawful act;



      (3)   A building or structure which is in a state of disrepair
to the extent so as to pose a threat to public health, safety or welfare; and



      (4)   Property inadequately maintained to the extent so as to
pose a threat to public health, safety or welfare.



   BRUSH. All trees and plant material which is growing or has grown on
the premise.



   CITY. The City of Goose Creek, South Carolina.



   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The appointed representative(s) of the city
to administer this code.



   CONTAINER. The 95-gallon or 65-gallon roll-cart refuse container
provided by the City of Goose Creek.



   CONTRACTOR. Any individual(s) who provides a service for an owner and
receives payment of any kind for any service rendered.



   CITY COUNCIL. The duly elected officials of the city.



   COUNTY. Berkeley County, South Carolina.



   DETERIORATION. The condition of a building, vehicle, public or private
property or part thereof, characterized by excessive holes, breaks, rotting,
crumbling, peeling, rusting, neglect, lack of maintenance or other evidence
of physical decay or excessive use.



   DRY TRASH. All weeds, limbs, brush, roots, leaves, grass clippings,
straw, logs, stumps and the like.



   END OF WORK WEEK. Friday at 5:00 p.m.



   EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW. Any premises or any part thereof, or any
building or vehicle or any part thereof, which may be viewed by the public
from a natural position, including any lawful elevated location on either
public or private property, using unassisted vision.



   EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES. Open space on the premises outside of any
building or vehicle thereon.



   EXTERMINATION. The control of insects, rodents or other pests by
eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods.



   FEDERAL GOVERNMENT. The government of the United States of America.



   GARBAGE. Any organic waste matter, both animal and vegetable. Also,
small cans, bottles, rags,



boxes, small dead animals and any other similar waste.



   HIGHWAY. A way or place of whatever nature, publicly or privately
maintained and opened to the use of the public or private sector for
vehicular travel. Highway includes streets, alleys, rights-of-way or paths.



   IMPOUND LOT. An area incident to the operation of a business within the
commercial district of the city, used for the storage of vehicles from which
no major parts have been removed, which are capable of being made fully
operational and used for storage of not more than nine vehicles as defined
herein, at any time.



   INFESTATION. The abnormal presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other
pests on the premise which constitutes a health hazard.



   INOPERATIVE. Any vehicle or property that is not functioning in a
manner consistent with its intended use.



   INOPERATIVE VEHICLE. A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public
streets as it was intended and designed to do for reason including, but not
limited to, being unlicensed, unregistered, wrecked, in a state of disrepair
or incapable of being moved under its own power



   JUNK. Any item that has no value other than nominal salvage value.



   JUNKYARD. An establishment which is maintained or used for storing,
buying or selling junk or an automobile graveyard and shall include garbage
dumps, sanitary landfills and scrap processors.



   LITTER. Any unpleasant, unhealthy or unsanitary accumulation or
placement of refuse, rubbish, garbage, the growth of grass, bushes, weeds,
vines, leaves and the like on private and/or public property.



   NUISANCE. Any act, thing, occupation, condition or use of property,
whereby:



      (1)   The health or life of any individual may be endangered,
injured impaired and/or cause any disease;



      (2)   Substantially injures or endangers the health safety of
an individual;



      (3)   Renders the public insecure in life and or use of
property;



      (4)   Unlawfully and or substantially interferes with,
obstructs or renders dangerous for passage on or across any street, highway,
alley, navigable waterway or other public way.



   OPERATOR. Any person(s) who has charge, care or control of a structure,
dwelling, premises or vehicle or any part thereof, whether with or without
the knowledge and consent of the owner, including, if applicable, a lessee.



   OWNER. Any person(s), agent, operator, firm, mortgage holder, part
owner, tenant, corporation or any entity having a legal or equitable interest
in the property or recorded in the official records of the state, county or
municipality. Owner shall include any person who has control of the property
or who otherwise holds themselves out as having control of the property.
Owner shall include the personal representative of an estate or the guardian
or conservator of a minor or incompetent person who has an ownership interest
in the property.



   PARTIALLY DISMANTLED/WRECKED VEHICLE. Any vehicle from which major
parts have been removed so as to render the motor vehicle inoperative, or a
wrecked vehicle where the damage to the vehicle has rendered the vehicle
inoperative.



   PARTIES OF INTEREST. Any person or entity who has interest of record in
a premise or any who are in actual possession thereof.



   PERSONS. The word PERSON shall extend and be applied to individuals,
firms, partnerships, associations, organizations and bodies political and
corporate, or any combination thereof.



   PREMISES. The exterior of any building, structure or any parcel of land
(whether improved or unimproved) including the area up to the paved edge of
the road, street, curb or alley and including any adjacent sidewalks,
easements and right-of-way.



   PUBLIC PLACES. Any building, park, cemetery, school yard or open space
owned by the public and used for the general welfare of the public.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Lands and improvements owned by the federal
government, the state, the county or the city, and includes but is not
limited to vehicles, buildings, grounds, parks, playgrounds, streets,
sidewalks, parkways, easements, rights-of-way and other similar property.



   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The individual appointed by the City
Administrator to carry out the function of the City's Public Works Department
as described in § 33.080.



   REFUSE (TRASH). Any ashes, litter, leaves, grass, brushes, vines, tree
branches, large pieces of metal (old appliances, vehicles and tin) and wood
with no piece exceeding four inches in diameter and four feet in length and
having a weight less than 50 pounds.



   REFUSE (LITTER and GROWTH). Any unhealthy or unsanitary accumulation of
litter and growth of grass, bushes, weeds, vines, leaves and the like, on
both private and public property.



   REPAIR. The improvement, replacement or restoration of an existing
premise or vehicle to its original state with similar materials or parts to
enhance its current value. The term REPAIR or REPAIRS shall not apply to any
alteration, i.e. moving of walls, additions of rooms, similar change of
construction and the like.



   ROLL-CART/HOUSEHOLD REFUSE. The refuse container provided by the City
of Goose Creek with a 95-gallon capacity.



   ROLL-CART/YARD DEBRIS. The yard debris container available for purchase
from the City of Goose Creek with a 95-gallon capacity.



   RUBBISH. Any non-putrescent (not undergoing rotting or decomposition of
organic material) solid waste, excluding ashes, consisting of both
combustible and waste, such as paper, cardboard, waste metal, tin cans,
brush, leaves, vines, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.



   SCDHEC. The South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental
Control.



   SCRAP PROCESSORS. Any person engaged in the business of buying scrap
iron and metals, including, but not limited to, old vehicles, for the
specific purpose of processing into raw material for re-melting purposes and
whose product is ferrous and nonferrous scrap for shipment to steel mills,
foundries, smelters and refineries, and having facilities and machinery
designed for the processing.



   SOLID WASTE. Garbage, rubbish, litter, dry trash, white goods, ashes
and refuse.



   STATE. The State of South Carolina.



   TRANSLUCENT. A bag or container's ability to transmit or diffuse light
so that objects within cannot be seen clearly



   VEHICLES. Any device by which a person or property may be propelled,
moved or towed upon a highway, except a vehicle moved by human power or those
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



   WEEDS. All uncultivated vegetative growth.



   WHITE GOODS. Any large appliance such as but not limited to, stoves,
refrigerators, air conditioners and the like.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



THE ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE SOUTH CAROLINA
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL



§ 93.055  ADOPTIONS.



   There are hereby adopted and made part of this chapter as fully as
though set out length herein, all the provisions and requirements of the
South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control and found in
the Code of Laws of South Carolina as amended in reference to:



   (A)   Eating and drinking establishments;



   (B)   Food processing plants; and



   (C)   Sanitary control of the manufacture, distribution and sale of
frozen dairy foods and frozen deserts.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.056 FOOD HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS.



   (A)   All food handling establishments may be inspected at such
times as designated by the city's Code Enforcement Officer.



   (B)   All food handling establishments shall adhere to the state and
county health rules and regulations



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.057  BURNING GARBAGE AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to burn garbage, leaves or rubbish
of any kind or amount, either inside or outside of garbage containers,
without the written consent of the Fire Chief or Duty Officer of the City
Fire Department



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.058  ABANDONED WELLS.



   It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or tenant to permit or allow
any abandoned well to remain open and unprotected, on any place or premises
owned or occupied by the owner or tenant.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 93.999



SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL



§ 93.075  RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   Owner. The owner, agent or tenant of a premise shall be
responsible for adhering to and obeying this code in order to enhance the
collection and disposal of solid waste from the highways, streets and
properties within the corporate limits of the city and to achieve the
purposes of this code.



   (B)   City. The city shall provide solid waste and disposal services
to all single-family residential homes within the city, as well as buildings
owned and occupied by the city as described in this code. No commercial solid
waste collection or disposal services shall be provided by the city. It shall
be the responsibility of all commercial agencies within the city to contract
with private companies for solid waste collection and disposal services.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.076  PROHIBITED WASTE.



   (A)   General; including oil. Ashes, shingles, rocks, bricks,
concrete slabs, sidewalks, driveways, large automobile parts and oil shall
not be deposited for solid waste collection. These items shall be disposed of
at the owner's expense.



   (B)   Contractor generated. Refuse, brick, scraps of lumber, mortar,
plaster, roofing, gutters, dry trash, litter, trees, stumps and all like
materials generated by a contractor shall be removed by the contractor and
disposed of according to the solid waste laws of the state and county by the
end of each work week.



   (C)   Hazardous waste. Waste that is classified and identified from
time to time by the SCDHEC as hazardous waste.



   (D)   Liquids. All liquids must be drained from the refuse or
garbage prior to be collected by the city.



   (E)   Mixed. No household garbage is to be mixed with dry trash.



   (F)   Leaves, grass, straw and the like. Loose leaves, grass, and
straw shall not be collected except for those contained according to this
code (see § 93.080).



   (G)   Animals. Dead animals or animal waste shall not be placed in
containers for collection.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.077  SOLID WASTE COLLECTION.



   The solid waste collected by the city shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:



   (A)   White goods, furniture and pieces of metal and tin with
dimensions exceeding nine inches by 48 inches must be placed by the street or
highway right-of-way on the designated day. The owner shall remove the
door(s) from all white goods if they are of the size to cause entrapment of
any person or animal. Note: For clarity, metal items which do not exceed the
nine inches by 48 inches will be considered as household garbage and litter.
These will be collected on the designated days.



   (B)   All dry trash meeting the requirements of this code.



   (C)   Leaves, grass and straw must be placed in strong paper bags or
yard debris roll-carts on the designated collection days.



   (D)   Logs, limbs, brush, branches and other similar materials not
exceeding four feet in length, 50 pounds in weight and not greater than four
inches in diameter.



   (E)    All normal household solid waste including, but not limited
to, food, bags, paper, household plastics and the like.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.078  PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS; HOUSEHOLD SOLID WASTE.



   Normal household solid waste must be placed in the proper containers
and not mixed with other solid waste as described in this chapter.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.079  BUNDLING OF SOLID WASTE.



   All loose materials (boxes, newspapers, magazines and the like) which
are normally placed into containers but exceed the container's capacity must
be bundled and tied securely to enhance the collection process.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.080  SOLID WASTE CONTAINERIZATION AND REMOVAL.



   (A)   All owners that receive solid waste collection services from
the city will be provided with one 95-gallon roll-cart refuse container to
accommodate their normal volume of solid waste.



   (B)   Bags used for dry trash (leaves, straw, grass and the like)
must be made of strong paper. No dry trash will be collected in plastic bags.
Owners may also elect to purchase from the City of Goose Creek and use a
95-gallon yard debris roll-cart.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.081  USE OF NON-STANDARD CONTAINERS.



   Only roll-cart containers provided by or purchased from the City of
Goose Creek will be collected. No other type of container is authorized for
household refuse or yard debris.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.082  SERVICE FOR OWNERS REQUIRING ADDITIONAL CONTAINERIZATION FOR
HOUSEHOLD REFUSE.



   Owners may obtain the use of an additional roll-cart refuse container
by making a request to the Department of Public Works and paying an
additional, one time, user fee.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.083  OWNERS, AGENTS AND TENANTS RESPONSIBILITY.



   The owner, agent or tenant shall be responsible for:



   (A)   The disposal of all solid waste that is not collected by the
city. These items must be disposed of in a manner which is consistent with
the laws, rules and regulations of the state and county;



   (B)   Placing all solid waste by the street or highway by 7:00 a.m.
on the designated collection days and placed in a manner that allows easy
access and does not create a safety hazard to road traffic or the general
public;



   (C)   The removal of all solid waste containers from the curb by
7:00 p.m. on the designated collection day;



   (D)   Any damages occurring from placing of or the removal of solid
waste that has been placed on top of or near any utility appurtenance,
drainage structure or other property (public or private);



   (E)   The separation of mixed waste;



   (F)   The placement of lids on containers to prevent spillage of
waste and littering the surrounding area;



   (G)   Paying the annual sanitation tax as required by City Council;



   (H)   Placing the roll-cart container away from cars and mailboxes,
with the handle toward the street;



   (I)   Not placing hot ashes, flammable liquids, construction debris,
dirt or rocks in roll-cart container;



   (J)   Not overloading roll-cart container;



   (K)   The owner, agent or tenant shall be responsible for reporting
stolen or missing roll-cart refuse containers to the Department of Public
Works. Missing or stolen household refuse roll-cart containers will be
replaced at no cost if the loss is determined to have occurred through no
fault of the owner, agent or tenant; and/or



   (L)   Actively engaging in the reduction of solid waste by promoting
and practicing recycling.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.084  REFUSAL OF SERVICE.



   The city reserves the right to refuse solid waste services to any
owner, agent or tenant who consistently violates this code.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.085  FREQUENCY OF SOLID WASTE COLLECTION.



   The city shall have complete authority to collect and dispose of the
city's solid waste at the times and intervals as is deemed necessary for the
health and welfare of its citizens as well as to provide efficient service.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.086  ASSESSMENT RATES FOR CITY RESIDENTS.



   (A)   Period; purpose. A sanitation tax to cover the period from
January 1 through December 31, both inclusive for the sums and in the manner
hereinafter mentioned, is and shall be levied, collected and paid into the
Treasury of the City of Goose Creek for the use and service thereof, i.e., a
tax as determined by City Council and is assessed on every single-family
occupied residential lot within the corporate limits of the City of Goose
Creek, to be paid into the City Treasury for the credit to the City of Goose
Creek, for the corporate purposes, permanent improvements and for the purpose
of paying current expenses of the municipality.



   (B)   Collection method. By mutual agreement between the City of
Goose Creek and Berkeley County, Berkeley County will bill and collect the
taxes enumerated herein, and pay the same to the Treasury of the City of
Goose Creek in the manner as agreed by both parties.



   (C)   Penalty dates; amounts. The billing dates, the penalty dates
and the amount of the penalty which shall be levied for delinquent taxes
shall be the same as those adopted by Berkeley County Council.



   (D)   Throwing waste from elevated places prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any owner, agent or tenant of property within the city to allow
any refuse, garbage, litter, dirty water, ashes, paper or other unclean or
unsanitary useless waste material to be thrown, poured, let fall or permit to
drop from any window, roof, porch, vehicle or other elevated place(s) except
for materials used during the construction of any structure having a building
permit.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 93.999



SEWAGE DISPOSAL



§ 93.100  OCCUPANCY OF PREMISES WITHOUT PROPER SYSTEM.



   No owner, agent or tenant of any dwelling shall allow the same to be
occupied unless proper sewage disposal is provided in accordance with this
code. If an owner, tenant or occupant fails to make payment of the bill for
use of the sanitary sewer system connected to the property, then proper
sewage disposal is not available and further occupancy constitutes unlawful
use of the structure. In addition, the city may terminate water service to
the property until proper payment is made for use of the sanitary sewer
system.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.101  BUILDING CONTRACTS TO PROVIDE FOR SEWAGE DISPOSAL.



   All building contracts for the erection of structures anticipated for
human occupancy must provide for adequate and sanitary sewage disposal. If no
public sewage connection is available to a building, the contract must
provide for the construction of a septic tank in accordance with the
standards as prescribed by the United States Public Health Service and the
South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control. Applications
for permits from the city to erect the buildings must state-the proposed
method of sewage disposal.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.102  USE OF SEPTIC TANKS.



   Septic tanks approved by the South Carolina Department of Health and
Environmental Control and kept in good sanitary condition will be required
where sewer lines are not provided, but under no condition will septic tanks
be accepted where sewer connections are available.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.103  CONNECTION TO SEWER.



   (A)   When a sewer connection is made available to the property line
of a premise that has a septic tank, the owner of the premise shall remove or
fill the septic tank and connect to the sewer connection within 90 days after
the service is available. If the owner fails to connect to the available
sewer system and make proper payment for connection and use of the system,
then the city may terminate water service to the property in addition to
other remedies available to the city including the general penalty provided
by this code.



   (B)   The removal or filling of the septic tank shall be in
accordance with all applicable laws of the city, county or state.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



NUISANCES



§ 93.145  PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, contrive, cause,
continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance within the city.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)  Penalty, see§ 93.999



§ 93.146  ENUMERATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.



   Public nuisances affecting public health shall include, but not be
limited to the following acts, omissions, conditions or things:



   (A)   All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or
drink sold or offered for sale to the public;



   (B)   Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not buried or otherwise
disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death;



   (C)   Accumulation of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash,
rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal or any
material whatsoever in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects,
rats or other vermin may inhabit or breed;



   (D)   All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects
can breed and multiply,



   (E)   All excessive weeds and other rank growth or vegetation;



   (F)   The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes,
gases, fly ash or industrial dust within the city or within one mile there
from in such quantities as to endanger the health of persons or to threaten
or cause substantial damage to property;



   (G)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake,
canal or body of water by sewage, creamery, industrial wastes or other
substances; and



   (H)   Any use of property,  substances or things that injures or
endangers the health or safety of individuals or persons within the city.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.147  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC SAFETY.



   Public nuisances affecting public safety shall include, but not be
limited to the following:



   (A)   All signs and billboards, awnings and other similar structures
over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the
public, so situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety;



   (B)   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which
prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from
obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or
pedestrian crosswalk;



   (C)   All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk or
roadway less than eight feet above the surface of a public sidewalk or less
than 14.5 feet above the surface of a public roadway;



   (D)   All wires over streets, alleys, public grounds which are
strung less than 15 feet above the surface of street or ground;



   (E)   All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks
and all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by the
ordinances of the city or which although made in accordance with the
ordinances, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable length of time after
purpose thereof has been accomplished;



   (F)   All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused
basements freely accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk;



   (G)   All abandoned refrigerators or iceboxes from which the doors
and other covers have not been removed (see § 93.077) or which are not
equipped with a device for opening from the inside; and



   (H)   Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a
public street, alley or sidewalk, or of a public street, alley or sidewalk,
which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free
use of the streets or sidewalks.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



ABATEMENT



§ 93.160  NOTICE TO ABATE INVOLVING GREAT A1VD IMMEDIATE DANGER.



   (A)   If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that a violation of
Chapter 93 exists on private property and that there is great and immediate
danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall serve notice specifying the particulars of the
violation. Service may be on the owner of the property by any means including
email, facsimile, text message or telephone. If the owner cannot be found,
then the owner shall be served by posting the property with the notice.



   (B)   (1)   The notice shall direct the owner, occupant or person
causing, permitting or maintaining the violation of Chapter 93 to abate or
remove the violation within 24 hours.



      (2)   The notice shall state that unless the violation is so
abated, the city will cause it to be abated and will charge the costs to the
owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the violation
and that said costs will also be filed as a lien against the real property.



   (C)   Any person refusing or neglecting to abate the violation after
having been directed to do so shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.161  ABATEMENT BY THE CITY INVOLVING VIOLATIONS WITHOUT GREAT OR
IMMEDIATE DANGER.



   (A)   If the Code Enforcement Officer or other representative of the
city shall determine that there is any violation of Chapter 93 of this code
that does not involve great and immediate danger, but which warrants
abatement, then the Code Enforcement Officer shall serve notice specifying
the particular violations of Chapter 93. Service may be on the owner of the
property personally or by mail. Service shall be effective upon deposit of
the notice in the United States Mail, first class mail, postage prepaid. If
the owner cannot be found, notice may be posted on the property. The notice
may also be served on the occupant or other person causing, permitting or
maintaining the violation of Chapter 93.



   (B)   (1)   The notice shall direct the owner, occupant, or
person causing, permitting or maintaining the violation of Chapter 93 to
abate or remove the violation of Chapter 93 within 30 days.



      (2)   The notice shall state that unless the violation is so
abated, the city will cause it to be abated and will charge the costs to the
owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the violation
and that said costs will also be filed as a lien against the real property.



   (C)   Any person refusing or neglecting to abate a violation of
Chapter 93 after having been directed to do so shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor which shall be in addition to the daily misdemeanor available for
the Chapter 93 offense.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.162  PROCEDURE TO APPEAL ABATEMENT DECISION.



   (A)   For a notice of abatement involving a violation for a
violation of Chapter 93 involving great and immediate danger and notice
pursuant to § 93.160, the owner or other person with a valid legal interest
may appeal the notice by serving a notice of appeal on the City Administrator
within 24 hours of the posting of the property or service, whichever is
first. The City Administrator shall review the appeal and the materials
provided with the appeal and make a decision. Any appeal of the decision of
the City Administrator shall be made to the Circuit Court within ten days of
the decision of the City Administrator. However, an appeal of a violation to
Circuit Court shall not automatically stay the matter pending appeal and the
city may abate the violation. The burden shall be on the appellant to secure
an order from the Circuit Court restraining the city from undertaking
abatement activities.



   (B)   For a notice of abatement involving a violation of Chapter 93
not involving great and immediate danger and notice pursuant to § 93.161,
the owner or other person with a valid legal interest may appeal the notice
by servicing a notice of appeal on the City Administrator within 20 days of
the posting of the property or service, whichever is first. The City
Administrator shall review the appeal and the materials provided with the
appeal and make a decision. Any appeal of the decision of the City
Administrator shall be to Circuit Court within ten days. However, an appeal
of a violation to Circuit Court shall not automatically stay the matter
pending appeal and the city may abate the violation. The burden shall be on
the appellant to secure an order from the Circuit Court restraining the city
from undertaking abatement activities.



   (C)   There is no right of adjacent landowners or other citizens to
appeal a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer if the officer finds no
violation or refuses to issue a notice to abate.



   (D)   The city shall be under no legal obligation to act to issue a
notice to abate a violation of Chapter 93. Nor shall the city be required to
actually abate the violation after posting or serving notice. Nor shall the
city be required to complete the abatement within any specific time period.
If the city does elect to abate, any owner, occupant or mortgage holder shall
be jointly and severally liable for the costs of the abatement and such costs
may also be filed as a lien against the property.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS



§ 93.175  THROWING REFUSE AND THE LIKE ON CITY PROPERTY.



   Any person throwing, or leaving for more than six hours, any rags,
trash, garbage, paper or any other refuse matter in the streets, parks,
public squares or any other public places in the city shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.176  TATTOOING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to mark the body of another person
by tattooing or any other method of placing designs, letters, scrolls,
figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin with ink, colors
or pigments.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.177  HOURS OF OPERATION FOR COMMERCIAL REFUSE OR WASTE COLLECTOR
RESTRICTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any commercial refuse or waste collector to
operate during the hours 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. Violations shall be subject
to the general penalty clause of this code, and such shall constitute cause
to initiate revocation of a business license.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



JUNK; JUNKYARDS



§ 93.190  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTOMOBILE BODY. Any motor vehicle from which major parts have been
removed so as to render the motor vehicle inoperable and incapable of passing
inspection as required by the state; or, a wrecked motor vehicle where the
damage to the motor vehicle has rendered the motor vehicle inoperable,
incapable of being made operable or incapable of passing inspection as
required by the state.



   AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD. Any establishment which is maintained or used for
buying or selling automobile bodies, wrecked, scrapped, ruined or dismantled
motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts.



   IMPOUND LOT. An area incident to the operation of a business within a
commercial district of the city, used for the storage of motor vehicles from
which major parts have not been removed, and which are capable of being made
fully operable and used for the storage of not more than nine vehicles at any
time.



   JUNK. Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash,
rubber, debris, waste, junked, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, or parts
thereof, iron, steel and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous materials.



   JUNKYARD. An establishment which is maintained or used for storing,
buying or selling junk, or an automobile graveyard, and the term shall
include garbage dumps, sanitary landfills and scrap processors.



   SCRAP PROCESSOR. Any person engaged in the business of buying scrap
iron and metals, including, but not limited to, old automobiles, for the
specific purpose of processing into raw material for re-melting purposes, and
whose product is ferrous and nonferrous scrap for shipment to steel mills,
foundries, smelters and refineries, and having facilities and machinery
designed for the processing.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.191  ABANDONMENT OF REFRIGERATORS; REMOVAL OF DOOR OR LOCK REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or allow to remain in any
place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox,
refrigerator or other container, device or equipment which has an airtight
door or lid, snap lock or other locking device which may not be released from
the inside, without first removing the door from the icebox, refrigerator,
device, equipment or container.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 93.999



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 16 3-1010.



§ 93.192  JUNK IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   No person shall accumulate, place or deposit any junk, automobile
bodies or automobile parts in a residential district of the city other than
within an enclosed building (garage, storage building and the like) or an
enclosed fence at least six feet tall which ensures that the materials cannot
be seen from adjacent properties. Any storage of such items determined by the
city to be excessive, unsafe or unhealthy, shall be eliminated.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 93.999.



§ 93.193  JUNK IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.



   No person shall accumulate, place or deposit any junk, automobile
bodies or automobile parts on any property in a commercial district of the
city, except as provided below:



   (A)   Within an enclosed building (garage, storage building and the
like) or an enclosed fence at least six feet tall, which ensures that the
materials cannot be seen from adjacent properties;



   (B)   At an automobile/motor vehicle body repair business, properly
licensed by the city, which has wrecked vehicles on the premises, actively
engaged in repairing the vehicles, where the vehicles are on the premises no
longer than 30 days; wrecked vehicles shall not be maintained on the property
for the purpose of using parts or accessories for any purpose; and/or



   (C)   Within an approved impound lot as provided in this subchapter.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.194  IMPOUND LOTS.



   Impound lots, incident to the operation of a business, may be
established within a commercial district of the city for the storage of motor
vehicles under the following conditions and requirements:



   (A)   The area used for an impound lot must be free of debris and
regularly maintained;



   (B)   The area used for an impound lot must be completely enclosed
by a fence at least six feet tall; if the impound lot adjoins a residential
district, that section of fence adjoining the residential district shall be
screened with materials designated by the city to ensure that the interior of
the impound lot cannot be seen from the residential district;



   (C)   An impound lot may be used for the temporary storage of motor
vehicles from which major parts have not been removed and which are capable
of being made fully operable and passing inspection as required by the state;



   (D)   An impound lot may be used for the storage of not more than
nine automobile bodies, as defined herein, at any one time;



   (E)   Motor vehicle parts shall not be stored within an impound lot;



   (F)   Motor vehicle parts shall not be taken or sold from motor
vehicles stored within an impound lot; and



   (G)   Motor vehicles stored in an impound lot shall be neatly parked
in rows.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 93.999



§ 93.195  ENFORCEMENT.



   The city, or its representative, shall enforce this subchapter and
shall take necessary actions to ensure that junk, automobile bodies or
automobile parts shall comply with this subchapter or be removed from the
property. Should it become necessary, the city will remove the junk,
automobile bodies or automobile parts from the property and the cost for the
removal shall become the responsibility of the property owner; if the cost
for removal shall go unpaid, the same shall become a lien upon the property
and collected in the manner prescribed for the collection of delinquent
taxes. The property owner shall also be liable for prosecution under.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 93.999  PENALTY.



   Any person who is convicted of violating any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in §
10.99, as amended of the city's Code of Ordinances unless otherwise
specified. All persons shall be required to correct or remedy any violation
or defects within a reasonable time when not specified. Each day that the
protested conditions are maintained shall constitute an additional offense.
The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions by court order.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



CHAPTER 94:  SMOKING



Section



   94.01   Findings and determinations



   94.02   Definitions



   94.03   Application to city-owned facilities and vehicles



   94.04   Prohibition of smoking in enclosed public places



   94.05   Prohibition of smoking in places of employment



   94.06   Prohibition of smoking in certain outdoor areas



   94.07   Reasonable distance of entry and outdoor area



   94.08   Where smoking not regulated



   94.09   Declaration of establishment as nonsmoking



   94.10   Posting of signs



   94.11   Non-retaliation; non-waiver of rights



   94.12   Public education



   94.13   Governmental agency cooperation



   94.14   Other applicable laws



   94.15   Interpretation for intent



   94.16   Enforcement



 



   94.99   Penalty



§ 94.01  FINDINGS AND DETERMINATIONS.



   The City Council of the City of Goose Creek, South Carolina, hereby
finds and determines:



   (A)   The City of Goose Creek, South Carolina (the “city”), is
an incorporated municipality located in Berkeley County, South Carolina, and
as such possesses all powers granted to municipalities by the Constitution
and the laws of the State of South Carolina, including the powers enumerated
in S.C. Code § 5-7-30 (2005 Supp) relating to regulating streets, markets,
and public health.



   (B)   Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major
contributor to indoor air pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke
(also known as environmental tobacco smoke) is a cause of disease in healthy
nonsmokers, including heart disease, stroke, respiratory disease, and lung
cancer. The National Cancer Institute has determined that smoke is
responsible for the early deaths of up to 65,000 Americans annually.
(National Cancer Institute (NCI), “Health effects of exposure to
environmental tobacco smoke: the report of the California Environmental
Protection Agency. Smoking and Tobacco Control Monograph 10,” Bethesda, MD:
National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute (NCI), August
1999.). The Surgeon General has declared that:



      (1)   Secondhand smoke causes disease and premature death in
nonsmokers exposed to smoke;



      (2)   Children exposed to secondhand smoke have an increased
risk for sudden death syndrome, acute respiratory infections, ear problems,
and more severe asthma;



      (3)   Adults exposed to secondary smoke have a higher risk of
coronary heart disease and lung cancer;



      (4)   There is no safe level of exposure to secondhand smoke;
and



      (5)   Separating smoking and nonsmoking sections of indoor
areas does not sufficiently remove the threats of secondhand smoke in
enclosed areas.



   (C)   A significant amount of secondhand smoke exposure occurs in
the workplace. Employees who work in smoke-filled businesses suffer a 25% to
50% higher risk of heart attack and higher rates of death from cardiovascular
disease and cancer, as well as increased acute respiratory disease and
measurable decrease. In lung function (Pitsavos C; Panagiotakos D.B.
Chrysohoou, C; Skoumas J.; Tziournis K.; Stefanadis C; Toutouzas P.,
“Association between exposure to environmental tobacco smoke and the
development of acute coronary syndromes: the CARDI02000 case-control
study,” Tobacco Control 11(3): 220-225, September 2002.)



   (D)   Smoke-filled workplaces result in higher worker absenteeism
due to respiratory disease, lower productivity higher cleaning and
maintenance costs, increased health insurance rates, and increased liability
claims for diseases related to exposure to secondhand smoke (“The high
price of cigarette smoking," Business & Health 15(8), Supplement A: 6-9,
August 1997.)



   (E)   Certain outdoor events, such as parades, festivals, and other
public gatherings, result in nonsmokers finding themselves in close proximity
to persons who are smoking which can be reasonably seen to have the same
effects of exposure as when nonsmokers are exposed to smoke in the same
enclosed space. Lighted cigarettes, cigars, and pipes of people standing or
sitting in close proximity have the potential of burning those with whom they
inadvertently come into direct contact and making the air quality and
peaceful enjoyment of outdoor events unreasonably restricted for nonsmokers.



   (F)   When there is a presence of secondhand smoke in enclosed
spaces or in outside areas where there is a public gathering resulting in
people being in close proximity in places that are otherwise open to the
public at large inevitably results in persons who do not smoke being forced
to bear unwarranted health risks and inappropriate deprivation of peaceful
enjoyment of the premises to which they have been invited or permitted to
enter, even when steps have been taken to separate “smoking” and
“nonsmoking” areas within the confined space.



   (G)   The city recognizes that smoke creates a danger to the health
and safety of the public at large and that, in order to protect the health
and welfare of the public, it is necessary to restrict smoking in the manner
provided for in this article (the “article”).



(Ord. 13-001, passed 1-8-2013)



§ 94.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the context shall clearly indicate some other meaning, the terms
defined in this section shall, for all purposes of this article and other
documents herein referenced, have the meanings herein specified. Definitions
shall be equally applicable to both the singular and plural forms of any of
the terms herein defined



   BAR.  An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic
beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving
of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including
but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets.



   BUSINESS.  A sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture,
corporation or other business entity, either for-profit or not-for-profit,
including retail establishments where goods or services are offered for sale;
professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental,
engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered; and
private clubs.



   EMPLOYEE.  A person who is employed by an employer in consideration
for direct or indirect monetary wages, commission goods or services in kind
or like compensation, and it shall also mean a person who volunteers his or
her services for a non-profit entity.



   EMPLOYER.  A person, business, partnership, association, corporation,
including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity that employs
the services of one or more individual persons.



   ENCLOSED AREA.  All space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed
on all sides by walls or windows (exclusive of doorways), which extend from
the floor to the ceiling, including stationary structures and mobile public
conveyances; parking structures and other facilities having only partial
exterior walls but otherwise enclosed by ceilings and floors shall also be
included in this definition.



   HEALTH CARE FACILITY.  An office or institution providing care or
treatment of persons having diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional,
or other medical physiological, or psychological conditions, including but
not limited to, hospitals rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics,
including weight control clinics nursing homes (except as otherwise permitted
herein), homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of
surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all
specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all
waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within
health care facilities.



   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT.  An area under the control of a public or private
employer that employees normally frequent during the course of employment,
including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, restrooms,
conference rooms, meeting rooms classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways,
and vehicles. A private residence is not a PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT for purposes
of this article unless it is used as a childcare, adult day care, or health
care facility. Nor is a private passenger motor vehicle a PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT
when used in the performance of employment responsibilities, provided it is
not being used as public conveyance.



   PRIVATE CLUB.  An organization, whether incorporated or not, which is
the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used
exclusively for club purposes, or for purposes of benefiting particular club
members and their guests, which is operated solely for a recreational,
fraternal, social patriotic political benevolent, or athletic purpose, but
not for pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcoholic beverages incidental
to its operation.  The affairs and management of the organization are
conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body
chosen by the members at an annual meeting.  The organization has
established bylaws and/or a constitution to govern its activities.  The
organization has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income
tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. Section 501.  Establishments which are in fact
operating as bars, restaurants, or entertainment venues primarily for the
pecuniary benefit of the owner, or chief operating officer, or other person
having substantial control shall not be treated as private clubs under this
article.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  An area to which the public is invited or to which the
public is permitted to have access, including but not limited to banks, bars,
educational facilities, health care facilities, hotel and motel lobbies,
laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants
retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service
establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, theaters, waiting rooms,
sports arena, stadiums and ball parks.  A private club is a PUBLIC PLACE
when being used for a function to which the general public is allowed entry.
A private residence is not a PUBLIC PLACE unless it is used as a childcare,
adult day care, or health care facility.



   RESTAURANT.  An eating establishment, including but not limited to
coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, ice cream parlors, and private and
public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public,
guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which
food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term RESTAURANT
shall include a bar area within the restaurant.



   RETAIL TOBACCO STORE.  A retail store utilized primarily for the sale
of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products
is merely incidental.  The term specifically includes cigar bars, which are
establishments licensed for the on-premises sale of beer, wine, and alcoholic
beverages as well as some food service, but the term does not include any
establishment which is primarily a bar or restaurant and which undertakes to
make retail offerings of tobacco products as a means of circumventing the
purposes of this article.



   SERVICE LINE.  An indoor line in which one or more persons are waiting
for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the
exchange of money.



   SHOPPING MALL.  An enclosed public plaza, promenade, walkway, or hall
area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments.



   SMOKING.  Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigar,
cigarette, pipe, or other lighted tobacco product in any manner or in any
form.



   SPORTS ARENA.  Sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas,
boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, and
other similar places where members of the general public assemble to engage
in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports
or other events.



(Ord. 13-001, passed 1-8-2013)



§ 94.03  APPLICATION TO CITY-OWNED FACILITIES AND VEHICLES.



   All enclosed facilities, buildings and vehicles owned, leased or
operated by the city shall be subject to the provisions of this article,
excluding golf carts.



(Ord. 13-001, passed 1-8-2013)



§ 94.04  PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN ENCLOSED PUBLIC PLACES.



   Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the
city, including but not limited to, the following places:



   (A)   Galleries, libraries, and museums.



   (B)   Areas available to and customarily used by the general public
in businesses and nonprofit entitles patronized by the public, including but
not limited to, professional offices, banks, laundromats, hotels, and motels.



   (C)   Bars.



   (D)   Bingo facilities.



   (E)   Convention facilities, conference centers, and exhibition
halls.



   (F)   Educational facilities, both public and private.



   (G)   Elevators.



   (H)   Health care facilities.



   (I)   Hotel and motel lobbies.



   (J)   Licensed childcare and adult day care facilities.



   (K)   Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment
buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes,
and other multiple-unit residential facilities.



   (L)   Polling places.



   (M)   Private clubs when being used for a function to which the
general public is invited.



   (N)   Public transportation facilities, including buses and
taxicabs, and ticket boarding, and waiting areas of public transit depots.



   (O)   Restaurants.



   (P)   Restrooms, lobbies reception areas, hallways and other
common-use areas.



   (Q)   Retail stores.



   (R)   Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly
including school buildings.



   (S)   Service lines.



   (T)   Shopping malls.



   (U)   Sports arenas.



   (V)   Theaters, performance hails, lecture halls, and Similar
facilities, inclusive of lobbies, audience seating areas, dressing rooms,
projections booths, back stage areas, and the stage, but excluding smoking on
stage when it is an integral part of a theatrical performance.



(Ord. 13-001, passed 1-8-2013)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.05  PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT.



   (A)   Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas within
places of employment without exception, including but not limited to common
work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private
offices, elevators, hallways, .medical facilities, cafeterias, employee
lounges, stairs, restrooms, vehicles used for the conveyance of the public,
but not including vehicles used in performing employment responsibilities
when the sole occupants and users are person who smoke.



   (B)   This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated by employers
to all existing employees by the effective date of this article and to all
prospective employees upon their application for employment.



(Ord. 13-001, passed 1-8-2-13)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.06  PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN CERTAIN OUTDOOR AREAS.



   Smoking shall also be prohibited in certain outdoor areas when the use
involves a gathering of the public, regardless of the number actually
assembled for the event, performance, or competition. This prohibition shall
apply to:



   (A)   Amphitheaters.



   (B)   Ball parks and stadiums when in use for athletic competitions
or public performances.



   (C)   Parades and special events on public streets and city
property, although the City Administrator has the discretion, but not the
obligation, to establish designated smoking areas in or in proximity to the
parade or event area.



   (D)   Dining areas in encroachment areas on public sidewalks, plazas
and parks.



(Ord. 13-001, passed 1-8-2013)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.07  REASONABLE DISTANCE OF ENTRY AND OUTDOOR AREA.



   Smoking is prohibited within a distance of ten feet from any entry into
an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited, so as to insure that tobacco
smoke does not enter the area through entrances, windows, ventilation
systems, or other means. Smoking is also prohibited within ten feet of the
boundary of the outdoor areas where smoking is prohibited.  Persons who have
begun smoking prior to approaching the ten-foot distance may continue doing
so provided they do not stop, stand, sit, or linger within the ten-foot
distance.



(Ord. 13-001, passed 1-8-2013)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.08  WHERE SMOKING NOT REGULATED.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary the
following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of §§ 94.04 through
94.06 of this article:



   (A)   Private residences except when used as a licensed childcare,
adult day care, or health care facility.



   (B)   Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are
designated as smoking rooms, provided, however, that not more than 20% of
rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated all smoking
rooms on the same floor must he contiguous and smoke from these rooms must
not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of
this article. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed
except to add additional nonsmoking rooms.



   (C)   Retail tobacco stores, provided that smoke from these places
does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the
provisions of this article.



   (D)   Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long-term
care facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are
smokers and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is
permitted; provided that smoke from these places does not infiltrate into
areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article.



   (E)   Private clubs that have no employees, except when being used
for a function to which the general public is admitted.



   (F)   Outdoor areas of places of employment except those covered by
the provisions of §§ 94.06 and 94.07 of this article.



(Ord. 13-001, passed 1-8-2013)



§ 94.09  DECLARATION OF ESTABLISHMENT AS NONSMOKING.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an owner,
operator, manager or other person in control of an establishment, facility,
or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor
area as a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which
a sign conforming to the requirements of § 94.10(A) is posted.



(Ord. 13-001, passed 1-8-2013)



§ 94.10  POSTING OF SIGNS.



   (A)   “No Smoking” signs or the international “No Smoking”
symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette
enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it shall be clearly and
conspicuously posted in every public place and place of employment where
smoking is prohibited by this article, by the owner, operator, manager or
other person in control of that place.



   (B)   Every public place and place of employment where smoking is
prohibited by this article shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous
sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited.



   (C)   All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is
prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager or other person
having control of the area.



(Ord. 13-001, passed 1-8-2013)



§ 94.11  NON-RETALIATION; NON-WAIVER OF RIGHTS.



   (A)   No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in
any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment, or
customer because that employee, applicant, or customer exercises any rights
afforded by this article or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of
this article.



   (B)   An employee who works in a setting where an employer allows
smoking does not waive or otherwise surrender any legal rights the employee
may have against the employer or any other party.



(Ord. 13-001, passed 1-8-2013)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.12  PUBLIC EDUCATION.



   The city shall engage in a continuing program to explain and clarify
the purposes and requirements of this article to citizens affected by it and
to guide owners/operators and managers in their compliance



with it. The program may include publication of a brochure for affected
businesses and individuals explaining the provisions of this article.



(Ord. 13-001, passed 1-8-2013)



§ 94.13  GOVERNMENTAL AGENCY COOPERATION.



   The city shall annually request other governmental and educational
agencies having facilities within the city to establish local operating
procedures in cooperation and compliance with this article. This includes
urging all federal, state, county, city and school district agencies to
update their existing smoking control regulations to be consistent with the
current health findings regarding secondhand smoke.



(Ord. 13-001, passed 1-8-2013)



§ 94.14  OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS.



   This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking
where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.



(Ord. 13-001, passed 1-8-2013)



§ 94.15  INTERPRETATION FOR INTENT.



   It is the intent of city council to prohibit smoking whenever the
private choice of smoking intrudes or has the capacity to intrude upon the
right of persons concerned about protecting their own rights to be free from
the hazards and inconvenience of secondhand smoke in places where they work,
stand, sit, walk, dine, drink, read, study or engage in entertainment and
recreation. All provisions shall be construed to achieve these purposes.



(Ord. 13-001, passed 1-8-2013)



§ 94.16  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   This article shall be enforced by the Office of the City
Administrator or an authorized designee.



   (B)   Notice of the provisions of this article shall be given to all
applicants for a business license in the city.



   (C)   Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this
article may initiate enforcement with the Office of the City Administrator.



   (D)   The building codes division, Fire Department, or their
designees shall, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated
inspections, inspect for compliance with this article.



   (E)   An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment
regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of the
appropriate provisions thereof.



   (F)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an
employee or member of the public may bring legal action against a person,
business, or organization in violation of this article to enforce this
article.



   (G)   In addition to the remedies provided by the provisions of this
section, the city or any person aggrieved by the failure of the owner
operator, manager or other person in control of a public place or a place of
employment to comply with the provisions of this article may apply for
injunctive relief to enforce those provisions in any court of competent
jurisdiction.



(Ord. 13-001,passed 1-8-2013)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by
the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction punishable by
a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $25.



   (B)   A person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a
public place or place of employment and who fails to comply with the
provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction punishable by a
fine of not less than $10 nor more than $25.



   (C)   In addition to the fines established by this section repeated
violations of this article by a person who owns, manages, operates, or
otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the
suspension or revocation of any occupancy permit or business license issued
to the person for the premises on which the violation occurred.



   (D)   Violation of this article is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance, which may be abated by the city by restraining order, preliminary
and permanent injunction or other means provided for by law, and the city may
take action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement.



   (E)   Each day of a continuing violation of this article shall be
considered a separate and distinct offense.



(Ord. 13-001, passed 1-8-2013)



CHAPTER 95: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



Section




Administration




   95.001   General



   95.002   Applicability



   95.003   Code enforcement



   95.004   Duties and powers



   95.005   Approval



   95.006   Violations



   95.007   Notices and orders



   95.008   Means of appeal




Definitions




   95.020   General



   95.021   Definitions




General Requirements




   95.035   General



   95.036   Exterior property areas



   95.037   Prohibited vehicles



   95.038   Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs



   95.039   Exterior structure



   95.040   Unsafe structures



   95.041   Emergency measures



   95.042   Demolition



   95.043   Extermination



ADMINISTRATION



§ 95.001  GENERAL.



   (A)   Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property
Maintenance Code of the City of Goose Creek, South Carolina, herein referred
to as “this Code.”



   (B)   Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to all existing
residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises and
constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures,
equipment and facilities for sanitation, protection from the elements, safety
from hazards, safe and sanitary maintenance, the responsibility of owners,
parties of interest, operators and occupants, the occupancy of existing
structures and premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties.



   (C)   Purposes. This code shall be construed to secure its expressed
purposes, which is to insure public health, safety and welfare in so far as
they are affected by the continued maintenance of structures and premises.
Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions
shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of compliance as
required herein.



   (D)   Severability. If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or
phrase of this code is, for any reason, declared invalid by a court of law,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
code.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 95.002  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   General. The provisions of this code shall apply to all
matters affecting or relating to structures and premises, as set forth in §
95.01. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this code specify
different requirements, the most restrictive shall apply.



   (B)   Maintenance. Except as specified herein, the owner, parties of
interest or the owners designated agent shall be responsible for the
maintenance of buildings, structures and premises.



   (C)   Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations
to a structure, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and
provisions, of the applicable and current building and zoning codes, enforced
by the City of Goose Creek.



   (D)   Existing remedies. The provisions in this code shall not be
construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction, or its
officers or agencies, relating to the removal or demolition of any structure
which is determined to be dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary.



   (E)   Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or
installations, which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of
this code, shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions and
applicable building and zoning codes.



   (F)   Historic buildings. The provisions of this code shall not be
mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated as historic
buildings when such buildings or structures are determined by the city to be
safe and not detrimental to public health or welfare.



   (G)   Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards
referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in § 95.55 and
considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of
each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code
and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.



   (H)   Requirements not covered by code. Requirements necessary for
the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure
or equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not
specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by the city.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 95.003  CODE ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   General. Code enforcement is hereby created and the executive
official in charge thereof is the Director of Public Works and shall
hereinafter be referred to as the code official.



   (B)   Appointment. It shall be the duty of the code official, or a
duly appointed and authorized representative(s), to determine whether any
condition exists or activity is being practiced which violates this code.



   (C)   Officers. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of the
city and, with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the code official
shall have the authority to appoint code enforcement officers, inspectors,
other related technical officers and other employees as deemed necessary.



   (D)   Liability. The code official, officer or employee charged with
the enforcement of this code, while acting for the city, shall not thereby be
rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal
liability for any damage occurring to persons or property as a result of an
act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties as provided in
the South Carolina Tort Claims Act.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 95.004  DUTIES AND POWERS.



   (A)   General. The city or its representative shall enforce this
code and shall take necessary actions to ensure that violations are
prosecuted in accordance with this code. Should it become necessary, the city
may remove such violation from the property and the cost for such removal
shall become the responsibility of the owner/parties of interest. If such
cost for removal shall go unpaid, the same shall become a lien upon the
property and shall be collected in the manner prescribed for the collection
of delinquent taxes. Responsible parties of interest shall also be liable for
prosecution pursuant to this code.



   (B)   Rule-making authority. The code official shall have authority,
as necessary in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare, to
adopt and promulgate departmental rules and procedures, to interpret and
implement the provisions of this code, to secure the intent thereof, and to
designate requirements applicable because of local climate or other
conditions.



   (C)   Inspections. The cause for inspections shall be formed either
by citizen complaints or city staff observations.



   (D)   Right of entry. The city, or its representative, shall have
the right-to-enter onto any premise at any reasonable time for the purpose of
making an inspection or investigation as required by this code, subject to
the constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If
entry is refused, the city is authorized to pursue a search warrant as
provided by law.



   (E)   Identification. City representatives shall carry proper
identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of
duties under this code.



   (F)   Notices and orders. All notices and orders necessary to ensure
compliance with this code shall be issued in accordance with this code and
the city's prescribed procedures and policies.



   (G)   Records. All official records of all business and activities
pertaining to this code shall be maintained in accordance with the city's
prescribed procedures and policies.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 95.005  APPROVAL.



   Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in
carrying out the provisions of this code, the city shall have the authority
to grant modifications for individual cases, provided the city shall first
find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code
impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose
of this code and that such modification does not lessen the requirements of
this code. The details of actions granting modifications shall be recorded
and entered in the code case files.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 95.006  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any owner/party of
interest to be in violation of any of the provisions of this code.



   (B)   Notice of violation. Notice of violations or orders shall be
served in accordance with § 95.016 of this Code.



   (C)   Prosecution of violation. Any owner/party of interest failing
to comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance with §
95.07 of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or civil
infraction as determined by the city and the violation shall be deemed a
strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with,
the city may institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate such violation. Any action taken by the authority
having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate
upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.



   (D)   Violation penalties. Any owner/party of interest, who shall
violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of
the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by
state or local laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served may be deemed a separate offense.



   (E)   Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the city from instituting appropriate action to
restrain, correct or abate a violation or to stop an illegal act.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 95.007  NOTICES AND ORDERS.



   (A)   Notice to person responsible. Whenever the city determines
that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe a
violation has occurred, notice may be given in the manner prescribed in
divisions (A)(1) and (2) below and in accordance with policies and procedures
prescribed in the City of Goose Creek Code Enforcement Standard Operating
Procedures, to the owner/parties of interest responsible for the violation as
specified in this code. Notices for condemnation shall also comply with this
section of the code.



      (1)   Form. Such notice prescribed in this of this code shall
be in accordance with the following:



         (a)   Be in writing or verbally;



         (b)   Include a description of the real estate
sufficient for identification;



         (c)   Include a statement of the violation or violations
and why the notice is being issued; and



         (d)   Include a correction order allowing a designated
time period to make the repair and improvements required to bring the
property into compliance with the provisions of this code.



      (2)   Method of delivery. Such notice shall be deemed to be
properly delivered if one or more of the following methods is used:



         (a)   Delivered personally;



         (b)   Posted in a conspicuous place in or about the
property or structure affected by such notice; and



         (c)   Sent by certified or regular mail addressed to the
owners/parties of interest last known address of record.



   (B)   Penalties. Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices
shall be as set forth in § 95.06(D).



   (C)   Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the
owner/parties of interest of any dwelling unit or structure who has received
a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to
sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling, unit
or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or
notice of violation have been complied with or until such owner/parties of
interest shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a
true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the city
and shall furnish the code official a signed and notarized statement from the
grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee acknowledging the receipt of such
compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the
responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs
required by such compliance order or notice of violation.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 95.008  MEANS OF APPEAL.



   General. There shall be no appeals to this code except those provided
by the courts.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



DEFINITIONS



§ 95.020  GENERAL.



   (A)   Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms
shall, for the purposes of this code, have the following meanings.



   (B)   Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include
the future, words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and
neuter, the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.



   (C)   Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in
this code and are defined in the International Building Code, International
Fire Code, International Zoning Code, International Plumbing Code,
international Mechanical Code or the International Electrical Code, such
terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes.



   (D)   Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the
methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted
meanings such as the context implies.



   (E)   Parts. Whenever the words “dwelling unit,” “dwelling,”
“premises,” “rooming house,” “rooming unit,” “housekeeping
unit” or “story” are stated in this code, they shall be construed as
though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 95.021  DEFINITIONS.



   The following terms and definitions shall be defined as written unless
context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED. To give up control of, or to cease from intending or
attempting to protect, maintain or use any vehicle, property, premise or
structure.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE/PROPERTY. Any derelict or wrecked property/vehicle
which has been left abandoned or unprotected from the elements and shall
include inoperative or partially dismantled vehicles, trailers, boats,
machinery, appliances, furniture, construction materials and other similar
articles used in or in conjunction with the home, property or vehicle.



   ANIMAL WASTE. Animal excreta, including cleanings from barns, stables,
corrals, all pens, or conveyances used for stabling, transporting, or penning
of animals, fowl or reptiles.



   APPROVED. Approved by the City of Goose Creek.



   ASHES. Any residue, hot or cold, that occurs and remains due to burning
or other similar manner of combustion.



   AUTOMOBLE GRAVEYARD. Any establishment which is maintained or used for
buying or selling vehicle bodies, wrecked, scraped, ruined, or dismantled
vehicles or motor vehicle parts.



   BLIGHT. Any one or more of the following conditions or activities:



      (1)   Abandoned building or structure;



      (2)   Attractive nuisance, as in any property in an unsecured
state so as to potentially constitute an attraction to children, vagrants,
criminals or other unauthorized persons or so as to enable persons to resort
thereto to committing an unlawful act;



      (3)   A building or structure that is in a state of disrepair
to the extent so as to pose a threat to public health, safety or welfare; and



      (4)   Property inadequately maintained to the extent so as to
pose a threat to public health, safety or welfare.



   BRUSH. All trees and plant material which is growing or has grown on
any premise.



   CODE OFFICIAL. The official who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative.



   CONDEMN. To judge unfit for human occupancy or unsafe as to the extent
as to pose a threat to public health and safety.



   CONTRACTOR. Any individual(s) who provides a service and receives
payment of any kind for said services rendered.



   CITY. City of Goose Creek, South Carolina.



   CITY COUNCIL. The duly elected officials of the City of Goose Creek,
South Carolina.



   COUNTY. Berkeley County, South Carolina.



   DETERIORATION. The condition of a building, vehicle, public or private
property or part thereof characterized by excessive holes, breaks, rotting,
crumbling, peeling, rusting, neglect, lack of maintenance or other evidence
of physical decay or excessive use.



   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.



   EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or
future use by a person or agency other than the legal owner(s) of the
property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above a
said lot or lots.



   EMINENT DANGER. A condition which could cause serious or life
threatening injury or death at any time.



   END OF WORK WEEK. Friday at 5:00 p.m.



   EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW. Any premises or any part thereof, or any
building or vehicle or any part thereof, which may be viewed from a natural
position, including any lawful elevated location on either public or private
property, using unassisted vision.



   EXTERIOR PROPERTY. The open space on the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of the owners or operators of such premises.



   EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents, vermin
or other pests by eliminating their harborage places by removing or making
inaccessible materials that serve as their food, by poison spraying,
fumigating, and trapping or by any other legal pest elimination methods.



   FEDERAL GOVERNMENT. The government of the United States of America.



   GARBAGE. Any organic waste matter, both animal and vegetable, resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food items. Also,
cans, bottles, rags, boxes, and other comparable items and waste.



   HIGHWAY. A way or place of whatever nature publicly or privately
maintained and opened to use of the public or private sector for vehicular
travel. Highway includes streets, roads, boulevards, courts, circles, alleys,
ways and the like.



   IMPOUND LOT. An area incident to the operation of a business within the
city, used for the storage of vehicles from which no major parts have been
removed, and which are capable of being made fully operational and used for
storage of not more than nine vehicles at any time.



   INFESTATION. The excessive or abnormal presence of insects, rodents,
vermin or other pests.



   INOPERATIVE. Any vehicle or equipment located upon a public highway,
street or street right-of-way, alley or on public or private property which
is wrecked, dismantled or inoperative so that said vehicle or equipment is
incapable of independent operation.



   INOPERATIVE MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the
public streets as it was intended and designed to do for reason including but
not limited to being unlicensed, wrecked, in a state of disrepair or
incapable of being moved under its own power.



   LITTER. Any unhealthy or unsanitary accumulation or placement of
refuse, rubbish, garbage, grass, bushes, weeds, vines, leaves, etc. on
private or public property.



   NATURAL POSITION. Standing or sitting in a manner not requiring the
assistance of additional apparatus, such as a ladder, to facilitate the
viewing of an area or object.



   OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is
utilized or occupied.



   OCCUPANT. Any individual(s) living or sleeping in a building, or having
possession of a space within a building.



   OPERATOR. Any person(s) who has charge, care or control of a structure,
dwelling, premises or vehicle or any part thereof, whether with or without
the knowledge and consent of the owner, including, if applicable, a lessee.



   OWNER. Any person(s), agent, operator, firm, mortgage holder, part
owner, tenant, corporation or any entity having a legal or equitable interest
in the property or recorded in the official records of the state, county or
municipality as holding title to the property or otherwise having control of
the property including the guardian of the estate of any such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.



   PARTIALLY DISMANTLED/WRECKED VEHICLE. Any vehicle from which major
parts have been removed so as to render the motor vehicle inoperative or a
wrecked vehicle where the damage to the vehicle has rendered the vehicle
inoperative.



   PARTIES OF INTEREST. Any person or entity who has interest of record in
a premise or property or any who are in actual possession thereof.



   PERSON. The word PERSON shall extend and be applied to individuals,
firms, partnerships, associations, organizations and bodies political and
corporate, or any combination thereof.



   PREMISES. The exterior of any building, structure or any parcel of land
(whether improved or unimproved) including the area up to the paved edge of
the road, street, curb or alley and including any adjacent sidewalks,
easements and right-of-way.



   PUBLIC PLACES. Any building, park, cemetery, school yard or open space
owned by the public and used for the general welfare of the public.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Lands and improvements owned by the Federal
government, the state, the county or the city, that include but are not
limited to vehicles, buildings, grounds, parks, playgrounds, streets,
sidewalks, parkways, easements, right-of-way and similar properties.



   PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.



   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR. The individual appointed by the City
Administrator to carry out the functions of the city's Public Works
Department.



   REFUSE. Any unhealthy or unsafe accumulation of rubbish, litter,
leaves, grass, bushes, vines, tree branches, garbage, waste, household items
and building materials, etc., on private or public property.



   REPAIR. The improvement, replacement or restoration, of an existing
premise or vehicle to its original state with similar materials or parts to
enhance its current value. The term REPAIR or REPAIRS shall not apply to any
alterations such as moving of walls, additions of rooms or similar changes of
construction.



   RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal
coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery and other similar materials.



   SCDHEC. South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control.



   SCRAP PROCESSORS. Any person(s) engaged in the business of buying scrap
iron and metals, including, but not limited to, vehicles, for the specific
purpose of processing into raw material for melting purposes, and whose
product is ferrous and non-ferrous scrap for shipment to steel mills,
foundries, smelters and refineries, and having facilities and machinery
designed for such processing.



   STATE. The State of South Carolina.



   STRICT LIABILITY OFFENCE. An offence in which the prosecution in a
legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as part of its
case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act that was
prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required
to do.



   STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed or any portion thereof



   TENANT. A person(s), corporation, partnership or group, whether or not
legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof.



   UNASSISTED VISION. Vision without the assistance of magnification
apparatus such as binoculars but not including prescription eyeglasses or
photographic equipment.



   VACANT. Not occupied or being used for its expressed intended purpose.



   VEHICLES. Any device by which a person(s) or property may be propelled,
moved or towed upon a highway, except a vehicle moved by human power or those
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



   VIEWABLE. That which can be viewed from public property, or private
property if proper permission is granted to do so, from a natural position,
including any lawful elevated position, with unassisted vision.



   WEEDS. All uncultivated vegetative growth.



   WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner, generally plumb, level,
square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.



   YARD. An open space on the same lot with a structure.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



GENERAL REQUIREMENTS



§ 95.035  GENERAL.



   (A)   Scope. The provisions of §§ 95.35 through 95.038 shall
govern the minimum conditions and the responsibilities of persons for
maintenance of structures and exterior property.



   (B)   Responsibility. The owner/parties of interest of the premises
shall maintain the structures and exterior property in compliance with these
requirements, except as otherwise provided for in this code.



   (C)   Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises
thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a safe, secure and sanitary
condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or
adversely affect the public health or safety.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 95.036  EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS.



   (A)   Sanitation. All exterior properties and premises shall be
maintained in a safe and sanitary condition.



   (B)   Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and
maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water thereon. This requirement does not apply to approved water
features, retention areas and reservoirs.



   (C)   Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs,
driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be maintained free from
hazardous conditions.



   (D)   Lawns. All lawns shall be maintained free from grasses, weeds
or other plant growth in excess of ten inches tall, that portion of which
equals at least 50% of the viewable ground cover thereon. Plant growth is
defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation. This term shall not
include cultivated flowers and gardens.



   (E)   Landscaping. The owner/parties of interest of property shall
be responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping existing or which
previously had been installed on any developed site within the city. All
landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy and growing condition.



   (F)   Trees/shrubs. All plant materials, especially trees and
shrubs, afflicted with decay, disease, insect infestation or otherwise
considered dangerous to other plant life or property, shall be removed or
appropriately treated. Dead or dying trees, shrubs and similar plant material
shall be removed. All cuttings shall be removed from the site and properly
disposed of. All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk or
roadway must provide a minimum of eight feet of vertical clearance above the
sidewalk and 15 feet of vertical clearance above the roadway.



   (G)   Grass cover required. The exterior open space or yard around
each structure shall be grassed and maintained or improved so as to provide
for grass, plantings or other suitable ground coverings, such as rock
gardens, to prevent soil erosion which may depreciate the value of or become
detrimental to structures, the lot or adjacent lots or structures.



   (H)   Rodent/reptile/insect infestation. All structures and exterior
property shall be kept free from rodent infestation. Where the excessive
and/or abnormal presence of rodents, reptiles or insects is found, they shall
be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to
human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to
prevent and eliminate pest harborage and infestation.



   (I)   Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including
detached garages, sheds, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally
sound and in good repair. Associated doors and gates, including operating
systems, if provided, shall be maintained in proper operating condition.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 95.037  PROHIBITED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Wrecked, dismantled, inoperative or unlicensed motor
vehicle(s) prohibited. No person except a duly licensed vehicle repair
establishment shall for any purpose keep, retain, store or place for more
than 14 days a vehicle(s) that has been declared by the city as wrecked,
dismantled, inoperative, unregistered or unlicensed on any private
residential or commercial property in the city except in a completely
enclosed building or fenced area (minimum height of six feet and constructed
of a material and in a manner so that the vehicle(s) cannot be seen from
adjacent properties) nor shall any person except a duly licensed vehicle
repair establishment, repair, rebuild, dismantle or tear down more than one
vehicle at any time except in a completely enclosed building or fenced area
(minimum height of six feet and constructed of a material and in a manner so
that the vehicle cannot be seen from adjacent properties). All repairs must
be completed within 30 days. No wrecked, dismantled, inoperative or
unlicensed vehicle(s) shall be maintained on private residential or
commercial property for the purpose of using parts or accessories except in a
completely enclosed building or fenced area (minimum height of six feet and
constructed of a material and in a manner so that the vehicle cannot be seen
from adjacent properties).



   (B)   Wrecked, dismantled, inoperative or unlicensed motor
vehicle(s) permitted. A duly licensed vehicle repair establishment may keep,
retain, store or place at any time more than one vehicle that has been
wrecked, dismantled or determined to be inoperative or unlicensed on the
premises provided the vehicles are actively being repaired and that the
vehicles do not remain on the premises for more than 30 days except in a
completely enclosed building or fenced area (minimum height of six feet and
constructed of a material and in a manner so that the vehicle(s) cannot be
seen from adjacent properties).



   (C)   Maximum number permitted. In all residential sections of the
city, no person shall keep more than three wrecked, dismantled, inoperative
or unlicensed vehicles; said vehicles shall be stored within a completely
enclosed building or fenced area (minimum height of six feet and constructed
of a material and in a manner) away from public view.



   (D)   Duty of owner/parties of interest. When any wrecked,
dismantled, inoperative or unlicensed vehicle, as defined in this section,
exists, the owner/parties of interest, as defined in this code, of the
property on which said vehicle is situated, shall be responsible for
removing, properly storing or having said vehicle otherwise brought into
compliance with the requirements of this code through private means and shall
indemnify the city of all cost associated with the same.



   (E)   Removal of wrecked, dismantled, inoperative or unlicensed
motor vehicle(s). Any vehicle that is deemed by the city as wrecked,
abandoned, dismantled, inoperative or unlicensed pursuant to this section
must be removed, properly stored or brought into compliance with the
requirements of this code as directed by appropriate notice pursuant to city
policies.



   (F)   Means of removal. Removal of said vehicle(s) shall be by the
property owner/parties of interest, as described in division (D), provided
proper notice is given pursuant to city policies.



   (G)   Impound lots. Any property within the city limits deemed by
the city as being used as an “impound lot,” as defined in this code, must
comply with the following conditions and requirements:



      (1)   The property must be free of debris and must be
regularly maintained in accordance with this code;



      (2)   The property must be completely enclosed by a fence
having a minimum height of six feet; if the property adjoins a residential
district, that section adjoining the residential district shall be completely
enclosed with a fence having a minimum height of six feet and constructed
with a material and in a manner, that ensures that the interior of the
property cannot be viewed from the residential district;



      (3)   The property may only be used for temporary storage of
vehicles which major parts have not been removed and which are capable of
being made fully operational;



      (4)   No more than nine vehicles, as defined herein, may be
stored on the property at any one time;



      (5)   Vehicle parts shall not be stored on the property;



      (6)   Vehicle parts shall not be taken or sold from vehicles
stored on such a property; and



      (7)   Vehicles stored on such a property must be parked neatly
in rows and meet or exceed all city, county, state and Federal laws governing
the same.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 95.038  SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS.



   Swimming pools. Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs shall be maintained
in a sanitary condition and in good repair and must meet enclosure
requirements of the city Zoning Codes.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 95.039  EXTERIOR STRUCTURE.



   (A)   General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in
good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to
public health, safety or welfare.



   (B)   Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but not
limited to doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies,
decks, fascia and fences, shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior
wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the
elements and decay by painting or other protective covering treatment.
Excessive peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces
repainted. All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the
building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights, shall be
maintained weather resistant and water tight. All metal surfaces subject to
rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be
stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust or corrosion. Excessive
oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed
for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement.



   (C)   Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained
free from excessive deterioration.



   (D)   Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained
plumb and free from excessive open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in
such a condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.



   (E)   Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from
excessive holes, breaks and loose or rotting materials and maintained
weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to prevent
deterioration and shall be kept in such a condition so as to prevent the
entry of rodents and other pests.



   (F)   Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound,
tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drains, gutters and
downspouts shall be maintained in safe and sound condition and free from
obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that affects
public health or safety.



   (G)   Decorative features. All cornices, belt cornices, corbels,
terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be
maintained in safe and sound condition with proper anchorage and in a safe
condition.



   (H)   Overhanging extensions. All overhanging extensions, including
but not limited to canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes,
standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in a safe and sound
condition and be properly anchored. When required, all exposed surfaces of
metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against excessive
decay or rust by application of weatherproofmg materials, such as paint or
similar surface treatment.



   (I)   Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior
stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto
shall be maintained in a safe and sound condition.



   (J)   Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke
stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained in a safe and sound
condition. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the
elements and against excessive decay or rust by application of
weatherproofing materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.



   (K)   Handrails and guards. Handrails and guards shall be maintained
in a safe and sound condition.



   (L)   Window, skylight and door frames. Every window, skylight, and
door frame shall be kept in a safe and sound condition and weather tight.



   (M)   Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from
excessive cracks and holes.



   (N)   Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall
be maintained in a safe and sound condition.



   (O)   Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be
maintained in a safe and sound condition and in a manner, that prevents the
entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage waters.



   (P)   Guards for basement windows. Every basement window shall be
maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage
waters.



   (Q)   Fences and retaining walls (sound condition, painted or
treated). All fences, retaining walls or similar structures shall be anchored
in such a way that such devices remain firmly in the ground, and shall be
constructed in a workmanlike manner so that such devices shall always be in a
safe and sound condition. All fences, retaining walls and similar structures
shall be erected parallel to property lines (if applicable), plumb, taunt,
and the top portions being level. The bottom portion of such devices shall
follow the contour of the ground. If any such fence, retaining wall or
similar structure is found not to be in a sound or safe condition, it shall
be removed, repaired or replaced.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 95.040  UNSAFE STRUCTURES.



   (A)   General. When a structure is determined by the city to be
unsafe or is determined unlawful, such structures may be condemned pursuant
to the provisions of this code.



   (B)   Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is
determined to be dangerous to life, health, property or safety of the public
or the occupants of the structure because such structure is so damaged,
decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or
unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible.



   (C)   Closing of vacant structures. If a structure is vacant and
determined unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and is not in danger of
structural collapse, the city is authorized to post a placard of condemnation
on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an
attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises
within the time specified in the order, the city may cause the premises to be
closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract or
arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against
the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon
such real estate and may be collected by any other legal source.



   (D)   Notice. Whenever the city has condemned a structure under the
provisions of this section, notice may be posted in a conspicuous place in or
about the structure affected by such notice and served on the owner/parties
of interest responsible for the structure in accordance with § 95.07(A)(2).
The notice shall be in the form prescribed in § 95.07(A)(1).



   (E)   Placarding. Upon failure of the owner/parties of interest
responsible to comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the
city may post on the premises a placard bearing the word “condemned” and
a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the premises or removing
the placard.



   (F)   Placard removal. The city may remove the condemnation placard
whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding
action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a
condemnation placard without the approval of the city shall be subject to the
penalties provided by this code.



   (G)   Prohibited occupancy. Any occupied structure, condemned and
placarded by the city shall be vacated as ordered by the city. Any person who
shall occupy a placarded premise and any owner/parties of interest
responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premise
shall be liable for the penalties provided by this code.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 95.041  EMERGENCY MEASURES.



   (A)   Eminent danger. When determined by the city, that there is
eminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which
endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and
life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is
actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the
proximity of any structure, the city is hereby authorized and empowered to
order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The city
may cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as
follows: “This structure is unsafe and its occupancy has been prohibited by
the City of Goose Creek.” It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such
structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the
required repairs, removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same.



   (B)   Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this
code, whenever the city determines there is eminent danger due to an unsafe
condition, the city may order the necessary work to be done, including the
boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or
not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted and, shall cause
such other action to be taken as the city deems necessary to meet such
emergency.



   (C)   Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the city
may temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having
jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to
unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized.



   (D)   Emergency repairs. For the purposes of § 95.41, the city may
employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as
expeditiously as possible.



   (E)   Cost of emergency repairs. Cost incurred in the performance of
emergency work shall be paid by the city but shall be a lien against the
property which may be filed against the property and pursued by all available
legal means. The legal counsel of the city may institute appropriate action
against the owner of the premises where the emergency work was performed for
the recovery of such costs including attorney's fees.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 95.042  DEMOLITION.



   (A)   General. The city may order the owner of any premises upon
which there is located any structure, which the city determines is so old,
dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous or unsafe and
such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove
such structure or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs,
to repair and make safe and sanitary or demolish and remove at the owners’
option or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any
structure for a period of more than two years, to demolish and remove such
structure;



   (B)   Notices and orders. All notices and orders shall comply with
§ 95.07;



   (C)   Failure to comply. If the owner/parties of interest of a
premise fails to comply with demolition order within the time prescribed, the
city may cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an
available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons,
and the cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real
estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real
estate which may be filed against the property. The legal counsel of the city
may institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the
work was performed for the recovery of such costs including attorney's fees.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 95.043  EXTERMINATION.



   (A)   Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from rodent and
insect infestation. All structures in which an excessive or abnormal presence
of rodents or insects is found shall be promptly exterminated by approved
procedures that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination,
proper precautions shall be taken to prevent future infestation issues.



   (B)   Owner. The owner/parties of interest of any infested structure
shall be responsible for extermination within the structure prior to the
structure being occupied.



   (C)   Single occupant. The owner/parties of interest of a one-family
dwelling or of a single-tenant non-residential structure shall be responsible
for extermination of the premises.



   (D)   Multiple occupancy. The owner/parties of interest of a
structure containing two or more dwelling units, multiple occupancy, a
rooming house or a non-residential structure shall be responsible for
extermination regardless if infestation is caused by failure of an occupant
to prevent such infestation.



(Ord. 17-016, passed 6-13-2017)



TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter




      110.   OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS





      111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES





      112.   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES PROGRAM




CHAPTER 110: OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS



Section




General Provisions




   110.001   Definitions



   110.002   Administration; designated officers; duties



   110.003   Inspection and audits



   110.004   Assessments; charge back from audit; payment under
protest; appeal



   110.005   Notice of license fees



   110.006   License required



   110.007   Purpose and duration of license



   110.008   Registration required; license application



   110.009   License fee according to classification; due date;
separate license; computation of fee



   110.010   Deductions and exemptions



   110.011   False application



   110.012   Display and transfer



   110.013   Delinquent license fee



   110.014   Denial of license



   110.015   Suspension or revocation of license



   110.016   Appeals to city administrator and City Council



   110.017   Permission to use streets required



   110.018   Consent, franchise or business license fee required



   110.019   Confidentiality



   110.020   Rates



   110.021   Alphabetical business classification index



   110.022   Numerical major groups of business classifications




Mobile Food Vendor




   110.035   License required



   110.036   Definitions



   110.037   Duration of license; transfer



   110.038   Permitted food; beverages



   110.039   License; fees



   110.040   Hours of operation; location



   110.041   Requirements



   110.042   Prohibited conduct



   110.043   Hospitality tax



   110.044   Exemptions




Peddlers, Solicitors and Transient Vendors




   110.055   License required



   110.056   Definitions



   110.057   Exceptions



   110.058   Display of license



   110.059   Hours of operation



   110.060   License



   110.061   Investigation; issuance; appeals



   110.062   License; fees



   110.063   Fixed location transient merchants



   110.064   Duplicate and individual licenses



   110.065   Revocation of license; procedure



   110.066   Carnivals and street shows




Express Building Permit and Business License




   110.080   Express building permit; business license



   110.081   Permit and License; fees




Precious Metals Dealers




   110.095   Definitions



   110.096   Place of operation



   110.097   Daily report to police; positive identification of
sellers; photographs of jewelry purchases; retention of records



   110.098   Purchases from minors



   110.099   Goods to be held



   110.100   Purchases of coins



   110.101   Exemptions




Gambling Establishments




   110.115   Simulated gambling devices restricted




Local Hospitality Fee




   110.130   Hospitality fee on charges for prepared food and beverages



 



   110.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 110.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context  indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS. Any person as defined herein, who, within the corporate
limits of the city, engages in, causes to be engaged in and/or represents to
be engaged in, any occupation or activity with the object of gain, benefit or
advantage, either directly or indirectly. Persons holding themselves out as
being able to perform services or sell goods in whole or in part within the
city are engaged in business even prior to completing their first transaction
and must first obtain a license.



   CHARITABLE PURPOSE. A benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic or
eleemosynary purpose which does not result in personal gain to a sponsor,
organizer, officer, director, trustee or person with ultimate control of the
organization. A charitable organization shall be deemed a business unless the
entire proceeds of its operation are devoted to charitable purposes.
Compensation in any form to a sponsor, organizer, officer, director, trustee
or person with ultimate control of the organization shall not be deemed a
necessary expense of operation.



   CITY. The City of Goose Creek.



   CLASSIFICATION. That division of businesses by major groups subject to
the same license rate as determined by a calculated index of ability to pay
based on national averages, benefits, equalization of tax burden,
relationship of services or other bases deemed appropriate by City Council.



   FINANCE DIRECTOR. A person designated to administer this chapter.



   GROSS INCOME. Means the total revenue of a business, received or
accrued, for one calendar year, without deduction for any expenses including
cost of goods sold or services sold, within the city, excepting therefrom
income from business done wholly outside of the city on which a license tax
is paid to some other municipality or a county and fully reported to the
city. Gross income for brokers or agents means gross commissions received or
retained, unless otherwise specified. Gross income for insurance companies
means gross premiums collected. Gross income for business license tax
purposes shall not include taxes collected for a governmental entity, escrow
funds or funds which are property of a third party. The value of bartered
goods, services or trade-in merchandise shall be included in gross income.
The gross income for business license tax purposes also includes income
realized in any form, whether in money, property or services. The city shall
have the authority to inspect returns and reports filed with the Internal
Revenue Service, the South Carolina Department of Revenue, the South Carolina
Insurance Commission, or other governmental agency to assist in
identification of gross income as defined in this chapter.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, LLP, LLC, cooperative
nonprofit membership, corporation, joint venture, association, estate, trust,
business trust, receiver, syndicate, holding company or other group or
combination acting as a unit, in the singular or plural, and the agent or
employee having charge or control of a business in the absence of the
principals.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.002  ADMINISTRATION; DESIGNATED OFFICERS; DUTIES.



   The Finance Director, under the direction of the City Administrator,
shall administer the provisions of this chapter, collect license fees, issue
licenses, make or initiate investigations and audits to insure compliance,
initiate denial or revocation procedures, report violations to the Police
Department and assist in prosecution of violators, produce forms, make
reasonable regulations relating to the administration of this chapter and
perform other duties as may be duly assigned.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.003  INSPECTION AND AUDITS.



   (A)   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter,
the Finance Director or other authorized agent of the city is empowered to
enter upon the premises of any person subject to this chapter to make
inspections, examine and audit books and records. It shall be unlawful for
any person to fail or refuse to make available the necessary books and
records including copies of returns and reports filed with any governmental
agency. In the event an audit or inspection reveals that false information
has been filed by the licensee, the costs of the audit shall be added to the
correct license fee and late penalties in addition to the other penalties
provided herein. Each day of failure to pay the proper amount of license fee
shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   The Finance Director may make systematic inspections and
random audits of all businesses within the city to insure compliance with
this chapter. Records of inspections and audits shall not be deemed public
records, and the Finance Director shall not release the amount of license
taxes paid or the reported gross income of any person by name without
permission of the licensee, provided that statistics compiled by
classifications may be made public.



   (C)   The Business License Inspector, upon approval of the Finance
Director, may disclose gross income of licenses to the Internal Revenue
Service, South Carolina Department of Revenue and other municipal or county
offices for the purpose of assisting tax assessments, tax collections and
enforcement. The disclosures shall be for internal, confidential and official
use of these governmental agencies and shall not be deemed public records.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.004  ASSESSMENTS; CHARGE BACK FROM AUDIT; PAYMENT UNDER PROTEST;
APPEAL.



   (A)   When a person fails to obtain a business license or to furnish
the information required by this chapter, the Finance Director may proceed to
examine the records of the business or any other available records as may be
appropriate, and to conduct the investigations and statistical surveys as the
Finance Director may deem appropriate to assess a license tax and penalties
as provided herein.



   (B)   A notice of assessment or charge back from an audit shall be
served by regular mail or hand delivery. An application for adjustment of the
assessment or charge back from an audit may be made to the Finance Director
within ten days after the notice is mailed, or the assessment or charge back
from an audit will become final. The Finance Director shall conduct a hearing
on an application for adjustment of assessment or charge back from the audit,
make written findings and issue a notice of final assessment.



   (C)   A final assessment or charge back from an audit may be
appealed to the City Administrator only by payment in full of the assessment
or charge back from an audit under protest within ten days and the filing of
a written notice of appeal within ten days after payment pursuant to the
provisions of this article relating to appeals to the City Council.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.005  NOTICE OF LICENSE FEES.



   The Finance Director may, but shall not be required, to serve or mail
written notices that license fees are due. If notices are not mailed, there
shall be published a notice of the due date in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city three times during the month of December in each
year. Failure to receive notice shall not constitute a defense to prosecution
for failure to pay the tax due or grounds for waiver of penalties.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.006  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Every person engaged or intending to engage in any calling, business,
occupation or profession in whole or in part, within the limits of the city,
is required to pay an annual license fee for the privilege of doing business
and obtain a business license as herein provided.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.007  PURPOSE AND DURATION OF LICENSE.



   The business license levied by this chapter is for the purpose of
providing the regulation as may be required of the business subject thereto
and for the purpose of raising revenue for the general fund through a
privilege tax. Each license shall be issued for one calendar year beginning
January 1 and shall expire on December 31. The provisions of this chapter and
the rates herein shall remain in effect from year to year unless amended by
City Council during the budget process.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.008  REGISTRATION REQUIRED; LICENSE APPLICATION.



   (A)   The owner, agent or legal representative of every business
subject to this chapter, whether listed in the classification index or not,
shall register the business and make application for a business license on or
before the due date of each year, except that a new business shall be
required to have a business license prior to operation within the city.



   (B)   Application shall be on a form provided by the Finance
Director which shall contain the social security number and/or the federal
employer's identification number, the South Carolina retail license number
(if applicable), the business name as reported on the South Carolina income
tax return and all information about the applicant and the business deemed
necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter by the Finance Director.
The applicant shall certify the information given in the application is true,
and that the gross income is accurately reported or estimated for a new
business, without any unauthorized deductions and all assessment and personal
property taxes due and payable to the city have been paid. Applicants may be
required to submit copies of portions of state and federal income tax returns
reflecting gross income figures.



   (C)   The Finance Director may refuse to issue a business license
until the applicant has demonstrated compliance with the City of Goose Creek
Zoning Ordinance, Building Code, Electrical Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing
Code, Roofing Code and other regulatory codes as adopted by the City of Goose
Creek, but issuance of a business license shall not be grounds to stop the
city from enforcing the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, Building Code,
Electrical Code, Mechanical Code, Plumbing Code, Roofing Code and other
regulatory codes.



   (D)   Insurance agents and brokers shall report the name of each
insurance company for which a policy was issued and the total premiums
collected for each company for each type of insurance coverage on a form
approved by the license official. An insurance agent not employed by an
insurance company or employed by more than one insurance company shall be
licensed as a broker.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.009  LICENSE FEE ACCORDING TO CLASSIFICATION; DUE DATE; SEPARATE
LICENSE; COMPUTATION OF FEE.



   The license fee for each class of business shall be computed in
accordance with the rate schedules established and approved by City Council
and on file in the offices of the Finance Director and City Clerk.



   (A)   The required license fee shall be paid for each business
subject hereto according to the applicable rate classification on or before
the last day of February in each year, except for those businesses in Rate
Class 8 for which a different due date is specified.



   (B)   A separate license shall be required for each place of
business and for each classification of business conducted at one place.
However, all classifications of business conducted at one place may be
licensed, at the option of the Finance Director, under a single license
calculated at the primary rate for each classification. The primary rate must
be applied for each business. If gross income cannot be separated for
classification at one location, the license fee shall be computed on the
combined gross income for the classification requiring the highest rate.



   (C)   A license fee based on gross income shall be computed on the
gross income for the preceding calendar or fiscal year, and on a twelve month
projected income based on the monthly average for a business in operation for
less than one year. The fee for a new business shall be computed on the
estimated probable gross income stated in the license application for the
balance of the license year. No fee shall be prorated. No refund shall be
made for a business that is discontinued, or for an overpayment of a prior
year license fee.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.010  DEDUCTIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   No deduction from gross income shall be made except from
income from business done wholly outside the city on which a license tax is
paid to some other municipality or county, or income which cannot be taxed
pursuant to state or Federal law. The applicant shall have the burden to
establish the right to exempt income by satisfactory records and proof. No
person shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter by reason of the
lack of an established place of business within the city, unless exempted by
state or Federal law.



   (B)   The Finance Director shall determine the appropriate
classification for each business in accordance with the latest issue of the
United States North American Industry Classification System Manual. No person
shall be exempt from this chapter by reason of the payment of any other tax,
unless exempted by state law, and no person shall be relieved of the
liability for the payment of any other tax by reason of the application of
this chapter.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.011  FALSE APPLICATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, subject to the provisions of this
chapter, to make a false application for a business license, or to give or
file, or direct the giving or filing, of any false information with respect
to the license or fee required by this chapter.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.012  DISPLAY AND TRANSFER.



   (A)   All persons shall display the license issued to them on the
original form provided by the Finance Director in a conspicuous place in the
business establishment at the address shown on the license. A transient or
nonresident shall carry the license upon the person or in a vehicle used in
the business readily available for inspection by an authorized agent of the
city.



   (B)   A change of address must be reported to the Finance Director
within ten days after removal of the business to a new location, and the
license will be valid at the new address upon written notification of the
Finance Director and compliance with zoning and building codes. Failure to
obtain the approval of the Finance Director for a change of address shall
invalidate the license and subject the licensee to prosecution for doing
business without a license.



   (C)   A business license shall not be transferable and a transfer of
controlling interest shall be considered a termination of the old business
and the establishment of a new business requiring a new business license. The
license is to be based on the old business income.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.013  DELINQUENT LICENSE FEE.



   (A)   The Finance Director shall levy and collect a penalty on all
licenses that are paid after the due date and all licenses not paid prior to
operation. Penalties shall not be waived. For nonpayment of all or any part
of the correct license fee, a late penalty of 5% of the unpaid fee will be
levied and collected for each month or portion thereof after the due date
until paid. For nonpayment of a business license prior to operation, a
penalty of 5% of the unpaid fee will be levied and collected for each month
or portion thereof from the date of initial operations. If any license fee
shall remain unpaid for 60 days after its due date, the Finance Director may
issue an execution which shall constitute a lien upon the property of the
licensee for the tax, penalties and costs of collection, and shall proceed to
collect the same in the same manner as prescribed by law for the collection
of other taxes.



   (B)   Partial payment may be accepted by the Finance Director to
toll imposition of penalties on the portion paid; provided, however, no
business license shall be issued or renewed until the full amount of the tax
due, with penalties, has been paid.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.014  DENIAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The Finance Director shall have authority to deny or revoke
any business license under the provisions set forth in this section when it
is determined that:



      (1)   The application is incomplete, contains a
misrepresentation, false or misleading statement, evasion or suppression of
material fact;



      (2)   The applicant has outstanding bench warrants or arrest
warrants;



      (3)   The activity for which a license is sought is unlawful,
or violates a city ordinance or constitutes a public nuisance;



      (4)   The license for the business or for a similar business
of the licensee in the Municipality or another jurisdiction has been denied,
suspended or revoked in the previous year; and



      (5)   The applicant has been convicted of an offense under a
law or ordinance regulating business, a crime involving moral turpitude, an
unlawful sale of merchandise or prohibited goods or has engaged in an
unlawful activity or nuisance related to the business within the past five
years.



   (B)   For a period of three years after a revocation of a business
license, no new license shall be granted to:



      (1)   The same licensee;



      (2)   The licensee's agent or any person who can be shown to
be acting on the licensee's behalf in attempting to do business in the city;
or



      (3)   No business license shall be granted to any applicant
for the operation of the same or similar type of business in the same
location when the prior applicant has been the subject of a revocation by the
Finance Director in which all avenues of appeal have been sought and upheld.



   (C)   The Finance Director shall not issue a business license to any
person until the time as any outstanding bench warrants and arrest warrants
have been cleared. A decision of the Finance Director to deny or not issue
shall be subject to appeal to the City Administrator and City Council as
herein provided. Denial shall be written with reasons stated.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.015  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   When the Finance Director determines that:



      (1)   A license has been mistakenly or improperly issued or
issued contrary to law;



      (2)   A licensee has breached any condition upon which the
license was issued or has failed to comply with the provisions of this
chapter;



      (3)   A licensee has obtained a license through fraud,
misrepresentation, a false or misleading statement, evasion or suppression of
a material fact in the license application;



      (4)   A licensee has been convicted of an offense under a law
or ordinance regulating business, a crime involving moral turpitude or an
unlawful sale of merchandise or prohibited goods; or



      (5)   A licensee has engaged in an unlawful activity or
nuisance related to the business.



   (B)   The Finance Director shall give written notice to the licensee
or the person in control of the business within the city by personal service
or certified mail that the license is suspended or revoked pending an appeal
to the City Administrator and to City Council as provided herein. The notice
shall state the time and place at which the hearing is to be held, which
shall be within 30 days from the date of service of the notice. The notice
shall contain a brief statement of the reasons for suspension or proposed
revocation and a copy of the applicable provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.016  APPEALS TO CITY ADMINISTRATOR AND CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a revocation, suspension or denial of
a business license by the Finance Director may appeal the decision to the
City Administrator by written request stating the reasons therefor. The
appeal must be filed with the City Administrator within ten days after notice
of revocation, suspension or a denial of a business license is received.



   (B)   An appeal or a hearing from revocation, suspension or denial
or other decision of the Finance Director shall be held by the City
Administrator after receipt of a request for appeal. At the hearings, all
parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and to present
testimony, evidence and to cross-examine witnesses. The proceedings shall be
recorded and transcribed at the expense of the party so requesting. The
decision of the City Administrator, shall be final unless appealed to City
Council within ten days after notice of the City Administrator's decision.



   (C)   An appeal to City Council shall be held within 30 days after
receipt of a request for appeal or service of notice of revocation,
suspension or denial at a regular or special meeting, of which the applicant
or licensee has been given written notice, unless continued by agreement. At
the hearings, all parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel
and to present argument based on the materials and testimony presented to the
City Administrator. City Council shall, by majority vote of members present,
render a decision to affirm, modify or deny the appeal which shall be final
unless appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction within ten days after
notice of City Council's decision.



   (D)   No person shall be subject to prosecution for doing business
without a license until the expiration of ten days after notice of final
assessment, charge backs from an audit, suspension or revocation which is not
appealed or until after final judgment of the circuit court upholding final
assessment, charge backs from an audit, denial, suspension or revocation.



   (E)   Any person continuing to operate a business after being denied
a business license shall be subject to prosecution during the appeal process
until the license is issued.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.017  PERMISSION TO USE STREETS REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, maintain or
operate in, on, above or under any street or public place under control of
the city, any line, pipe, cable, pole, structure or facility for utilities,
communications, cable vision or other purposes without a consent agreement or
franchise agreement issued by City Council, by ordinance which prescribes the
term, fees and conditions for use.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.018  CONSENT, FRANCHISE OR BUSINESS LICENSE FEE REQUIRED.



   The annual fee for use of streets or public places authorized by a
consent agreement or franchise agreement shall be set by the ordinance
approving the agreement and shall be consistent with uppermost limits set by
state law. Existing franchise agreements shall continue in effect until
expiration dates in the agreements. Franchise and consent fees shall not be
in lieu of or be credited against business license fees unless specifically
provided by the franchise or consent agreement.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.019 CONFIDENTIALITY.



   Except in accordance with proper judicial order, or as otherwise
provided by law, it shall be unlawful for any official or employee to divulge
or make known in any manner, the amount of income or any particulars set
forth or disclosed in any report or return required under this chapter.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the publication of
statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular
reports or returns. Any license data may be shared with other public
officials or employees in the performance of their duties, whether or not
those duties relate to enforcement of this chapter.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.020  RATES.



   The license fee for each class of business shall be computed in
accordance with the rate schedules established and approved through budget by
City Council and on file in the offices of the Finance Director and City
Clerk.



   (A)   Out of city rates. Unless otherwise specifically provided, all
minimum fees and rates shall be doubled for business having no fixed
permanent place of business within the city.



   (B)   (1)   Class 8 rates. Each NAIC number designates a separate
subclassification. The businesses in this section are treated as separate and
individual subclasses due to provisions of state law, regulatory
requirements, service burdens, tax equalization consideration and the like,
which are deemed to be sufficient to require individually determined rates.
Nonresident rates do not apply except where indicated.



      (2)   Contractors not having a permanent, principal place of
business in the City of Goose Creek.



         (a)   Contractors must have a permanent, principal place
of business within the city limits of Goose Creek in order to be classified
as such. Contractors who temporarily occupy a trailer, model home, structure
or office space during construction will not constitute a permanent place of
business under this chapter.



         (b)   The total fee for the full amount of the contract
shall be paid prior to commencement of work and shall entitle the contractor
to complete the job without regard to the normal license expiration date. No
contractor shall be issued a business license until all state and city
qualification examination and trade license requirements have been met. Each
contractor shall post a sign in plain view on each job identifying all
subcontractors. All contractors on each job shall supply a subcontractor
listing which shall state the names of each subcontractor, their state
license or registration number and contract amount. For contractors on a job
per job business license a contract signed by all parties stating scope of
work and total contract amount without deductions is required.



         (c)   Subcontractors shall be licensed on the same basis
as general or prime contractors for the same job. No deductions shall be made
by a general or prime contractor for value of work performed by a
subcontractor.



         (d)   No contractor shall be issued a business license
until all performance and indemnity bonds required by the Building Code have
been filed and approved. Zoning permits must be obtained when required by
Chapter 151.



   (C)   Amusement machines; coin-operated. Not included in gross
income of business where located or not owned by business where located.



      (1)   Music machines, juke boxes, kiddie rides, video games,
pin tables with levers and amusement machines with or without free play
feature licensed pursuant to S.C. Code § 12-21-2720 (A)(1) and (A)(2).



      (2)   Amusement machines of the non-payout type or in-line pin
game licensed by South Carolina Department of Revenue pursuant to S.C. Code
§ 12-21-2720(A)(3).



      (3)   Distributor selling or leasing machines (not licensed by
state as an operator pursuant to S.C. Code § 12-21-2728.



   (D)   Telephone companies.



      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter,
business license taxes for retail telecommunications services, as defined in
S.C. Code § 58-9-2200, including but not limited to those services described
in United States North American Industry Classification System Manual, shall
pay an annual business fee based on gross income.



      (2)   Pursuant to S.C. Code § 58-9-2200, the following
business license tax schedule shall apply to the gross income from retail
telecommunications services for the preceding calendar or fiscal year, which
either originate or terminate in the city and which are charged to a service
address within the municipality regardless of where these amounts are billed
or paid and on which a business license tax has not been paid to another
municipality or county. The measurement of the amounts derived from the
retail of mobile telecommunications services shall include only revenues from
the fixed monthly recurring charge of customers whose service address is
within the boundaries of the city.



 

Rate for license taxes due
 
As established by state law



 



      (3)   For a business in operation for less than one year, the
amount of business license tax authorized by this section shall be computed
on a 12 month projected income.



      (4)   The telecommunications business license tax shall be due
on January 1 in each year. Declining rates shall not apply. Taxes are payable
without penalty by January 31 following the due date. After January 31, the
delinquent penalty shall be 5% of the tax due for each month, or portion
thereof, after the due date until paid.



      (5)   Exemptions for income from business in interstate
commerce are not permitted. Properly apportioned gross income from interstate
commerce shall be included in the gross income for every business subject to
a business license tax.



      (6)   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to
interfere with a franchise agreement or contractual agreement entered into
with a telecommunications provider prior to December 31, 1997.



      (7)   All fees collected under the franchise agreement or
contractual agreement shall be in lieu of fees or taxes which might otherwise
be authorized by this chapter.



   (E)   Insurance companies.



      (1)   NAICS 5241 - Insurance companies:



         (a)   Except as to fire insurance, "gross premiums"
means gross premiums written for policies for property or a risk located
within the municipality. In addition, "gross premiums" shall include premiums
written for policies that are sold, solicited, negotiated, taken,
transmitted, received, delivered, applied for, produced or serviced by:



            1.   The insurance company's office located in the
municipality;



            2.   The insurance company's employee conducting
business within the municipality; or



            3.   The office of the insurance company's
licensed or appointed producer (agent) conducting business within the
municipality, regardless of where the property or risk is located, provided
no tax has been paid to another municipality in which the property or risk is
located based on the same premium.



         (b)   Solicitation for insurance, receiving or
transmitting an application or policy, examination of a risk, collection or
transmitting of a premium, adjusting a claim, delivering a benefit, or doing
any act in connection with a policy or claim shall constitute conducting
business within the municipality, regardless of whether or not an office is
maintained in the municipality.



         (c)   As to fire insurance, "gross premiums" means gross
premiums:



            1.   Collected in the municipality; and/or



            2.   Realized from risks located within the limits
of the municipality.



         (d)   Gross premiums shall include all business
conducted in the prior calendar year.



         (e)   Gross premiums shall include new and renewal
business without deductions for any dividend, credit, return premiums or
deposit.



         (f)   Declining rates shall not apply.



      (2)   NAICS 52411 - Life, Health and Accident - 2% of gross
premiums.



      (3)   NAICS 524126 - Fire and Casualty - 2% of gross premiums.



      (4)   NAICS 524127 - Title Insurance - 2% of gross premiums.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, license
taxes for insurance companies shall be payable on or before May 31 in each
year without penalty. The penalty for delinquent payments shall be 5% of the
tax due per month, or portion thereof, after the due date until paid.



   (C)   Any exemptions in the business license ordinance for income
from business in interstate commerce are hereby repealed. Gross income from
interstate commerce shall be included in the gross income for every business
subject to a business license tax.



   (D)   Pursuant to S.C. Code §§ 38-45-10 and 38-45-60, the
Municipal Association of South Carolina is designated the municipal agent for
purposes of administration of the municipal broker's premium tax. The
agreement with the Association for administration and collection of current
and delinquent license taxes from insurance companies as authorized by S.C.
Code § 5-7-300 and administration of the municipal broker's premium tax in
the form attached hereto is approved, and the Mayor is authorized to execute
it.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.021  ALPHABETICAL BUSINESS CLASSIFICATION INDEX.



   (A)   The Business Classification Index shall be approved by City
Council and are on file in the Offices of the Finance Director and City Clerk.



   (B)   The business classification index, based on the latest edition
of the United States North American Industry Classification System Manual, is
such as has been established and approved by City Council and is on file with
the Finance Director. The alphabetical index in this chapter is a tool for
classification, not a limitation on businesses subject to a license tax. The
Finance Director shall determine the proper class for a business according to
the applicable NAIC manual, whether or not the business is listed in the
alphabetical index.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.022  NUMERICAL MAJOR GROUPS OF BUSINESS CLASSIFICATIONS.



   The numerical major groups of business classifications, based on the
latest edition of the United States North American Industry Classification
System Manual, is such as has been established and approved by City Council,
and is on file with the Finance Director.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



MOBILE FOOD VENDOR



§ 110.035 LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to engage in the
business of a mobile food vendor within the City of Goose Creek, without
first obtaining a license therefor, as provided in this chapter, unless
specifically exempted therefrom by the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.036  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. Any person or persons who operates or sells
unprepared or prepared meals from a stationary cart, food truck or trailer
mounted on a chassis. Mobile food vendors shall not mean selling from a
stand, booth. A mobile food truck may mean a privately-owned automobile if
the meal is prepared and cooked in a commercial kitchen with an "A" from the
Department of Health and Environmental Control.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.037  DURATION OF LICENSE; TRANSFER.



   Each license shall be issued for one calendar year beginning January 1
and shall expire on December 31. A change of the business address must be
reported to the Finance Director ten days prior for approval for the license
to be valid at the new address. Failure to obtain the approval of the Finance
Director of the change of address shall invalidate the license and subject
the licensee to prosecution for doing business without a license.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.038  PERMITTED FOOD; BEVERAGES.



   Permitted food and beverages shall be limited to edibles, hot and cold
beverages containing no alcohol, unless a special license has been obtained
from the South Carolina Department of Revenue and is on file with the City of
Goose Creek Business License Office and other items related to such edibles.
Sale of tobacco products and smoking paraphernalia is prohibited. No sale
items may be displayed outside the mobile vending unit. Edibles with alcohol
which are not regulated by the South Carolina Department of Revenue alcoholic
beverage licensing including alcohol suspended in frozen form, gelatin,
fruit, or other food product are prohibited to be sold by mobile food vendors
unless the alcohol is cooked so as to cause the evaporation of burning off of
all of the alcohol.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.039  LICENSE; FEES.



   The license fee for each class of business shall be computed in
accordance with the rate schedules established and approved by City Council
and is on file in the offices of the Finance Director and City Clerk.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.040  HOURS OF OPERATION; LOCATION.



   Operating hours shall be no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and no later than
9:00 p.m., unless a special events permit has been issued. Mobile food vendor
is limited to those zoning classifications that permit food service, unless a
special event permit has been issued. When selling from a privately-owned
automobile as described in § 110.036 and invitation must be extended from
the property owner in writing detailing the hours needed and specific
location permitted.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.041  REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Application. Mobile food vendor must submit a completed City
of Goose Creek business license application to the Business License Office.



   (B)   Permission from property owner/representative. Permission to
operate must be obtained in writing from the property owner/representative.
Mobile food vendor must submit authorized property use letter, unless an
events permit has been issued, or is located on the naval weapons station.



   (C)   Mobile food vendors are not permitted outside the parking area
of designated location.



   (D)   Parking. Required parking for the primary business(es) shall
be minimally affected.



   (E)   Signage. Signage shall be permitted on the vehicle only to
identify the name of the product or the name of the vendor, and the posting
of prices. A separate menu board is allowed not exceeding 12 square feet in
area and 40 inches in height. This sign must be located on the same property
and within close proximity to the mobile food vendor, and must not be placed
on the sidewalk or in the public right-of-way.



   (F)   Garbage disposal. The mobile food vendor shall only use
single-service plates and utensils. Garbage and/or recycling receptacles must
be made available for patron use and removed from the site daily by the
mobile food vendor. Failure to remove trash/garbage/recyclables or to keep
area of vending unit clean may result in the immediate revocation of the
mobile food vendor business license.



   (G)   DHEC requirements. Mobile food vendor must meet all applicable
DHEC regulations for mobile food units and possess a valid DHEC permit where
applicable.



   (H)   Routine inspections. Any mobile food vendor or vending unit
that has been issued a notice of health violation by any Department of the
State of South Carolina, which remains uncorrected upon a subsequent
inspection, shall have its mobile food vendor business license revoked.



   (I)   Site plan. Site plan must be submitted indicating the location
of vending unit, umbrellas and/or tents, dining equipment: i.e. tables and
benches, property boundaries and adjacent buildings, parking area, entrances
and exits, and the distance unit will be from roadway.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.042  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   No vendor shall:



   (A)   Leave any vehicle unattended.



   (B)   Store, park or leave any vehicle overnight on any street or
sidewalk.



   (C)   Leave from any location without first picking up, removing and
disposing of all trash or refuse remaining from sales made by the vendor.



   (D)   Solicit or conduct business with persons in motor vehicles.



   (E)   There will be no external lighting permitted.



   (F)   Sell anything other than that for which a license to vend has
been issued.



   (G)   Sound or permit the sounding of any device that produces a
loud and raucous noise or use or operate any loudspeaker, public address
system, radio, sound amplifier or similar device to attract the attention of
the public.



   (H)   Allow any item relating to the operation of the vending
business to lean against or hang from any building or other structure
lawfully placed on public or private property.



   (I)   Change vending locations without first notifying the Business
License Department and submitting required permissions.



   (J)   Discharge fat, oil, grease or waste water into the sanitary
sewer system. All waste shall be properly stored and disposed of at a
properly designated disposal location.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.043  HOSPITALITY TAX.



   All mobile food vendors shall collect from any patron a 2% hospitality
tax on all prepared food and beverages and will remit collected hospitality
tax to the Finance Director no later than the twentieth day of the following
month in which collected.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.044  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following are exempt from the provisions of this policy; caterers:
a person or company providing food and drink at a social event or other
gathering for a contracted price and has obtained an annual city business
license, vendors with a store front within the municipal limits of Goose
Creek and possess an annual city business license and vendors that fall under
a peddler or solicitor license.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT VENDORS



§ 110.055  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to engage in the
business of a hawker, peddler or itinerant merchant or vendor of any
articles, goods, wares of merchandise or services within the City of Goose
Creek, without first obtaining a license therefor, as provided in this
chapter, unless specifically exempted therefrom by the provisions of this
chapter.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.056  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PEDDLER or HAWKER. Any person who sells, or offers to sell, commodities
of any type from house to house, or from place to place, or on the streets,
or in any other public place, or who, without traveling from place to place,
sells, or offers to sell, commodities of any type from a wagon, vehicle, boat
or other movable structure.



   RESIDENCE. Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes
by one or more persons contained within any type of building or structure.



   TRANSIENT MERCHANT or VENDOR. Any person intending to remain in
business in the city for less than one year and is operating without a
permanent place of business or from a temporary or roadside site, and does
not have an annual business license, who:



      (1)   Offers for sale tangible personal property or personal
services; or



      (2)   Takes or attempts to take orders for the sale of
tangible personal property, advertising, subscriptions or services to be
furnished or performed in the future.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.057  EXCEPTIONS.



   Persons engaged in the following described activities are exempt from
the duty of applying for a transient merchant license:



   (A)   Persons selling at wholesale to merchants for the purpose of
resale;



   (B)   Persons selling or distributing newspapers;



   (C)   Persons selling tangible personal property or services to
business enterprises as opposed to the general public;



   (D)   Persons selling at events for which a blanket license has been
obtained;



   (E)   Persons selling tangible property at a garage, basement or
yard sale held at one of the person's premises but not more than two sales
within any 12-month period;



   (F)   Persons conducting and selling admissions to or for
theatricals, shows, rides, sports and games, concerts, or any other public
amusements where no sales or other products are involved, and the sales are
made on the premises where the event is to be conducted;



   (G)   Bona fide nonprofit organizations;



   (H)   Persons selling merchandise or services through an event
sponsored by the United States Government, State Government or any
governmental subdivision; and



   (I)   Mobile food vendor as defined in this chapter.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.058  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   Each transient merchant shall at all times while doing business in the
city keep in the possession of the person, the license required by this
chapter and shall prominently display the license so as to be visible to
customers and city officials as evidence of compliance with the requirements
of this chapter.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.059  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   Operating hours within the city limits for all transient vendors,
canvassing, hawking, peddling or soliciting door to door from place to place,
shall be no earlier than 10:00 a.m. and no later than 8:00 p.m. during
daylight savings, all other times will be 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.060 LICENSE.



   An application for a transient merchant license shall give the
following minimum information:



   (A)   The name or names of the person or persons having the
management or supervision of the applicant's business during the time that it
is proposed it will be carried on in the city, the local address or addresses
of the person or persons while engaged in the business and the telephone
numbers of the person or persons;



   (B)   The permanent address or addresses of the person or persons;
whether the person will act as proprietor, agent, consignee or employee, and
the credentials establishing the relationship, the name and address of the
person, firm or corporation for whose account the business will be carried
on, if any and if a corporation, under the laws of what state the same is
incorporated and the telephone numbers of the person, persons, corporation or
corporations;



   (C)   The place or places in the city where it is proposed to carry
on the applicant's business and the length of time during which it is
proposed that the business shall be conducted. A notarized copy of the
applicant's lease or written permission form supplied by the city to sell
from the owner's property must be attached to the application;



   (D)   The place or places other than the permanent place of business
of the applicant, where the applicant within three years preceding the date
of the application conducted a transient business, state the nature thereof
and giving the post office box number and street address of any building or
office in which the business was conducted;



   (E)   A statement of the nature, character and price of the tangible
personal property or service to be sold or offered for sale by the applicant
in the city; whether the goods are new, damaged or rejects, whether the same
are proposed to be sold from stock in possession or by sample, or at auction
or by direct sale or by having orders for future delivery, where the goods or
property proposed to be sold are manufactured or produced and where the goods
or products are located at the time the application is filed;



   (F)   Whether or not the person having management or supervision of
the applicant's business has been convicted of any crime or violation of any
federal, state or local laws or ordinances within the five years immediately
preceding the date of the application, or of the violation of any law or
ordinance relating to the same or similar business to be conducted by the
applicant. If so, the nature of the offense, the date of the same, the
jurisdiction in which the offense was heard and the punishment therefor;



   (G)   Whether the applicant has ever applied for a license under
this chapter, which has been denied;



   (H)   Whether the applicant has ever held a license under this
chapter, which has been revoked;



   (I)   Two photographs, two inches by two inches in size showing the
head and shoulders of the individual in a clear and distinguishing manner for
each individual applicant and for any person who will be conducting,
managing, supervising or administering the business for, or on behalf of the
applicant(s);



   (J)   The other reasonable information as to the identity or
character of the applicant(s) or any other individuals who will be
conducting, managing, supervising or administering the business for or on
behalf of the applicant(s), or the method or plan of conducting the business,
as the Finance Director may deem necessary or proper, in order to determine
the fitness of the applicant(s) to have the license issued, for the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare. The failure to provide
the requested information will cause the application to be denied and
returned without further action to the applicant; and



   (K)   The application shall provide written notice to the
applicant(s) that the information obtained during the application process
shall become public information in conformance with the State of South
Carolina Freedom of Information Act, being S.C. §§ 30-4-10 et seq., in its
entirety.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.061  INVESTIGATION; ISSUANCE; APPEALS.



   (A)   Application of license. Upon receipt of an application for a
license under the provisions of this chapter, the Finance Director shall
refer the application to the Police Department, the Planning and Zoning
Department and other agencies or departments of the city deemed appropriate
for review, investigation and recommendation, in order to determine whether
the activities proposed to be undertaken would be contrary to any law or
whether the issuance of the license would otherwise be contrary to the public
health, safety or welfare. No license shall be issued until the Finance
Director has received reports and recommendations from all departments and
agencies to which the application has been referred.



   (B)   Issuance of license; appeals from denials or revocations.



      (1)   Upon receipt of reports and recommendations as herein
provided, the application, together with all supporting information, shall be
forwarded to the Finance Director, who shall determine whether or not to
issue the license for which the application has been made. The application
shall be approved unless the Finance Director determines that the activities
proposed to be undertaken would be contrary to law or the granting of the
license would otherwise be detrimental to the public health, safety or
welfare; specifically, the Finance Director shall take into consideration any
reports of unethical conduct by any reporting agency, reports of habitual
violations of rules, regulations and ordinances, and the potential for the
creation of a public nuisance which shall constitute sufficient reason for
the denial of a license. If an application is denied, the Finance Director
shall set forth his or her reasons in writing and a copy of the decision
shall be provided to the applicant.



      (2)   See § 110.016(B) and (C) appeals to City Administrator
and City Council.



   (C)   Approved application. An approved application, subject to the
provisions codified in this chapter, may be issued by the Finance Director
within a reasonable period of time. A fee will be charged as determined by §
110.062 allowing for the processing of the application.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.062  LICENSE; FEES.



   The license fee for each class of business shall be computed in
accordance with the rate schedules established and approved by City Council
and on file in the offices of the Finance Director and City Clerk.



   (A)   Before an application shall be processed, the applicant shall
pay an annual application fee for the initial application.



   (B)   Before a license shall be issued, the applicant shall pay a
weekly application fee and a weekly license fee.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.063  FIXED LOCATION TRANSIENT MERCHANTS.



   (A)   No transient merchant shall engage in business at a fixed
location without the written permission, by lease or otherwise, of the owner
or person in control of the property.



   (B)   A property use agreement supplied by the Finance Director must
be signed by all parties, it shall include the dates the transient merchant
shall be conducting business and must be submitted with initial application.



   (C)   This agreement shall be displayed by the transient merchant at
the fixed location when he or she is doing business there.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.064  DUPLICATE AND INDIVIDUAL LICENSES.



   (A)   When required, a transient merchant license may be issued to a
person carrying on the business of transient merchant in the city through
employees.



   (B)   The employees shall carry a duplicate license issued to the
person, which shall be obtained from the Finance Director's office.



   (C)   If the business of transient merchant in the city is carried
on through agents who are not employees or by consignees, or by an
unincorporated firm or association, each person so conducting the business of
transient merchant in the city shall be required to have a separate license.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.065  REVOCATION OF LICENSE; PROCEDURE.



   (A)   The Finance Director may revoke any license issued under the
provisions of this chapter by sending a notice of revocation by certified
mail to the license holder at his or her last known address, return receipt
requested or by personal service on the license holder or its officers for
any of the following causes:



      (1)   Information showing that the license was erroneously
issued initially;



      (2)   For any violation of the provisions of this chapter; or



      (3)   For any violation of any city or state law regulating
the sales activities of the license holder.



   (B)   The license shall stand revoked unless within ten days after
receipt of the notice of revocation from the Finance Director, the license
applicant or holder files a written appeal pursuant to § 110.061(B)(2).



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.066  CARNIVALS AND STREET SHOWS.



   (A)   All carnivals or street shows by whatever name known are
hereby forbidden to show, parade or otherwise engage in business in the city,
unless a special licensing permit is obtained from the City Council.



   (B)   No carnival show or riding devices exhibiting in the open or
under a tent shall be issued a license or be permitted to operate within the
city when any agricultural fair is being held in the county, nor during a
period of ten days prior to the opening of the fair, unless the carnival show
or riding devices are exhibited under the auspices of, or with the consent
of, the parties conducting the agricultural fair.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 110.999



EXPRESS BUILDING PERMIT AND BUSINESS LICENSE



§ 110.080  EXPRESS BUILDING PERMIT; BUSINESS LICENSE.



   (A)   When building a new residential home, the builder must obtain
an express building permit and express business license. The express building
permit and business license will cover all contractors except: electrical,
plumbing, and heating and air conditioning contractors, these trades would be
required to obtain individual permits and business licenses. This requirement
would apply to the homeowner if they are acting as the builder.



   (B)   All contractors and subcontractors must comply with Federal,
state and locals laws regarding license and registration requirements.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.081  PERMIT AND LICENSE; FEES.



   The permit fee and license fee for each class of business shall be
computed in accordance with the rate schedules established and approved by
City Council and on file in the offices of the Finance Director and City
Clerk.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS



§ 110.095  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DEALER. Any person who holds the person's self out to the public as a
purchaser of precious metals, or who in the course of operation of a licensed
business, engages in the purchase of silver, gold or other precious metals.



   PRECIOUS METAL. Any article made, in whole or in part, of gold, silver
or platinum, which article has been used or sold by a retailer. The term
PRECIOUS METAL shall not include any coin or any gold or silver ingot or bar.



   WHOLESALE PRECIOUS METALS. Articles made, in whole or in part, of
silver, gold or platinum that have not been previously used, traded or sold
by a retailer and that are being purchased by a dealer from a manufacturer or
from a wholesaler or distributor of newly manufactured metals.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.096  PLACE OF OPERATION.



   No dealer shall operate in the city except from a permanent shop or
place of business. No dealer shall operate upon public property or from a
vehicle, flea market, hotel room or similar temporary location.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.097  DAILY REPORT TO POLICE; POSITIVE IDENTIFICATION OF SELLERS;
PHOTOGRAPHS OF JEWELRY PURCHASES; RETENTION OF RECORDS.



   (A)   (1)   Every dealer shall electronically submit daily
purchases to the Police Department within 24 hours from the time of purchase,
giving the name and address of the seller, the price paid for each item, the
date of purchase, a detailed and accurate description of each article
purchased, the manufacturer (where known), any identifying marks, serial
number, model number, and owner applied number and the seller's driver's
license number, or the number on any other governmental identification card
bearing the photograph of the seller; and, every dealer shall photograph all
jewelry purchased.



      (2)   The dealer shall obtain the right thumb print of all
sellers when the property involves firearms, jewelry and electronics. If the
seller is missing the right thumb, the dealer shall print the next digit
available to be printed. This print will be placed on the law enforcement
copy of the dealer's paperwork.



   (B)   The dealer shall retain purchase/sales records for a minimum
of three years.



   (C)   The dealer shall maintain an accurate record of the
disposition of all items purchased by the dealer.



   (D)   Any records required to be kept or maintained by this section
shall at all times be open to the inspection of the Chief of Police or an
officer duly authorized by the Chief to inspect same.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.098  PURCHASES FROM MINORS.



   No dealer shall purchase gold or silver from a person less than 18
years of age.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 110.999



§ 110.099  GOODS TO BE HELD.



   All precious metals purchased by a dealer must be held in the county in
the possession of the dealer, before being sold, melted or altered in any
manner, for a period of seven working days. The location of these goods and
the identification of the person in possession of these goods must be filed
with the Chief of Police within 24 hours from the time of the purchase, if
the goods are held or stored at a location other than the point of sale. All
goods required to be held under this section shall at all times be open to
the inspection of the Chief of Police or an official duly authorized by the
Chief to inspect the same.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.100  PURCHASES OF COINS.



   Any purchaser of coin made up, in whole or in part of gold or silver,
where the total price exceeds the sum of $50, shall comply with §
110.097(A), (B) and (D).



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.101  EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to purchases of
wholesale precious metals, nor shall it apply to a transaction between
dealers of precious metals, where the selling dealer has already complied
with the terms of this chapter, including the seven-day holding period.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



GAMBLING ESTABLISHMENTS



§ 110.115  SIMULATED GAMBLING DEVICES RESTRICTED.



   (A)   The use of all simulated gambling devices for commercial
purposes is hereunder prohibited throughout the city.



   (B)   SIMULATED GAMBLING DEVICE. Any device that plays any game of
chance which may deliver or entitle the person or persons playing or
operating the device to a payoff. This shall not include any machines,
devices or materials including any scratch cards associated with the state
lottery. The following rules of construction apply to this definition of
SIMULATED GAMBLING DEVICE:



      (1)   The term DEVICE means any mechanical or electrical
contrivance, computer, terminal, video or other equipment that may or may not
be capable of downloading games from a central server system, machine,
computer or other device or equipment. The term DEVICE also includes any
associated equipment necessary to conduct the operation of the device;



      (2)   The terms PLAY OR OPERATEor PLAY OR OPERATION include
the application of the element of chance or displays the results of a raffle,
sweepstakes or drawing;



      (3)   The term GAME includes slot machine, poker, bingo,
craps, keno, any other type of game ordinarily played in a casino, or a game
involving the display of the results of a raffle, sweepstakes, drawing,
contest or other promotion, lotto, sweepstakes, or any other game associated
with gambling or which could be associated with gambling; and



      (4)   The term PAYOFF means cash, monetary or other credit,
tickets, tokens or other electronic credits which may be exchanged for cash,
merchandise or anything of value whatsoever, whether made automatically from
the machine or manually. A chance to win another free play on the same
machine shall not be considered a thing of value for the purposes of this
division, as when a pinball machine might award a free play, but any purchase
or refund of credits for cash, merchandise or anything of value shall be
regarded as a PAYOFF.



   (C)   If there is a determination that the above prohibition is
invalid, then as a matter of zoning, use of simulated gambling devices shall
be limited to areas zoned light industrial as shall be specified in Appendix
B: Table of Land Uses of the zoning ordinance; there shall be allowed no more
than four simulated gambling devices per parcel as determined by a tax map
identification system; and the premises shall not allow for the storage, sale
or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)  Penalty, see § 110.999



Cross-reference:



   Gambling; generally, see § 133.07



LOCAL HOSPITALITY FEE



§ 110.130  HOSPITALITY FEE ON CHARGES FOR PREPARED FOOD AND BEVERAGES.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this subchapter, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      CITY. The City of Goose Creek, South Carolina.



      ESTABLISHMENT. Any business, private club, or non-profit
institution other than a private club which has a fixed place of operations
or uses a mobile device on a regular basis, within the city and which from
that location or device sells prepared meals and/or beverages inclusive of
alcoholic beverages, beer and wine, whether for on premises consumption, take
out or delivery. As used in this definition, NON-PROFIT INSTITUTION shall
include any medical, educational or social service facility which makes the
service of prepared meals and beverages available for sale to the public at
large on a regular basis.



      FINANCE DIRECTOR. A person designated to administer this
subchapter.



      PREPARED MEAL. Any food and/or beverages, inclusive of alcoholic
beverages, beer and wine, prepared or modified by an establishment which at
the time of sale is ready for consumption by members of the public,
regardless of the actual quantity, presentation, or packaging, without regard
to the time of day of the sale.



   (B)   Imposition of fee.



      (1)   A local hospitality fee equal to 2% is imposed on sales
of prepared meals and beverages, inclusive of alcoholic beverages, beer and
wine sold in establishments.



      (2)   The fee imposed by this section shall be collected from
any patron when he/she tenders payment for his/her meal, food or beverage and
shall be held in trust for the benefit of the city until the same is remitted
to the Finance Director.



   (C)   Remittance to city; due date.



      (1)   The fee provided for in this subchapter must be remitted
by the establishment to the Finance Director, along with the form as provided
by the city from time to time for such purpose, by the twentieth day of the
month following the closing date of the period for which the fee payment is
to be remitted. The fee must be remitted on a monthly basis when the
estimated amount of average fee is more than $50 a month, on a quarterly
basis when the estimated amount of average fee is $25 to $50 per month, and
on an annual basis when the estimated amount of average fee is less than $25
a month. The closing date for monthly payments is the last day of the month;
the closing dates for quarterly payments are the last days of the months of
March, June, September and December, and the closing date for annual payments
is the last day of December.



      (2)   A payment is considered to be timely remitted to the
city if the return has a United States Post Office postmark date on or before
the date the report form is required to be made. If the twentieth day of the
month falls on a Saturday, Sunday or postal service holiday, then payments
mailed on the next business day will be accepted as timely filed.



   (D)   Late fee. A late fee of 5% of the unpaid amount for each month
or portion thereof shall be added to any tax not timely remitted under this
subchapter. The purpose of the fee is to compensate the city for additional
administrative handling and lost earnings on operating balances.



   (E)   Collection of delinquent fees. It shall be unlawful to fail to
pay the fees required by this subchapter. If any tax due under this
subchapter shall remain unpaid 30 days after its due date, the city may
proceed with all available procedures under the law, including, but not
limited to, issuance of ordinance summons or enforcement through the
Municipal Court or the revocation of the establishment's business license.



   (F)   City's receipt and use of fee proceeds.



      (1)   Upon receipt of the fee remitted under this subchapter,
the city shall deposit the funds into a local hospitality fee fund,
maintained separately by accounting procedures from the general fund, in
accordance with S.C. Code § 6-1-720, as amended.



      (2)   The city's use of the hospitality fee fund shall be for
purposes as authorized by S.C. Code § 6-1-730, as amended.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



§ 110.999  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of an offense and shall be subject to punishment under § 10.99 upon
conviction. Each day of the violation shall be considered a separate offense.
Punishment for violation shall not relieve the offender of liability for
delinquent fees, penalties and costs provided herein.



(Ord. 17-015, passed 6-13-2017)



CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section




General Provisions




   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   Jurisdiction of Municipal Court



   111.03   What constitutes prior offenses



   111.04   Unlawful to sell unless tax paid



   111.05   Sunday and Monday morning sales; prohibited



   111.06   Contraband



   111.07   Wholesale delivery on Sunday



   111.08   Restricting the hours of operation of commercial
establishments which allow for the on premises consumption of alcoholic
beverages




Drinking Specifically




   111.25   Drinking or possession on licensed premises at prohibited
hours



   111.26   Drinking in public places generally; open containers



   111.27   Drinking on school or recreational property



   111.28   Drinking alcoholic beverages on unlicensed premises



   111.29   Alcoholic beverages on premises of unlicensed person
constitutes contraband




Alcoholic Beverages to Minors




   111.45   Sale to minors



   111.46   Purchase or possession by minor



   111.47   False information as to age



   111.48   Purchasing on behalf of another who cannot lawfully purchase




License and Permits




   111.65   Acts prohibited on licensed premises; revocation of license



   111.66   Sale of alcoholic beverages after license revoked, canceled
or suspended



   111.67   Permittee selling draft beer to be approved by state



   111.68   Permit and health certificates to be posted



   111.69   Hindering inspection




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   The words ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS, as used in this chapter, shall mean any
spirituous malt, vinous, fermented, brewed or other liquors or any compound
or mixture thereof by whatever name called or known which contains alcohol
and used as a beverage, regardless of the weight of alcohol contained by
weight or volume.



(1985 Code, § 3-1)



Statutory reference:



   Definitions, see S.C. Code § 61-6-20



§ 111.02  JURISDICTION OF MUNICIPAL COURT.



   (A)   The Municipal Courts shall try and determine all cases
involving any violation of S.C. Code Title 61, except § 61-6-4720, occurring
within the limits of the city where the penalties do not exceed a fine of
$500 plus assessments required by the State of South Carolina or imprisonment
of 30 days.



   (B)   The courts and judge shall have and are hereby vested with
jurisdiction over the criminal cases, with the right and duty of sending the
cases, occurring within the municipal limits, but beyond their jurisdiction
to try, to the higher courts.



(1985 Code, § 3-2)



Statutory references:



   Jurisdiction of Municipal Courts and Judges, see S.C. Code § 61-6-4500



   Penalties, see S.C. Code § 61-6-4230



§ 111.03  WHAT CONSTITUTES PRIOR OFFENSES.



   A conviction, plea of guilty, plea of nolo contendere or forfeiture of
bond for the violation on or after March 28, 1956, of any of the laws of the
state, or of the United States, relating to alcoholic liquor shall constitute
prior offense for the purpose of any prosecution, or for the purpose of
imposition of sentence for any subsequent violation of this chapter.



(1985 Code, § 3-3)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 61-6-4220



§ 111.04  UNLAWFUL TO SELL UNLESS TAX PAID.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or permit to be sold, any
beer, ale, porter, wine, malt or other beverage authorized to be sold under
state statutes regulating same, on which the tax is levied but not paid.



(1985 Code, § 3-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 61-6-190



§ 111.05  SUNDAY AND MONDAY MORNING SALES; PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, barter or
give away any wine or beer in the city between the hours of 12:00 midnight
Saturday and sunrise Monday morning; provided, however, any establishment
licensed pursuant to S.C. Code §§ 61-6-100 et seq., as amended shall be
authorized to sell the products during those hours in which the sale of
alcoholic beverages in containers of two ounces or less is lawful.



(1985 Code, § 3-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 61-6-4160



§ 111.06  CONTRABAND.



   (A)   Any place of business violating §§ 111.04 or 111.05 shall
have all beer and wine found upon the premises declared contraband, and it
shall be seized as contraband liquor; provided, that the person owning or
claiming the beer/wine may retain possession by delivering a cash bond in an
amount equal to the cost price charged for a like quantity by a licensed
wholesaler.



   (B)   The officer who shall receive the bond shall deliver a written
receipt to the person posting the bond.



   (C)   The cash bond shall be deposited in the Treasury of the city.



(1985 Code, § 3-6)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code §§ 61-6-4300 et seq.



§ 111.07  WHOLESALE DELIVERY ON SUNDAY.



   No person shall deliver wine or beer in wholesale lots or quantities
within the city between the hours of 12:00 midnight Saturday and 12:00
midnight Sunday.



(1985 Code, § 3-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.08  RESTRICTING THE HOURS OF OPERATION OF COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
WHICH ALLOW FOR THE ON PREMISES CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., on the premises of any
private or non-profit club, bar, any store, beer parlor, or other place or
entity of business or commercial establishment authorized by law to sell
beer, ale, porter, wine, and/or alcoholic liquor for the on premises
consumption thereof, it shall be unlawful for:



   (A)   An owner, employee, or person in charge thereof to sell for
consumption on premises, offer for sale, give away, barter, exchange, or in
any manner dispense or permit the consumption of any beer, ale, porter, wine,
as defined in S.C. Code § 61-4-10, as amended, and/or alcoholic liquor on
premises; or



   (B)   Any person to operate, or to allow to be open any such private
or non-profit club, bar store, beer parlor or other such place or entity of
business or commercial establishment authorized by law to sell beer, ale,
porter, wine, and/or liquor for on premises consumption.



(1985 Code, § 3-8)  (Ord. 11-001, passed 1-11-2011)  Penalty, see § 10.99




DRINKING SPECIFICALLY




§ 111.25  DRINKING OR POSSESSION ON LICENSED PREMISES AT PROHIBITED HOURS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or possess in an open
container any quantity of beer, wine or alcoholic beverage in any alcoholic
beverage place of business, or upon the premises of any place of business
between the hours stated in this chapter. At no time will any establishment
licensed to sell beer, wine or alcoholic beverages, sell, give away, consume
or allow the consumption of the beer, wine or alcoholic liquors behind locked
doors.



(1985 Code, § 3-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 61-6-1610



§ 111.26  DRINKING IN PUBLIC PLACES GENERALLY; OPEN CONTAINERS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any kind of
alcoholic liquor or other intoxicating beverage on the streets, highways, in
any vehicle or in any other public place in the city.



   (B)   Possession of any open container, whether empty, partially
full or full, within the person's possession or control, shall constitute
prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.



(1985 Code, § 3-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.27  DRINKING ON SCHOOL OR RECREATIONAL PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any beer, liquor, wine or
other intoxicating beverages on any public school property, or any
recreational property owned or operated by the city.



(1985 Code, § 3-11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.28  DRINKING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON UNLICENSED PREMISES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person not licensed to sell
alcoholic beverages to permit the drinking of alcoholic beverages on the
premises of any place of business under the person's control which is open to
the public.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink alcoholic
beverages in or around any place of business open to the public which is not
licensed to sell alcoholic beverages.



(1985 Code, § 3-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.29  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON PREMISES OF UNLICENSED PERSON CONSTITUTES
CONTRABAND.



   If any alcoholic beverage is sold to anyone by a person who does not
have a valid license to make such a sale, all alcoholic beverages found on
the premises of the person, or the premises under the control of the person,
is hereby declared contraband and shall be seized by any municipal police
officer, without warrant, and handled as contraband liquor.



(1985 Code, § 3-13)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 61-6-4310




ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO MINORS




§ 111.45  SALE TO MINORS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell beer, ale, porter, wine or
other malt, fermented beverage or any alcoholic beverage to minors, as
defined by state law.



(1985 Code, § 3-14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 61-6-4070



§ 111.46  PURCHASE OR POSSESSION BY MINOR.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any minor, as defined by state law,
to purchase or knowingly have in his or her possession, any beer, ale,
porter, wine or any other similar malt or fermented beverage.



   (B)   Any possession shall not apply to any employee lawfully
engaged in the sale or delivery of any beverage in an unopened container.



(1985 Code, § 3-15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 61-6-4070



§ 111.47  FALSE INFORMATION AS TO AGE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to whom alcoholic beverages cannot
be lawfully sold to knowingly give false information concerning the person's
age for the purpose of purchasing alcoholic beverages. This section does not
relieve the seller of the legal requirement to determine the legal age of the
purchaser.



(1985 Code, § 3-16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 61-6-4085



§ 111.48  PURCHASING ON BEHALF OF ANOTHER WHO CANNOT LAWFULLY PURCHASE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase beer or wine while on
licensed premises and to give the beer or wine to a person to whom beer or
wine cannot lawfully be sold, for consumption on/or off the premises.



(1985 Code, § 3-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 61-6-4075




LICENSE AND PERMITS




§ 111.65  ACTS PROHIBITED ON LICENSED PREMISES; REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   No holder of a permit authorizing the sale of alcoholic
beverages or any servant, agent or employee of the permittee shall knowingly
do any of the following acts upon the licensed premises covered by the
holder's permit:



      (1)   Sell alcoholic beverages to a minor;



      (2)   Sell alcoholic beverages to any person while the person
is in an intoxicated condition;



      (3)   Permit gambling or games of chance;



      (4)   Permit any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment,
conduct or practices;



      (5)   Permit any act, the commission of which tends to create
a public nuisance or which constitutes a crime under the ordinances of the
city or the laws of the state; or



      (6)   Sell, offer for sale or possess any beverage or
alcoholic liquor the sale or possession of which is prohibited on the
licensed premises under the laws of the state.



   (B)   A violation of any of the foregoing provisions shall be a
ground for the revocation or suspension of the holder's permit by the state.



(1985 Code, § 3-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 61-6-920



§ 111.66  SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AFTER LICENSE REVOKED, CANCELED OR
SUSPENDED.



   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any holder of a license to
sell alcoholic beverages at wholesale or retail, to sell or offer to sell
alcoholic beverages after the license shall have been revoked or canceled, or
during the period of a suspension of the license.



(1985ode, § 3-19)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 61-6-950



§ 111.67  PERMITTEE SELLING DRAFT BEER TO BE APPROVED BY STATE.



   No person holding a retail permit to sell beer, ale, porter and other
similar malt or fermented beverages, issued by the state, shall sell the
beverages on draft, on tap or from kegs or other containers on the premises
described in the permit, unless approved by the rules and regulations of the
State Department of Health and Environmental Control governing eating and
drinking establishments and other retail food establishments.



(1985 Code, § 3-20)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 61-4-1750



§ 111.68  PERMIT AND HEALTH CERTIFICATES TO BE POSTED.



   Both the permit issued by the state and the certification of approval
issued by the State Department of Health and Environmental Control, shall be
conspicuously posted on the premises.



(1985 Code, § 3-21)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 61-6-1800



§ 111.69  HINDERING INSPECTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, operator, employee or
patron, upon demand of any police officer, to refuse to allow full inspection
of the premises of any part thereof which is licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages, or refuse to allow full inspection of the stocks or invoices of
the licensee, or to hinder or in any way, delay or prevent the inspection.



(1985 Code, § 3-22)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 112: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES PROGRAM



Section



   112.01   Title



   112.02   Findings



   112.03   Definitions



   112.04   Authorization



   112.05   Authorized incentives



   112.06   Eligibility criteria



   112.07   Administration and terms of delivery



   112.08   Administration of incentives and incentive agreements



§ 112.01  TITLE.



   This article shall  be titled  "Economic Development Incentive
Program."



(Ord. 17-018, passed 8-8-2017)



§ 112.02  FINDINGS.



   Subject to the realization of certain benefits (as defined in §
112.03), the economic development incentive program is enacted by the Council
to meet its goals (as defined in § 112.03).



(Ord. 17-018, passed 8-8-2017)



§ 112.03  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this Chapter 112, unless the context shall otherwise
require, the following terms shall have the following respective meanings:



   BENEFITS. The value to the city of providing the incentives, which
generally includes:



      (1)   Increased property values within the incentive area,
super incentive area, and the city as a whole;



      (2)   Increased revenue from property taxes, business license
fees and permit fees;



      (3)   Increased tourism and commercial activity within the
city as a whole; and



      (4)   The improvement of the character of the city by
rehabilitating existing buildings and promoting the construction of infill
development.



   DEVELOPMENT. The activity of improving a real property to the extent of
adding value to the tax base through real property improvements, and the
creation of employment opportunities.



   GOALS. The objectives of the city in offering the incentives, which are
as follows:



      (1)   To promote the redevelopment of existing buildings and
infill development within the incentive area and the super incentive area;



      (2)   To support the establishment of the categories of new
businesses that the Council determines will significantly increase the
overall commercial activity within the city, provide the city's residents
with restaurant and retail options within the city rather than having to
travel elsewhere; encourage tourists and those who reside in surrounding
communities to make use of businesses within the city; and increase property
values within the city as a whole; and



      (3)   To develop the incentive and super incentive areas into
a "downtown" that provides the city with a "sense of place."



   INCENTIVE. A grant of any inducement having monetary value by the city
that is offered to a person, firm, or corporation to pursue a development
that encourages private investment and/or the creation/retention of jobs. The
incentive may also include grants from other entities that the city may be
able to obtain.



   INCENTIVE AREA. The particular area in which the Council has determined
that the revitalization and redevelopment thereof is essential to preserving
and improving the economy, society and culture of the city and enhancing the
quality of life of the citizens thereof. The incentive area shall include
those properties indicated on the map submitted along with this chapter as
Exhibit A, to include parts of St. James Avenue, US Highway 52, and some
adjacent streets.



   SUPER INCENTIVE AREA. The particular area in which the Council has
determined that additional support is necessary to promote the revitalization
and redevelopment thereof, which is essential to preserving and improving the
economy, society and culture of the city and enhancing the quality of life of
the citizens thereof. The super incentive area shall include those properties
indicated on the map submitted along with this chapter as Exhibit A, to
include portions of Red Bank Road and US Highway 52 (S. Goose Creek Blvd)
south of the intersection of US Highway 52 and St. James Avenue. Excepted
where specifically stated in this chapter, all references to the incentive
area shall include the super incentive area. Unless explicitly distinguished
or context would indicate otherwise, references to "incentive area" shall
include the super incentive area.



   INCENTIVE RECIPIENT. The private parties receiving the incentives from
the city.



   JOB. Each new:



      (1)   Full-time position; or



      (2)   Each full-time equivalent position that is created as a
direct result of the ongoing operation of a development. For the purposes of
calculating the number of jobs created by a development, only those employed
at businesses directly associated with the development at positions
permanently located within the incentive area shall be considered.



(Ord. 17-018, passed 8-8-2017)



§ 112.04  AUTHORIZATION.



   (A)   Authorization to grant incentives. The Council, at its
discretion and on a case-by-case basis, but subject to the general
eligibility criteria provided for in § 112.06 herein, may enter into an
incentive agreement (as defined herein) with a person, firm or corporation
providing for incentives in order to encourage and support the development of
real property within the incentive area.



   (B)   Incentive agreements. Incentives shall only be provided to an
incentive recipient after an incentive agreement has been entered into
between the city and such person, firm or corporation, which agreement shall
set forth:



      (1)   The particulars of the development;



      (2)   The incentives to be provided; and



      (3)   Sufficient assurances that the benefits will accrue to
the city and the goals will be met by the development (an "incentive
agreement"). Pending the approval by the Council of any incentive agreement,
and subject to the provisions of in § 112.07 herein, the City Administrator
of the city is authorized to discuss the provisions of this economic
development incentive program, aid in the completion of any proposal (as
defined herein) and, subject to the final approval by the Council, negotiate
with the potential incentive recipient on behalf of the city. Each incentive
agreement shall be approved by Council by ordinance. Council is authorized to
provide incentives in any amounts and for any period of time within the
thresholds provided for herein or within the time periods and thresholds
provided for in any applicable statutory authorization.



(Ord. 17-018, passed 8-8-2017)



§ 112.05  AUTHORIZED INCENTIVES.



   (A)   Multiple incentives. The Council may provide to an incentive
recipient any combination of Incentives provided for herein; provided,
however, that the total amount of incentives given to a development must be
in keeping with the goals, and the value of the benefits accruing to the city
(and its citizens) must be greater than the financial value of the incentives
to an incentive recipient.



   (B)   incentives of the city. All direct incentives of the city
shall be granted in the form of reimbursements and refunds of fees and taxes
that have been duly paid to the city. No up-front abatements of fees or taxes
shall be permitted. Where incentives continue for a period of more than one
year, such incentives may be graduated to increase or decrease year-to-year
as the Council sees fit, but subject to monitoring by the city to ensure
compliance with the terms of any incentive agreement. The Council may, at its
discretion and on a case-by-case basis, enter into an incentive agreement to
reimburse or give a refund to any person, firm or corporation the following
fees and taxes up to the amounts and percentages provided for herein:



      (1)   Up to 100% of the applicable development impact fees
collected by the city;



      (2)   Up to 50% of the building permit fees collected by the
city;



      (3)   Up to 50% of the business license fees collected by the
city for as many as five years;



      (4)   Up to 50% of the local hospitality taxes collected by
the city for as many as five years, but funds received through such incentive
are to be spent only for purposes that are related to tourism, pursuant to
S.C. Code § 6-1-730, and which have been approved by Council and included in
the incentive agreement;



      (5)   Such other incentives that the Council, at its
discretion on a case-by-case basis, determines are appropriate given the
amount or type of investment made by the Incentive Recipient in the
investment area.



   (C)   State incentive programs. The state programs that may be
considered by Council to be included within any package of Incentives or as a
stand-alone set of incentives for in-city projects located outside of the
development area, include the following:



      (1)   Property tax credits authorized by the provisions of the
South Carolina Abandoned Buildings Revitalization Act, codified at S.C. Code
Ann. §§ 12-67-100 et seq. (collectively, the "Abandoned Building Act").
Incentive recipients requesting consideration of the Abandoned Building Act
by the Council shall submit an Abandoned Building Act Application in a form
to be provided by the city.



      (2)   The South Carolina real property tax credit for the
installation of a fire sprinkler system, codified at S.C. Code Ann. §
12-6-3622.



(Ord. 17-018, passed 8-8-2017)



§ 112.06  ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA.



   (A)   Incentive area eligibility criteria. Except for those
incentives discussed in § 112.05(C) above as authorized by the state and
which are intended by the terms of this economic development incentive
program to be applied city-wide, in order for a development to be eligible to
receive incentives, the Council must determine that the development meets, or
upon completion will meet, each of the following criteria:



      (1)   The development is consistent with the City of Goose
Creek comprehensive plan (as may be amended) and the City of Goose Creek
economic development strategic plan (as may be amended) (together, the
"plans") as well as the goals.



      (2)   Absent the provision of incentives, the development
would be unlikely to occur or unlikely to occur at the level or scale
contemplated by the developer.



      (3)   The development must be located within the incentive
area, as defined in § 112.03.



      (4)   The development must have a minimum threshold investment
of $1,000,000 (as applicable to the incentive area, the "minimum investment").



         (a)   The minimum investment may be comprised of any
combination of:



            1.   Real property acquisition costs;



            2.   The costs of physical improvements to real
property; or



            3.   The costs of capital improvements to city
infrastructure.



         (b)   The minimum investment may be calculated based
upon investment in a single property or the cumulative investment in multiple
properties, each within the incentive area. Where multiple uses or businesses
are to be located within a single development as separate businesses, the
Council may, at its discretion on a case-by-case basis, allocate appropriate
portions of the total investment in the development to such separate business
in order to allow such business to meet the minimum investment eligibility
requirement. In order to meet the threshold for the minimum investment, a
development may be given a credit towards the minimum investment of $50,000
for each job (as defined herein) that will be created by the development.



      (5)   The intended use of the development must be for one or
more of the following business purposes:



         (a)   Retail uses;



         (b)   Tourism-related business or activities;



         (c)   Cultural arts activities and associated businesses;



         (d)   Corporate headquarters;



         (e)   Research and development;



         (f)   High technology growth businesses;



         (g)   Full service restaurants; and



         (h)   Other uses, as may be determined by the Council,
that are consistent with the goals, and the plans.



   (B)   Super incentive area eligibility criteria. Except for those
incentives discussed in § 112.05(C) as authorized by the state and which are
intended by the terms of this economic development incentive program to be
applied city-wide, in order for a development to be eligible to receive
incentives, the Council must determine that the development meets, or upon
completion will meet, each of the following criteria:



      (1)   The development is consistent with the plans as well as
the goals.



      (2)   Absent the provision of incentives, the development
would be unlikely to occur or unlikely to occur at the level or scale
contemplated by the developer.



      (3)   The development must be located within the super
incentive area, as defined in § 112.03.



      (4)   The development must have a minimum threshold investment
of $750,000 (as applicable to the super incentive area, the "minimum
investment").



         (a)   The minimum investment may be comprised of any
combination of:



            1.   Real property acquisition costs;



            2.   The costs of physical improvements to real
property; or



            3.   The costs of capital improvements to city
infrastructure.



         (b)   The minimum investment may be calculated based
upon investment in a single property or the cumulative investment in multiple
properties, each within the super incentive area. Where multiple uses or
businesses are to be located within a single development as separate
businesses, the Council may, at its discretion on a case-by-case basis,
allocate appropriate portions of the total investment in the development to
such separate business in order to allow such business to meet the minimum
investment eligibility requirement. In order to meet the threshold for the
minimum investment, a development may be given a credit towards the minimum
investment of $50,000 for each job (as defined herein) that will be created
by the development.



      (5)   The intended use of the development must be for one or
more of the following business purposes:



         (a)   Retail uses;



         (b)   Tourism-related business or activities;



         (c)   Cultural arts activities and associated businesses;



         (d)   Corporate headquarters;



         (e)   Research and development;



         (f)   High technology growth businesses; and



         (g)   Other uses, as may be determined by the Council,
that are consistent with the goals, and the plans.



   (C)   Specific criteria. The Council may, at its discretion and on a
case-by-case basis, include within an incentive agreement any other
eligibility criteria that must be met upon completion of a development in
order to ensure that the goals are met and that the development provides
benefits to the city (and its citizens) in amounts that warrant the
implementation of incentives.



(Ord. 17-018, passed 8-8-2017)



§ 112.07  ADMINISTRATION AND TERMS OF DELIVERY.



   (A)   Application for incentives. Except where an applicant seeks
only incentives authorized by the state incentive programs listed in §
112.05(C), in order to be eligible for incentives, a person, firm or
corporation must submit to the City Administrator a proposed set of
incentives for a development (a "proposal"), in a form provided by the city.
The proposal must include a sufficient description of the development, to
include, without limitation, the following information:



      (1)   Identification of the property or properties on which
the development is to be located and any acquisition costs thereof;



      (2)   The estimated start date and completion date for any
work to be performed with respect to the development;



      (3)   A list of any physical improvements that are to be made
with respect to the development, including a good-faith estimate of the costs
thereof;



      (4)   The then-current value of the property on which the
development is to be located and a good-faith estimate of the value of the
property upon completion of the improvements thereto;



      (5)   A good-faith estimate of the number of jobs that the
development is projected to create, including an estimate of the date upon
which the estimated number of jobs will have been created;



      (6)   A statement affirming that, based upon any acquisition
costs for the on which the development is to be located, along with
good-faith estimates for the costs of physical improvements and the number of
jobs created, the development will meet or exceed the minimum investment;



      (7)   A good-faith estimate of other revenue for the city that
will be created as a direct result of the development, including anticipated
business license fees, additional property tax revenue, capital improvements
to city-owned infrastructure and utilities revenue; and



      (8)   Any other additional information that the incentive
recipient or the City Administrator deems may be necessary and helpful for
the Council to evaluate and give due consideration to the proposal.



   (B)   Determination of incentive amounts. The amount of incentives
granted to a development shall be based upon the amount of the capital
investment in the development, the amount of new revenue for the city
directly created by the development and the number of new jobs that will be
directly created by the development. The amount of incentives granted to a
development shall in no case exceed the value of the direct and indirect
benefits of the development to the city. These amounts shall be expressly
included within any incentive agreement.



   (C)   Certification, commencement and continuation of incentives.



      (1)   No incentive shall commence or be given until such time
as the development has been issued a certificate of occupancy and/or a
business license as well as a certificate that all terms and benchmarks
included within the applicable incentive agreement, including without
limitation benchmarks for capital investment, property valuation, and job
creation (the "benchmarks"), have been fully achieved or otherwise completed.



      (2)   Where benchmarks, such as the number of jobs created,
are to be met continuously over a period of time, the incentive recipient
shall provide to the city, on an annual basis, sufficient proof that the
development has continuously achieved or otherwise complied with such
benchmarks.



      (3)   If, at any time after completion of a development or at
any time within the period of time during which a development is granted
incentives, a development fails to achieve or otherwise comply with a
benchmark, the Council may, at its discretion and on a case-by-case basis:



         (a)   Declare the incentive agreement null and void and
refuse to grant any future incentives; or



         (b)   Decrease the amount of incentives based upon the
actual direct and indirect benefits of the development to the city and its
citizens.



(Ord. 17-018, passed 8-8-2017)



§ 112.08  ADMINISTRATION OF INCENTIVES AND INCENTIVE AGREEMENTS.



   The administration of the application process, specifically including
the drafting of any proposal, and continuous monitoring of developments
pursuant to applicable incentive agreements shall be the responsibility of
the City Administrator and any person designated to oversee such process by
the City Administrator.



(Ord. 17-018, passed 8-8-2017)



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter




      130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





      131.   OFFENSES CONCERNING PROPERTY





      132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE





      133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS





      134.   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES





      135.   WEAPONS





      136.   ADVERTISING





      137.   NUISANCES




CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   130.01   Impersonating an officer



   130.02   Obstructing justice; generally



   130.03   Assaulting or resisting public official or police officer



   130.04   Approaching within 20 feet of person being arrested



   130.05   Failure to aid police



   130.06   Interfering with firefighters



   130.07   Obstructing or interfering with public utility officers



   130.08   False alarms; generally



   130.09   Reports or complaints to Police Department



   130.10   Escape from confinement; fraudulent payment of bail



   130.11   Releasing prisoner before completion of sentence



   130.12   Report of treatment of wounds



   130.13   Closing hours for parks and playgrounds



   130.14   Railroads; complaints of conduct



   130.15   Entry on rights-of-way or property



§ 130.01  IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER.



   (A)   No person, other than an official police officer of the city,
shall wear or carry the uniform, apparel, badge, identification card or any
other insignia of office like or similar to, or a colorable imitation of that
adopted and worn or carried by the police officers of the city.



   (B)   No person shall do or attempt any act to impersonate a police
officer.



(1985 Code, § 14-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Impersonating an officer, see S.C. Code § 16-17-720



§ 130.02  OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE; GENERALLY.



   Any person within the city who shall hinder, prevent or obstruct any
officer or other person charged with the execution of any warrant or other
process issued under the provisions of any ordinance of the city, in
arresting any person for whose arrest the warrant or other process may have
been issued, or in arresting any person for any treason, felony or breach of
the peace, committed in the officer’s presence, or shall rescue or attempt
to rescue the person from the custody of the officer or person lawfully
assisting the officer, or shall aid, abet or assist any person so arrested,
directly or indirectly, to escape from the custody of the officer or person
assisting the officer, or shall harbor or conceal any person for whose arrest
a warrant or other process shall have been issued so as to prevent the
person's discovery and arrest, after notice or knowledge of the issuing of
the warrant or other process, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1985 Code, § 14-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 16-5-50



§ 130.03  ASSAULTING OR RESISTING PUBLIC OFFICIAL OR POLICE OFFICER.



   No person shall assault, resist, hinder, oppose, abuse, molest or
interfere with any police or other officer or employee of the city, or of any
department or board of the city, in the discharge of official duties.



(1985 Code, § 14-3)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Hindering officers, see S.C. Code § 16-5-50



§ 130.04  APPROACHING WITHIN 20 FEET OF PERSON BEING ARRESTED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully to approach
nearer than 20 feet to any police officer who is making an arrest or
attempting to do so, or while on the way to jail with the prisoner, except as
otherwise directed by the police officer.



   (B)   All police officers are empowered to order all persons away
from the vicinity of the site of arrest or the jail while any person is being
placed therein or being held for custody.



(1985 Code, § 14-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.05  FAILURE TO AID POLICE.



   It shall be the duty of each and every citizen of the city to assist
the police or other municipal officer to arrest violators of the law when
commanded, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail to do so.



(1985 Code, § 14-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.06  INTERFERING WITH FIREFIGHTERS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to hinder or obstruct any firefighter or
other authorized person while the person is answering a fire call or any
other emergency call, or to hinder or obstruct the person who is attempting
to extinguish a fire or remedy any emergency while acting in an official
capacity, or to loiter about the station used by the Fire Department.



   (B)   The failure to obey any lawful order of any official of the
Fire or Police Departments at the scene of any emergency shall be unlawful.



(1985 Code, § 14-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Driving over fire hose, see S.C. Code § 56-5-3850



   Following fire apparatus and parking near fires, see S.C. Code §
56-5-1960



   Operation of vehicle on approach of emergency vehicle, see S.C. Code §
56-5-2360



§ 130.07  OBSTRUCTING OR INTERFERING WITH PUBLIC UTILITY OFFICERS.



   During a riot or other civil emergency, no person shall hinder,
obstruct, endanger or interfere with any person who is engaged in the
operation, installation, repair or maintenance of any essential public
service facility within the city, including any facility for the transmission
of electricity, gas, telephone messages or water.



(1985 Code, § 14-8)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.08  FALSE ALARMS; GENERALLY.



   (A)   No person shall make or cause to be made with intent to
deceive, any false alarm by means of the fire alarm system, public or private
alarm system, telephone or by any other means of communication.



   (B)   No person shall wilfully make or cause to be made any false
call for an ambulance by any means of communication.



   (C)   This section shall not apply to any authorized personnel while
installing, testing or repairing the alarm systems in the normal course of
employment.



(1985 Code, § 14-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Alarm boxes and false alarms from the boxes, see S.C. Code § 16-17-570



§ 130.09  REPORTS OR COMPLAINTS TO POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   No person shall knowingly make, file or cause to be made or filed, a
false or misleading report, allegation or complaint with the Police
Department.



(1985 Code, § 14-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.10  ESCAPE FROM CONFINEMENT; FRAUDULENT PAYMENT OF BAIL.



   (A)   No person, being lawfully confined in any prison or upon the
public works of the city or while in the custody of any superintendent, guard
or officer, shall escape, attempt to escape or have in the person's
possession tools or weapons which may be used to facilitate an escape.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly escape or attempt to escape
confinement in the city jail by tendering a false bank draft, check or any
other negotiable instrument not honored or paid upon presentation in payment
of a bail order or fine.



(1985 Code, § 14-11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 24-13-410



§ 130.11  RELEASING PRISONER BEFORE COMPLETION OF SENTENCE.



   The Chief of Police, or any officer having in custody any person duly
sentenced and committed by the judge, shall not release the person at any
time previous to the completion of the full term of the sentence, unless
required or authorized by competent legal or medical authority to do so.



(1985 Code, § 14-12)



Statutory reference:



   Aiding escape, see S.C. Code §§ 16-9-410 and 16-9-420



§ 130.12  REPORT OF TREATMENT OF WOUNDS.



   Every physician or surgeon, whenever treating any person in the city
for a gunshot or stab wound, shall notify the Police Department within one
hour of the time the professional service is rendered or the physician is
called upon to render the service.



(1985 Code, § 14-13)



§ 130.13  CLOSING HOURS FOR PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS.



   All parks and playgrounds within the city shall close between the hours
of 11:00 p.m. and sunrise on each day of the week, except when an activity
has been officially authorized by the City Parks and Playground Commission,
or the city during those hours. Any person who shall go onto a park or
playground within the city during the closing hours, as herein set out,
without the permission of the City Parks and Playground Commission or the
city, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1985 Code, § 14-14)



§ 130.14  RAILROADS; COMPLAINTS OF CONDUCT.



   The City Council has the authority to apply directly to the State
Public Service Commission for relief from conduct of any railroad within the
city.



(Prior Code, § 14-15)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 58-17-190



§ 130.15  ENTRY ON RIGHTS-OF-WAY OR PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or be upon any railroad
right-of-way or property, or to tamper with any switch, crossing bar, lights
or any other railroad device, without the express consent of the company
owning the right-of-way or property; provided, however, that the within
prohibition shall not apply to entry or presence on any publicly maintained
grade crossing.



(Prior Code, § 14-16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES CONCERNING PROPERTY



Section




Larceny




   131.001   Larceny



   131.002   Larceny by false pretense




Public Property




   131.015   Damaging or misuse of public property generally



   131.016   Opening or tampering with fire hydrants and waterlines



   131.017   Breaking or removing street lights



   131.018   Walking on or damaging grass plots



   131.019   Damaging private property generally



   131.020   Removing or damaging property on vacant structure or
building




Trespassing




   131.035   Trespassing on private property



   131.036   Breaking or entering coin box or other receptacle



   131.037   Breaking and entering outside showcase or counter



   131.038   Trespassing on publically owned property or private or
public utilities




Tampering With/Damaging Property




   131.055   Tampering with property of public utilities; manhole covers



   131.056   Tampering with utility wires and posting bills on utility
poles



   131.057   Damaging public lamps, utilities poles and sign posts



   131.058   Injury or damage to flowers, shrubs, fences and parks



   131.059   Flags and decorations; damaging



   131.060   Damaging monuments and signs



   131.061   Defrauding places of public accommodation; proof, exception



   131.062   Receiving stolen goods prohibited



   131.063   Revocation of license upon conviction



   131.064   Removing, destroying or leaving down fences




General Offenses




   131.080   Failing to return books and the like, borrowed from
certain public institutions



   131.081   Trespass for various purposes



   131.082   Altering and removing landmarks




LARCENY




§ 131.001  LARCENY.



   No person shall wrongfully take, steal, obtain or withhold by any means
whatever, from the possession of the true owner or any other person, any
money, personal property or article of value of any kind of a value of less
than $200 with intent, permanent or temporary, to deprive or defraud another
person of the use and benefit of the property, or to appropriate the same to
the person's own use or the use of any person other than the true owner.



(1985 Code, § 14-20)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.002  LARCENY BY FALSE PRETENSE.



   No person shall induce, or attempt to induce, any person to give up, or
pay over any money or other thing of value, by any false representation or
pretense, or in exchange for any false or bogus coin or check, draft or other
false evidence of value, or in consideration of refraining from a lawful or
unlawful arrest, or in consideration of refraining from reporting any
unlawful act to any public official.



(1985 Code, § 14-21)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code §§ 16-13-230et seq.




PUBLIC PROPERTY




§ 131.015  DAMAGING OR MISUSE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY GENERALLY.



   No person shall wilfully damage, destroy or trespass upon, or illegally
make use of, any public property of any kind whatsoever belonging to, or in
the possession and care of the city, whether streets, trees, buildings or
other property.



(1985 Code, § 14-22)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Damage to property, see S.C. Code §§ 16-11-520et seq.



§ 131.016  OPENING OR TAMPERING WITH FIRE HYDRANTS AND WATERLINES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, except a member of the Fire
Department or a person expressly authorized by the Director of Public Works,
to open or otherwise tamper with any fire hydrant or waterline within the
corporate limits of the city.



(1985 Code, § 14-23)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.017  BREAKING OR REMOVING STREET LIGHTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to break any lamp or electric light
or to remove any electric light bulb or otherwise tamper with any street
light.



(1985 Code, § 14-24)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.018  WALKING ON OR DAMAGING GRASS PLOTS.



   No person shall walk upon or damage any grass plots planted by the city
in its parks or in any street, lane, alley or open court within the city,
where prohibiting signs are posted.



(1985 Code, § 14-25)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.019  DAMAGING PRIVATE PROPERTY GENERALLY.



   No person shall break, deface, remove or destroy any private property
of another without first having obtained the consent of the owner.



(1985 Code, § 14-26)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Damaging property, see S.C. Code §§ 16-11-510et seq.



§ 131.020  REMOVING OR DAMAGING PROPERTY ON VACANT STRUCTURE OR BUILDING.



   No person shall remove or in any manner damage any fixture, attachment
or other property belonging to, connected with or used in the construction of
any vacant structure or building, or break into any vacant structure or
building unless authorized to enter and remove any fixture, attachment or
other property belonging to, connected with or used in the construction on
any vacant structure or building, whether built or in the process of
construction or damage the structure or building in any way, whether
intentional or not, in attempting to enter the structure or building or in
removing, or attempting to remove, any fixture, attachment or other property
belonging to, connected with or used in the construction of the structure or
building.



(1985 Code, § 14-27)  Penalty, see § 10.99




TRESPASSING




§ 131.035  TRESPASSING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall wilfully enter upon the lands or premises of
another without the consent of the owner, or after having been forbidden to
do so or after the land or premises has been posted by the owner, occupant or
any other authorized person with a conspicuous notice forbidding trespassing.



   (B)   No person shall neglect or refuse to depart from the property
of another when ordered to do so by the owner, occupant or any other person
with authority to order the departure.



(1985 Code, § 14-28)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.036  BREAKING OR ENTERING COIN BOX OR OTHER RECEPTACLE.



   (A)   No person shall, by and with the aid and use of any key,
instrument, device or explosive, break or attempt to break, or force or
attempt to force an entrance into any coin box, depository box, newspaper
coin box or other receptacle not belonging to the person.



   (B)   No person shall, without making payment for any article of
merchandise or service, extract or obtain, or attempt to extract or obtain
from any coin box or receptacle anything of value deposited or contained in
the receptacle or coin box.



(1985 Code, § 14-29)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.037  BREAKING AND ENTERING OUTSIDE SHOWCASE OR COUNTER.



   No person shall break and enter, or attempt to break and enter, or
enter without breaking, at any time, any outside showcase or other enclosed
counter used for the display of goods, wares or merchandise.



(1985 Code, § 14-30)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.038  TRESPASSING ON PUBLICALLY OWNED PROPERTY OR PRIVATE OR PUBLIC
UTILITIES.



   (A)   No person shall trespass or loiter on any of the properties
enumerated in division (B) below, when the properties are posted with signs
which have been approved by the Chief of Police as being sufficiently well
designed and located as to apprise the public of the fact that the property
is so restricted.



   (B)   The following properties shall be posted as provided in
division (A) above:



      (1)   Every reservoir, dam, pumping station, aqueduct, main
canal or pipe line of a public water system;



      (2)   Every reservoir, dam, generating plant, receiving
station, distributing station and transmission line of a company or agency
furnishing electrical energy;



      (3)   Every gas generating plant, compressor plant, gas
holder, gas tank and gas main used for the production, storage and
distribution of gas;



      (4)   Every plant or vital part thereof, including sewer
mains, settling tanks and outfall sewers used for sewage disposal purposes;



      (5)   Every plant or vital part thereof or other principal
property essential to rendering telephone or telegraph service; and



      (6)   Every radio or television broadcasting central plant or
station.



(1985 Code, § 14-31)  Penalty, see § 10.99




TAMPERING WITH/DAMAGING PROPERTY




§ 131.055  TAMPERING WITH PROPERTY OF PUBLIC UTILITIES; MANHOLE COVERS.



   (A)   No person shall alter, remove, interfere with or tamper with,
any wire, fixture, pipe, conduit, meter or other appliance of any waterworks
plant, gas or electrical, or telephone, telegraph or other company, or person
operating a similar business, or tap any supply wires or pipes, or
fraudulently or secretly extract, or use any water, electricity or gas of the
plant or company, or uncover or open up any manhole or other opening to any
sewer, unless the person so doing is an employee of the company or city, or
under authority and direction to do so.



   (B)   No person shall leave any manhole or other opening open or
unprotected without replacing the fixtures and appliances in their proper
place and position.



(1985 Code, § 14-32)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.056  TAMPERING WITH UTILITY WIRES AND POSTING BILLS ON UTILITY POLES.



   No person shall meddle, tamper with, damage, break, cut, take down or
disarrange any telegraph, telephone or electric light pole, fire or police
alarm pole or box, or any wire cord, lamp or other apparatus used in
operating or maintaining any telegraph, telephone, electric light or fire
alarm, without authority so to do, or post any bills or posters of any kind
whatsoever upon any poles or posts within the city.



(1985 Code, § 14-33)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.057  DAMAGING PUBLIC LAMPS, UTILITIES POLES AND SIGN POSTS.



   No person shall wilfully or wantonly damage or break any of the public
lamps, or any glass in the lamps, or any lamp post, telegraph, telephone,
electric light or fire alarm pole, or any sign post or street sign.



(1985 Code, § 14-34)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 16-11-740



§ 131.058  INJURY OR DAMAGE TO FLOWERS, SHRUBS, FENCES AND PARKS.



   No person shall wilfully, and without authority cut, pull, pluck or
otherwise injure any flowers, flowering plants, shrubs or trees growing in or
around any private or public grounds or wilfully tear down, remove, cut or
otherwise damage or destroy any gate, fence, bench, seat, bridge, building or
other structure or property located on public property.



(1985 Code, § 14-35)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.059  FLAGS AND DECORATIONS; DAMAGING.



   No person shall remove, destroy, damage, deface, or disarrange any flag
or other decoration without the consent of the owner.



(1985 Code, § 14-36)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 16-17-220



§ 131.060  DAMAGING MONUMENTS AND SIGNS.



   No person shall wilfully remove, destroy, mutilate, damage or deface in
any way or to any extent, any monument or sign in, on or upon any public
park, street or private property of the city.



(1985 Code, § 14-37)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.061  DEFRAUDING PLACES OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION; PROOF, EXCEPTION.



   (A)   No person shall obtain food, lodging or other accommodation at
any hotel, motel, inn, boarding, eating or rooming house or place, or any
other lodging place, with the intent to defraud the owner or keeper.



   (B)   Proof that lodging, food and other accommodations were
obtained by false pretense or fictitious show of any package or other
property, or that the person gave a check or negotiable paper on which
payment was refused, or that the person left the hotel, motel, inn, boarding,
eating or rooming house or place or other lodging place, without paying or
offering to pay for the goods, lodging or other accommodation or that the
person surreptitiously removed or attempted to remove the package or
property, or that the person registered under a fictitious name shall be
prima facie proof of attempt to defraud.



   (C)   This section shall not apply where there has been an agreement
in writing for delay in payment.



(1985 Code, § 14-38)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.062  RECEIVING STOLEN GOODS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall buy or receive any goods, chattels or other
property knowing or having reasonable cause to believe the property to have
been stolen or knowing that the seller thereof has not good and lawful title
to the property, or without having made a reasonable and careful inquiry into
the title or ownership of the property.



   (B)   No person shall purchase any goods, chattels or other property
from or through any minor without the written permission of the parent or
guardian of any minor.



   (C)   The purchase or possession of any stolen goods, chattels or
other property shall be prima facie evidence of knowledge that the same was
stolen and the burden of proof to show facts justifying a belief that the
property was not stolen property shall be upon the party purchasing or in
possession of the property.



(1985 Code, § 14-39)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Receiving stolen goods, see S.C. Code § 16-13-180



§ 131.063  REVOCATION OF LICENSE UPON CONVICTION.



   The license of any merchant in the city, in whose stock of goods may be
found any stolen goods and who shall be convicted of the crime of receiving
stolen goods, shall be immediately revoked.



(1985 Code, § 14-40)



§ 131.064  REMOVING, DESTROYING OR LEAVING DOWN FENCES.



   Any person other than the owner, who shall remove, destroy or leave
down any portion of any fence in the city intended to enclose animals of any
kind, or crops or uncultivated lands, or who shall leave open any gate or
leave down any bars or other structure intended for a like purpose shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1985 Code, § 14-41)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law, see S.C. Code § 16-11-650




GENERAL OFFENSES




§ 131.080  FAILING TO RETURN BOOKS AND THE LIKE, BORROWED FROM CERTAIN
PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS.



   Whoever borrows from any county library or municipal, school, college
or other institutional library or gallery, museum, collection or exhibition
any book, newspaper, magazine, manuscript, pamphlet, publication, recording,
film or other article shall be given written notice, mailed to the person's
last known address or delivered in person, to return the borrowed article
within 15 days, the person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor; provided the
notice required by this section shall bear upon its face a copy of this
section.



(1985 Code, § 14-42)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provision, see S.C. Code § 16-13-340



§ 131.081  TRESPASS FOR VARIOUS PURPOSES.



   Any person entering upon the lands of another for the purpose of
hunting, fishing, trapping, netting, gathering fruit, wild flowers,
cultivated flowers, shrubbery, straw, turf, vegetables or herbs or cutting
timber on the same without the consent of the owner or manager thereof, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1985 Code, § 14-43)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law, see S.C. Code § 16-11-610



§ 131.082  ALTERING AND REMOVING LANDMARKS.



   If any person shall knowingly, wilfully, maliciously or fraudulently
cut, fell, alter or remove any certain boundary tree or other allowed
landmark, the person so offending shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1985 Code, § 14-44)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 16-11-680



CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE



Section



   132.01   Assault



   132.02   Disorderly conduct; generally



   132.03   Idling



   132.04   Disorderly establishment; investigative procedures



   132.05   Disturbing school



   132.06   Interfering with worship



   132.07   Loitering; generally; police orders to disperse; penalty



   132.08   About police station



   132.09   Ringing doorbells



   132.10   Flood lights restricted



   132.11   Masked or disguised persons; exceptions



   132.12   Burning crosses; intimidating exhibits; placing exhibits
while masked



   132.13   Solicitation on highways prohibited



   132.14   Noises



§ 132.01  ASSAULT.



   No person shall attempt, or offer with unlawful force or violence, to
do bodily harm to another person, whether or not the attempt or offer is
consummated.



(1985 Code, § 14-50)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Assault with concealed weapon, see S.C. Code § 16-3-610



§ 132.02  DISORDERLY CONDUCT; GENERALLY.



   (A)   A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the
purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder, nuisance, or if the
person's conduct is likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or
nuisance, the person wilfully does any of the following acts in a public
place:



      (1)   Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward
another, whereby that other is placed in danger of loss of, or injury to,
life, limb or health;



      (2)   Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward
another, whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being
destroyed or damaged;



      (3)   Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or
riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of
another;



      (4)   Interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation
by acts of violence;



      (5)   Obstructs, either singly or together with other persons,
the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear the public
way when ordered to do so by the city police or other lawful authority known
to be such;



      (6)   Incites, attempts to incite or is involved in attempting
to incite a riot;



      (7)   Threatens violence to any member of the city Police
Department, any other authorized official of the city who is engaged in the
lawful performance of duties, or any other person when the words have a
direct tendency to cause acts of violence; or



      (8)   Makes or causes to be made any loud, boisterous or
unreasonable noise or disturbance when a person of ordinary sensibilities
would be annoyed or disturbed.



   (B)   This section shall not be construed to suppress the right to
lawful assembly, picketing, public speaking or other lawful means of
expressing public opinion not in contravention of other laws.



   (C)   As used in this section:



      (1)    RIOT shall mean a public disturbance involving:



         (a)   Any act of violence by one or more persons, part
of an assemblage of three or more persons, which act shall constitute a clear
and present danger of, or shall result in, damage to the property of any
other persons or injury to the persons of any other individual; or



         (b)   A threat of the commission of any act of violence
by one or more persons, part of an assemblage of three or more persons having
individually or collectively the ability of immediate execution of the
threat, where the performance of the threatened act of violence would
constitute a clear and present danger of, or would result in damage to the
property of any other person, or injury to the person of any other individual.



      (2)   INCITE A RIOT shall mean, but is not limited to, urging
or instigating other persons to riot, but shall not be deemed to mean the
mere oral or written:



         (a)   Advocacy of ideas; or



         (b)   Expression of belief, not involving advocacy of
any act of violence or assertion of the rightness, of, or the right to
commit, any such act.



(1985 Code, § 14-51)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Public disorderly conduct, see S.C. Code § 16-17-530



§ 132.03  IDLING.



   (A)   A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if the person
shall remain idle in essentially one location in a public place in such
manner so as to:



      (1)   Create, or cause to be created, a danger of a breach of
the peace;



      (2)   Create, or cause to be created, any disturbance or
annoyance calculated to interfere with the comfort and repose of any person;



      (3)   Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles;



      (4)   Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully
in any public place; and



      (5)   Make unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or
insulting nature or which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to,
or in whose hearing, they are made.



   (B)   Whenever any police officer shall, in the exercise of
reasonable judgment, decide that the presence of any person in any public
place is causing any of the conditions enumerated in division (A) above, the
officer may, if deemed necessary for the preservation of the public peace and
safety, order that person to leave that place, and any person who shall
refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be
guilty of a violation.



   (C)   This section shall not apply to peaceful picketing, public
speaking or other lawful expressions of opinion not in contravention of other
laws.



(1985 Code, § 14-52)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Public disorderly conduct, see S.C. Code § 16-17-530



§ 132.04  DISORDERLY ESTABLISHMENT; INVESTIGATIVE PROCEDURES.



   No person, firm, or organization in control of any premises shall allow
or tolerate any disorderly conduct upon the premises. For the purpose of this
section, a person, firm or organization in control of any premises shall
include, but is not necessarily limited to: any owner, lease holder, manager,
assistant manager, or other person in apparent control of the premises. Any
person who is found guilty of a violation of this section shall be punished
according to the general penalty provisions in this code for violation of a
city ordinance.



(Ord. 10-001, passed 1-12-2010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.05  DISTURBING SCHOOL.



   (A)   No person shall wilfully or unnecessarily:



      (1)   Interfere with or disturb in any way or in any place the
students or teachers of any school or college;



      (2)   Loiter about the school or college premises; or



      (3)   Act in an obnoxious manner thereon.



   (B)   No person shall:



      (1)   Enter upon school or college premises; or



      (2)   Loiter around the premises, except on business, without
the permission of the principal or person in charge.



(1985 Code, § 14-54)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Disturbing school, see S.C. Code § 16-17-420



§ 132.06  INTERFERING WITH WORSHIP.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or disturb any
public gathering or religious worship within the city.



(1985 Code, § 14-55)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.07  LOITERING; GENERALLY; POLICE ORDERS TO DISPERSE; PENALTY.



   (A)   No person shall loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle
either alone or in consort with others in a public place in such manner as to:



      (1)   Obstruct any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or
tending to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles or
pedestrians; and



      (2)   Commit in or upon any public street, public highway,
public sidewalk or any other public place or building, any act or thing which
is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of
property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or
facing or fronting on any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or
any other public place or building, all of which prevents the free and
uninterrupted ingress or egress, or moving about therein, thereon or thereto.



   (B)   (1)   When any person causes or commits any of the
conditions enumerated in division (A) above, a police officer or any law
enforcement officer shall order that person to stop causing or committing the
conditions and to move on or disperse.



      (2)   Any person who fails or refuses to obey the orders shall
be guilty of a violation of this section.



(1985 Code, § 14-56)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.08  ABOUT POLICE STATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter about the city police
station or to communicate in any way with the prisoners therein, without the
consent of the police officer on duty.



(1985 Code, § 14-57)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.09  RINGING DOORBELLS.



   No person shall ring any doorbell or knock on any door for the purpose
of annoying the occupants of the premises.



(1985 Code, § 14-58)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.10  FLOOD LIGHTS RESTRICTED.



   No person shall have, keep, maintain or cause or permit to be kept or
maintained, either as the owner or as the one in possession or in charge, any
flood light or any other reflector type light on any property in such manner
that its light is unnecessarily thrown into the residence of any person in
the vicinity so as to constitute, while the light is on, a continuous
annoyance to the person occupying the other residence.



(1985 Code, § 14-59)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.11  MASKED OR DISGUISED PERSONS; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No person over 16 years of age shall appear on any street,
highway, alley, public park or other public place in the city in any mask or
disguise which conceals the identity of the person, without the permission of
the Chief of Police.



   (B)   No person shall appear on any street, highway, alley, public
park, public home, private home or any other place to make trick or treat
visitations; provided that this section shall not apply to children 16 years
or less on Halloween night prior to 10:00 p.m.



(1985 Code, § 14-61)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Wearing masks which conceal one's identity, see S.C. Code § 16-7-110



§ 132.12  BURNING CROSSES; INTIMIDATING EXHIBITS; PLACING EXHIBITS WHILE
MASKED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or cause to be
placed on the property of another in the city, a burning or flaming cross or
any manner of exhibit in which a burning or flaming cross, real or simulated,
is a whole or a part without first obtaining the written permission of the
owner or occupant of the premises to do so.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or cause to be
placed anywhere in the city, any exhibit of any kind whatsoever with the
intention of intimidating any person, to prevent any person from doing any
act which is lawful or to cause any person to do any act which is unlawful.



   (C)   For the purpose of this section, the term PUBLIC PLACE shall
include all walks, alleys, streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, roads,
highways or other ways or thoroughfares dedicated to public use or owned or
maintained by public authority and all grounds and buildings owned, leased
by, operated or maintained by public authority.



(1985 Code, § 14-63)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law, see S.C. Code § 16-7-120



§ 132.13  SOLICITATION ON HIGHWAYS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person located on a public right-of-way to
solicit contributions or to distribute any written materials to any other
person within a motor vehicle which is upon any public highway, street or
road within the City of Goose Creek.



(Ord. 93-004, passed 7-1-1993)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.14  NOISES.



   (A)   Generally.  It is found and declared that:



      (1)   The making and creation of excessive, nuisance,
unnecessary or unusually loud noises within the limits of the City of Goose
Creek is a condition which has existed for some time and the extent and
volume of the noises is increasing;



      (2)   The making, creation or maintenance of the excessive,
nuisance, unnecessary, unnatural or unusually loud noises which are
prolonged, unusual and unnatural in their time, place and use affect and are
a detriment to public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and
prosperity of the residents of the City of Goose Creek; and



      (3)   The necessity in the public interest for the provisions
and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted, is declared as a matter
of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared
that the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in
pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health,
comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the peace and quiet
of the City of Goose Creek and its inhabitants.



   (B)   Prohibited noises generally.  It shall be unlawful for any
person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued, or contribute to
creating or continuing, any excessive, nuisance, or unusually loud noise, or
any noise of the character, intensity or duration which interferes with the
comfortable enjoyment of persons of ordinary sensibilities occupying, owning
or controlling nearby properties, or persons making use of public properties
for their intended purposes, within the city.



   (C)   Specific noises prohibited.  The following acts, among
others, are declared to be loud, excessive, disturbing, nuisance, unnecessary
or unusual noises in violation of this section, but the enumeration shall not
be deemed to be exclusive, namely:



      (1)   Radios, phonographs, televisions and the like.  The
playing, using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any
radio receiving set, stereo, recorder, compact disc player, television set,
musical instrument, phonograph or other similar machine or device for the
producing or reproduction of sound in the manner as to disturb the peace,
quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, or at any time with louder
volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who
are in the room, chamber or vehicle, whether the vehicle is parked or moving,
or public place in which the machine or device is operated and who are
voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any set, instrument,
phonograph, machine or device in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a
distance of 50 linear feet or greater measured from the closest part of the
structure from which the sound is emanating, or at a distance of 50 linear
feet or greater measured from the closest point of the vehicle from which the
sound is emanating, or at a distance of 50 linear feet or greater measured
from the device in possession of a pedestrian shall be prima facie evidence
of a violation of this section. To be in violation, it is not necessary that
words or phrases be discernible, and bass reverberations are considered to be
included in the terms “plainly audible”.



      (2)   Construction or repairing of buildings.  The erection
(including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building
other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekdays, and 9:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekends, except in case of urgent necessity in the
interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the
City's Building Inspector, which permit may be granted for a period not to
exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may
be renewed for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues.
If the Building Inspector should determine that the public health and safety
will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any
building or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends, and
if he or she shall further determine that the loss or inconvenience would
result to any party in interest, he or she may grant permission for the work
to be done within the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 9:00
p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends, upon application being made at the time the
permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work.



      (3)   Pile drivers, hammers and the like.  The operation
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 9:00 p.m. and
9:00 a.m. on weekends of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer,
derrick, steam or electric hoist of other appliance, the use of which is
attended by loud or unusual noise.



      (4)   Steam whistles.  The blowing of any steam whistle
attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin
or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper
authority.



      (5)   Exhausts.  The discharge into the open air of the
exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor
boat or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will
effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.



      (6)   Blowers.  The operation of any noise-creating blower,
power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes
noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise
from the blower or fan is muffled and the engine is equipped with a muffler
device sufficient to deaden the noise.



      (7)   Refrigerating or air cooling equipment.  The operation
of any refrigerating or air cooling equipment used in connection with any
building, structure or vehicle unless noise is muffled or the equipment is
equipped with muffler device to deaden the noise.



      (8)   Transportation of metal rails, pillars and columns. 
The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other
material, over and along streets and other public places upon carts, trays,
cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as
to disturb the peace and quiet of the streets or other public places.



      (9)   Defect in vehicle or load.  The use of any automobile,
motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in the manner as to
create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.



      (10)   Racing engines.  The racing of the engine of any motor
vehicle, while the vehicle is not in motion, except when necessary to do so
in the course of repairing, adjusting or testing the same.



      (11)   Horns, signals devices and the like.  The sounding of
any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar or
other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, the creation by
means of any signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound and the
sounding of any device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.
The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity,
the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust and
the use of any signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up.



      (12)   Loading, unloading, opening and the like, boxes and the
like.  The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading
or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes,
crates and containers.



      (13)   Continuous or repeated noises.  Regardless of the
level of sound, the following shall be prohibited:



         (a)   To keep any animal, including a bird, causing a
frequent or long continued noise, such as barking, howling or screeching,
disturbing the comfort and repose of any person of ordinary sensibilities in
the immediate vicinity; and



         (b)   To install or operate a burglar alarm system which
uses an audible warning or bell without a functioning device that will shut
off the warning or bell within 20 minutes after application of the system
when the alarm cannot be readily or conveniently silenced by persons who are
disturbed by its activation. Each activation of an alarm beyond 20 minutes
shall be deemed a separate offense.



      (14)   Loudspeakers, amplifiers and the like for
advertising.  The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or
operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph,
loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound which broadcast upon the public streets for the purpose
of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any
building or structure.



      (15)   Drums and the like.  The use of any drum, whistle,
rattle, bell, gong, clapper, horn, hammer or other instrument or device for
the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance,
exhibition, show or sale.



      (16)   Hawkers, peddlers and the like.  The shouting and
crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of
the neighborhood.



      (17)   Yelling, shouting and the like.  Yelling, calling,
crying, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing in an unreasonably loud
fashion on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 9:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or
other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.



      (18)   Schools, courts, churches and hospitals.  The creation
of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of
learning, church or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any
hospital or nursing home, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of
the institutions, or which disturbs or unduly annoys the patients in the
hospital or the residents in the nursing care facility, provided conspicuous
signs are displayed in the streets indicating that the same is a school,
hospital, care facility or court street.



   (D)   Enforcement factors.  In the enforcement of standards
established in this section, an enforcement officer may be required to
exercise judgment in determining if a particular noise is sufficiently loud
or otherwise so offensive that it would unreasonably disturb a person of
ordinary sensibilitiesin the vicinity. When making the determinations, the
enforcement officer shall consider the following factors:



      (1)   The volume of the noise;



      (2)   The intensity of the noise;



      (3)   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;



      (4)   Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;



      (5)   The type and intensity of background noise, if any;



      (6)   The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping
facilities;



      (7)   The nature of zoning of the area(s) in which the noise
is heard;



      (8)   The time of day or night the noise occurs;



      (9)   The duration of the noise; and



      (10)   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or
constant.



   (E)   Special permits for events and exhibitions.  When approved by
City Council, the City Administrator or his or her designee may issue on a
temporary basis, permits for special events or exhibitions such as (but not
limited to) music, speeches or general entertainment as a part and in
recognition of the community celebration of national, state or city events,
concerts, festivals, parades, athletic and recreational events, to permit
reasonable and limited exceptions to the provisions of this section. Any
special event or exhibition permit issued shall contain specific provisions
as to the activities that will be conducted and dates and times during which
the provisions of this section are to be suspended. Specific sources of any
noise shall be identified and special conditions may be established in the
permit which will minimize the noise impact of the special event or
exhibition on the community, provided the permit shall be subject to
revocation at the discretion of the City Administrator or his or her designee
on the basis of excessive or inappropriate noise. Whenever the revocation
occurs, the activities of the event or exhibition shall then become subject
to the prohibitions of this section.



   (F)   Exemptions.  The following noises shall be exempt from the
prohibitions from this section, even when they cause a disturbance:



      (1)   The sound produced by horns, sirens and alarms used with
authorized emergency vehicles or otherwise used as safety devices to alert
persons to danger or attempted crime; however, this exemption shall not apply
to improperly operating burglar alarms as identified in division (C)(13)(b)
above;



      (2)   The sound produced by emergency repair measures
necessary to restore public utilities, to restore property to a safe
condition or to protect persons or property from imminent danger, following a
fire, accident or natural disaster;



      (3)   The sound produced by bells, chimes or other carillon
instruments when used to signify the passage of hour, half-hour or
quarter-hour components, or to commemorate a wedding, funeral or similar
event including regular religious services, provided the sound does not
exceed five continuous minutes in duration in any one hour period;



      (4)   The sound produced by the following, provided there is
compliance with any federal regulations applicable to the noise:



         (a)   Aircraft in flight or in operation at an airport;



         (b)   Railroad equipment in operation on railroad
rights-of-way; and



         (c)   Motor vehicles, otherwise in lawful operation, on
all public streets and highways.



      (5)   The sound of water splashing produced by any waterfall,
stream, decorative water fountain or irrigation device when established or
operated in an ordinary and customary manner; and



      (6)   The unamplified sound emanating from a ballpark, playing
field, stadium or comparable outdoor facility designed and intended for
recreational or sports activity when used during the period between 7:00 a.m.
and 11:00 p.m. of the same calendar day for organized exhibitions,
participatory sports or recreational activities.



(Ord. 01-004, passed 4-10-2001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



Section



   133.01   Indecent exposure



   133.02   Fortune telling to promote other business



   133.03   Harassing, threatening and obscene telephone calls



   133.04   Drunkenness in public



   133.05   Contributing to delinquency of a child



   133.06   Obscene material



   133.07   Gambling; generally



   133.08   Pools



§ 133.01  INDECENT EXPOSURE.



   No person shall appear in any public place in a state of nudity or
otherwise make any indecent exposure of the person.



(1985 Code, § 14-70)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Indecent exposure, see S.C. Code § 16-15-130



§ 133.02  FORTUNE TELLING TO PROMOTE OTHER BUSINESS.



   It shall be unlawful to engage in the business, trade or profession of
fortune telling, palmistry, phrenology, clairvoyance or the prediction of
future events by palmistry, astrology, clairvoyance, cards or other means as
an inducement to promote some other business, trade or profession.



(1985 Code, § 14-75)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 16-17-690



§ 133.03  HARASSING, THREATENING AND OBSCENE TELEPHONE CALLS.



   No person shall telephone any other person repeatedly or cause any
person to be telephoned repeatedly in such manner as to harass or molest the
other person or the other person's family, whether or not conversation
ensues, or use any threatening, vulgar, indecent, or obscene language over
any telephone.



(1985 Code, § 14-76)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see S.C. Code § 16-17-430



§ 133.04  DRUNKENNESS IN PUBLIC.



   No person shall be in a drunk or intoxicated and disorderly condition
in or on any public place or in any place open to the public.



(1985 Code, § 14-77)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   See S.C. Code § 16-17-530



§ 133.05  CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.



   No person shall contribute to, encourage, cause or tend to cause the
delinquency or neglect of a child under 17 years of age, whether or not the
child is adjudicated a ward of the court.



(1985 Code, § 14-78)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Contributing to delinquency of a minor, see S.C. Code § 16-17-490



§ 133.06  OBSCENE MATERIAL.



   The offense of printing, selling or exhibiting, or distributing obscene
material shall be as set out in the S.C. Code §§ 16-15-305 et seq., as
amended, which provisions are hereby incorporated in and made a part of this
code.



(1985 Code, § 14-79)



§ 133.07  GAMBLING; GENERALLY.



   (A)   No person shall open, keep or maintain any gaming house in any
building within the city, or suffer or permit any description of gaming or
playing any game of chance or skill for money, goods, chattels or other
things whatever.



   (B)   No person shall participate or engage in any device of gaming
whatever in any building, street, lane, alley, court, park, lot or public way
within the city.



(1985 Code, § 14-80)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Simulated gambling devices restricted, see § 110.100



Statutory reference:



   Gambling, see S.C. Code §§ 16-19-10et seq.



§ 133.08  POOLS.



   No person shall bet in or sell a pool within the city upon any race,
horse race, boat race, foot race, baseball, football or other game.



(1985 Code, § 14-81)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 134: CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES



Section



   134.01   Sale and the like



   134.02   Possession of marijuana or hashish



   134.03   Transactions in drug-related objects; definitions



   134.04   Prohibitions



   134.05   Exceptions



   134.06   Defense to prosecution



   134.07   Destruction



§ 134.01  SALE AND THE LIKE.



   No person shall sell, offer for sale, give away, bargain, trade,
distribute in any manner, transport, use, prescribe, possess, knowingly keep,
conceal or allow on premises under the person's control any narcotic or
controlled substance or aromatic hydrocarbon in violation of S.C. Code Title
44, Chapter 53, Article 3, as amended, or other law of the state.



(1985 Code, § 14-90)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 134.02  POSSESSION OF MARIJUANA OR HASHISH.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly or intentionally
to possess marijuana or hashish in any form or amount whatsoever in a house,
part of a house, outhouse, room in any house or building or anywhere on the
person's property, in or on any motor vehicle, bicycle, boat, garage, trailer
or train or on the person, unless substance was obtained directly from, or
pursuant to a valid prescription or order of a practitioner while acting in
the course of the practitioner's professional practice.



   (B)   Anyone so doing, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (C)   Provided, however, that any person who violates this section
with respect to 28 grams or one ounce or less of marijuana or ten grams or
less of hashish shall be triable in the Municipal Court.



(1985 Code, § 14-91)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law, see S.C. Code § 44-53-370



§ 134.03  TRANSACTIONS IN DRUG-RELATED OBJECTS; DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.  All equipment, products and materials of any kind
which are used, intended for use or designed for use, in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling
or otherwise introducing into the human body, a controlled substance in
violation of city, state and federal law:



      (1)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance, or from which a controlled substance
can be derived;



      (2)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
manufacturing compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances;



      (3)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed
for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance;



      (4)   Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for
use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances;



      (5)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine,
hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for
use or designed for use in cutting controlled substances;



      (6)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or
designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning
or refining marijuana;



      (7)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices
used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances;



      (8)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used,
intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;



      (9)   Containers and other objects used, intended for use or
designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;



      (10)   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used,
intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled
substances into the human body;



      (11)   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or
hashish oil into the human body, such as:



         (a)   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or
ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or
punctured metal bowls;



         (b)   Water pipes;



         (c)   Carburetion tubes and devices;



         (d)   Smoking and carburetion masks;



         (e)   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning
material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too
short to be held in the hand;



         (f)   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;



         (g)   Chamber pipes;



         (h)   Carburetor pipes;



         (i)   Electric pipes;



         (j)   Air-driven pipes;



         (k)   Chilams;



         (l)   Bongs; and



         (m)   Ice pipes or chillers.



      (12)   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia,
the Chief of Police and the court shall consider, in addition to all other
logically relevant factors, the following:



         (a)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of
the object concerning its use;



         (b)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to
any controlled substance;



         (c)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to
a direct violation of this chapter;



         (d)   The proximity of the object to controlled
substances;



         (e)   The existence of any residue of controlled
substances on the object;



         (f)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of
an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons
whom the person knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to
facilitate a violation of this chapter, the innocence of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of the chapter
shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed
for use as drug paraphernalia;



         (g)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the
object concerning its use;



         (h)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object
which explain or depict its use;



         (i)   National or local advertising concerning its use;



         (j)   The manner in which the object is displayed for
sale;



         (k)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the
object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community,
such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;



         (l)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of
sales of the objects to the total sales of the business enterprise;



         (m)   The existence and scope of legitimate use for the
object in the community; and



         (n)   Expert testimony concerning its use.



(1985 Code, § 14-92)



§ 134.04  PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, knowing the drug-related
nature of the object, to sell, lend, rent, lease, give, exchange or otherwise
distribute to any person, any drug paraphernalia.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, knowing the drug-related
nature of the object, to display for sale or possess with the intent to
distribute, any drug paraphernalia.



   (C)   It shall also be unlawful for any person to use or to possess
with intent to use any drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate,
grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare,
test, analyze, pack, replace, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale
or otherwise introduce into the human body, a controlled substance in
violation of this chapter.



   (D)   KNOWING, as used herein, means either actual or constructive
knowledge of the drug-related nature of the object, and a person has
constructive knowledge of the drug-related nature of the object if the person
has knowledge of facts which would put a reasonable and prudent person on
notice of the drug-related nature of the object.



(1985 Code, § 14-93)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 134.05  EXCEPTIONS.



   Anything to the contrary herein notwithstanding the drug-related
objects provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the manufacture, sale,
distribution or advertisement of any product or object designed and sold
primarily for scientific research, industrial, veterinary or agricultural
purposes, or for bona fide medical or clinical use.



(1985 Code, § 14-94)



§ 134.06  DEFENSE TO PROSECUTION.



   It shall be an affirmative defense that the person to whom the
drug-related object, advertisement or notice was distributed had a
prescription from a licensed medical practitioner or psychiatrist for
marijuana or the controlled substance for which the object is primarily
intended to be used. It is also an affirmative defense that the drug-related
object was designed or marketed as useful, primarily for veterinary or
agricultural purposes.



(1985 Code, § 14-95)



§ 134.07  DESTRUCTION.



   All instruments, devices and objects which are seized on condemnation
as being distributed or possessed in violation of this chapter may be
destroyed by the municipality only after compliance with the following
procedure: within 15 days after conviction for a violation of this chapter or
within 90 days from the date of acquisition of instruments, devices and
objects described in this chapter are to be destroyed, unless the items are
to be used as evidence in cases before a superior court or those items are
considered suitable for public display by the Police Department in drug
education programs.



(1985 Code, § 14-96)



CHAPTER 135: WEAPONS



Section



   135.01   Discharging of firearms and dangerous devices; generally



   135.02   Carrying loaded firearm



   135.03   Carrying weapons



   135.04   Pointing firearm at any person



   135.05   Drawing weapon in affray



§ 135.01  DISCHARGING OF FIREARMS AND DANGEROUS DEVICES; GENERALLY.



   It shall be unlawful to fire or discharge any rifle, gun, pistol, air
rifle, pellet gun or other device which may be potentially harmful to any
person or property, with the exceptions stated in § 135.02, or by special
permit issued by the Chief of Police. Any device used within the city in
violation of this section is hereby declared to be contraband, and the device
shall be seized by the police and sold or destroyed.



(1985 Code, § 14-100)  (Ord. 89-07, passed 7-11-1989; Ord. 06-019, passed
8-24-2006)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 135.02  CARRYING LOADED FIREARM.



   It shall be unlawful to carry on one’s person, any loaded firearm,
except for peace officers, in the performance of their duty, or persons
acting in the defense of their lives or property.



(1985 Code, § 14-101)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 135.03  CARRYING WEAPONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry about the person any dirk,
metal knuckles, razor, pistol, hawkbill knife or any spring or clasp knife,
which has a blade more than three inches in length, or other weapon usually
used for the infliction of personal injuries. The weapon so carried shall be
forfeited to the city upon conviction of a violation of this section.



(1985 Code, § 14-102)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Concealed weapons, see S.C. Code § 16-23-460



§ 135.04  POINTING FIREARM AT ANY PERSON.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to present or point at any other
person, any loaded or unloaded firearm. Nothing contained herein shall be
construed to abridge the right of self-defense or to apply to theatricals or
like performances.



(1985 Code, § 14-103)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law, see S.C. Code § 16-23-410



§ 135.05  DRAWING WEAPON IN AFFRAY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to draw a knife, gun, pistol or any
dangerous or deadly weapon in any affray or disturbance in the city or at any
time to threaten another with physical violence with such.



(1985 Code, § 14-104)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 136: ADVERTISING



Section



   136.01   Scattering handbills



   136.02   Painting or printing on sidewalks



   136.03   Posting on public property



   136.04   Posting on private property



§ 136.01  SCATTERING HANDBILLS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, scatter, toss or
throw handbills, booklets, cards, posters or other printed matter into or
upon any street, sidewalk, alley or other public highway or portion thereof,
or to place, scatter, toss or throw any handbill, circular, advertising card,
pamphlet, booklet or other printed matter, into or attach the same to a motor
vehicle parked or being driven upon any street or other highway in the city,
or on any yard, lawn, driveway or porch, or in the vestibule of any building,
or attach any of the same to any door or place where they may reasonably be
expected to be blown by the wind or thrown by the occupant of the premises or
by others into or upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys or other public
highways, or portions thereof, so as to litter the streets, sidewalks, alleys
or public highways, clog catch basins and sewers, create fire hazards,
obstruct passage or create an unclean or filthy condition.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall apply to newspapers or magazines
or to anything delivered by the United States Postal Service.



   (C)   This section shall be liberally construed to permit the
reasonable circulation of printed information so as not to suppress the
freedom of the press, but shall be so enforced as to promote the health,
safety and general welfare of the city.



(1985 Code, § 14-110)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 136.02  PAINTING OR PRINTING ON SIDEWALKS.



   No person shall print, paint, write, inscribe or affix, or in any other
way deface the sidewalks, streets or other public property of the city for
advertising or other purposes; provided, nothing herein contained shall be
construed to prohibit the Police Department or any other department of the
city from marking the sidewalks for the purpose of controlling traffic or for
any other city purpose.



(1985 Code, § 14-111)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 136.03  POSTING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to post any placards, posters or
advertisements of any kind on public property within the city, by use of a
placard, picture, circular, painting or by any means of device whatsoever.



(1985 Code, § 14-112)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 136.04  POSTING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   It shall be unlawful to place any advertisement, whether business,
political or otherwise, or any notice or sign of any nature on private
property within the city, without the consent of the owner or lessee of the
property.



(1985 Code, § 14-113)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 137: NUISANCES



Section




General Provisions




   137.01   Definitions



   137.02   Public nuisances prohibited



   137.03   Enumeration of public nuisances affecting health



   137.04   Public nuisances affecting public safety




Abatement




   137.20   Complaint by citizens; report by officers



   137.21   Notice to abate nuisance



   137.22   Abatement by city



   137.23   Abatement by court action



   137.24   Cost of abatement



Cross-reference:



   Nuisances, see §§ 93.145 through 93.147




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 137.01  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Any act whereby the health or life of any individual may be
endangered, injured or impaired, or which causes any disease is hereby
declared a nuisance. Further, it shall be lawful for the health officials to
declare as nuisances, things the existence of which may be deemed unhealthful
or harmful to the citizens of the city.



   (B)   The term PUBLIC NUISANCE shall mean any act, thing,
occupation, condition or use of property which shall continue for the length
of time as to:



      (1)   Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort,
health, repose or safety of the public;



      (2)   In any way render the public insecure in life or in the
use of property;



      (3)   Greatly offend the public morals or decency; and



      (4)   Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or
tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway,
navigable body of water or other public way.



(1985 Code, § 14-120)



§ 137.02  PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, contrive, cause,
continue, maintain or permit to exist, any public nuisance within the city.



(1985 Code, § 14-121)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 137.03  ENUMERATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH.



   Public nuisances affecting health shall include, but not be limited to,
the following acts, omissions, conditions or things:



   (A)   All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or
drink sold or offered for sale to the public;



   (B)   Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not buried or otherwise
disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death;



   (C)   Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash,
rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, scrap metal or any
material whatsoever in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-carrying insects,
rats or other vermin may breed;



   (D)   All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects
can multiply;



   (E)   Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not fly-tight;



   (F)   All noxious weeds and other rank growth or vegetation;



   (G)   The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes,
gases, fly ash or industrial dust within the city or within one mile
therefrom in the quantities as to endanger the health of persons of ordinary
sensibilities or to threaten or cause substantial damage to property;



   (H)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake,
canal or body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other
substances; and



   (I)   Any use of property, substances or things emitting or causing
any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odors,
effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary
persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of any
appreciable number of persons within the city.



(1985 Code, § 14-122)



§ 137.04  PUBLIC NUISANCES AFFECTING PUBLIC SAFETY.



   Public nuisances affecting public safety shall include, but not be
limited to the following:



   (A)   All signs and billboards, awnings and other similar structures
over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds of places frequented by the
public, so situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety;



   (B)   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which
prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from
obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or
pedestrian crosswalk;



   (C)   All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk or
roadway less than eight feet above the surface of a public sidewalk or less
than 14-1/2 feet above the surface of a public roadway;



   (D)   All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are
strung less than 15 feet above the surface of street or ground;



   (E)   All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks
and all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by the
ordinances of the city or which, although made in accordance with the
ordinances, are kept or maintained for an unreasonable length of time after
the purpose thereof has been accomplished;



   (F)   All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused
basements freely accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk;



   (G)   All abandoned refrigerators or iceboxes from which the doors
and other covers have not been removed or which are not equipped with a
device for opening from the inside; and



   (H)   Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a
public street, alley or sidewalk, or of a public street, alley or sidewalk,
which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free
use of the streets or sidewalks.



(1985 Code, § 14-123)




ABATEMENT




§ 137.20  COMPLAINT BY CITIZENS; REPORT BY OFFICERS.



   (A)   Any citizen or resident of the city may complain of and report
to the City Clerk, any nuisance, other matter or thing detrimental to the
public health. The complaint and report must be in writing, must specify
fully the character of the nuisance or other matter complained of, and be
signed by the person making the complaint or report.



   (B)   The Clerk shall promptly notify the Chief of Police, health
officer or Building Inspector, who shall inspect or cause to be inspected the
premises and make a written report of the findings to the Mayor. Whenever
practicable, the inspecting officer shall cause photographs to be made of the
premises and shall retain the same in the officer's office.



(1985 Code, § 14-130)



§ 137.21  NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE.



   (A)   If the inspecting officer determines that a public nuisance
exists on private property and that there is great and immediate danger to
the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the Chief of Police
shall serve notice on the owner or, if the owner cannot be found, on the
occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance and to
post a copy of the notice on the premises.



   (B)   The notice shall direct the owner, occupant or person causing,
permitting or maintaining the nuisance to abate or remove the nuisance within
24 hours. The notice shall state that unless the nuisance is so abated, the
city will cause it to be abated and will charge the costs to the owner,
occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance.



   (C)   Any person refusing or neglecting to abate a nuisance after
having been directed to do so shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1985 Code, § 14-131)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 137.22  ABATEMENT BY CITY.



   If the nuisance is not abated within the time provided or if the owner,
occupant or person causing the nuisance cannot be found, the health officer,
in case of health nuisances and the Chief of Police in other cases, shall
cause the abatement or removal of the public nuisance.



(1985 Code, § 14-132)



Statutory references:



   Abatement of public health nuisances by the State Board of Health and
Environmental Control, see S.C. Code § 48-1-280



   Authority of cities to abate nuisances, see S.C. Code §§ 5-7-30 and
5-7-80



§ 137.23  ABATEMENT BY COURT ACTION.



   If the inspecting officer shall determine that a public nuisance exists
on private premises, but that the nature of the nuisance is not such as to
threaten great and immediate danger to the public health, safety, morals or
decency, the officer shall file a written report of findings and cause an
action to abate the nuisance to be commenced in the name of the city in a
court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with the provisions of the
state statutes.



(1985 Code, § 14-133)



§ 137.24  COST OF ABATEMENT.



   In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for the
erection, contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public
nuisance, the cost of abating a public nuisance by the city shall be
collected as a debt from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or
maintaining the nuisance. If notice to abate the nuisance has been given to
the owner, the cost shall be assessed against the real estate as other
special taxes.



(1985 Code, § 14-134)



TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



   Chapter




      150.   BUILDINGS; CONSTRUCTION AND RELATED ACTIVITIES





      151.   ZONING





      152.   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES




CHAPTER 150: BUILDINGS; CONSTRUCTION AND RELATED ACTIVITIES



Section




General Provisions




   150.01   Purpose



   150.02   Building Board of Adjustments and Appeals; established;
composition



   150.03   Meetings; organization of Board



   150.04   Power and duties of Board



   150.05   Appeals; hearings and notices to the Board



   150.06   Required vote for decisions; records



   150.07   Fire District




Specific Codes




   150.25   Adopting international codes



   150.26   Code compliance inspections




Fees




   150.40   Building permit



   150.41   Plumbing permit



   150.42   Gas permit



   150.43   Mechanical permit



   150.44   Swimming pool



   150.45   Electrical permit



   150.99   Penalty




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 150.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum requirements to
safeguard life, health and the public welfare, and the protection of property
as it relates to these safeguards by regulating and controlling the design,
construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location,
maintenance, removal and demolition of all buildings or structures and
appurtenances thereto within the corporate limits of the city.



(1985 Code, § 5-1)



§ 150.02  BUILDING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS AND APPEALS; ESTABLISHED;
COMPOSITION.



   There is hereby created a board to be called the Building Board of
Adjustments and Appeals, which will consist of five members, who shall be
citizens of the city and shall be appointed by the City Council, for
overlapping terms of three years. The Board shall be composed of one
engineer, one general contractor and three members at-large from the building
industry. Initial appointment shall be as follows: one member for a term of
three years, two members for a term of two years and two members for a term
of one year. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired
term in the same manner as the initial appointment. Members shall serve
without pay but may be reimbursed for any expenses incurred while
representing the Board.



(1985 Code, § 5-2)



§ 150.03  MEETINGS; ORGANIZATION OF BOARD.



   The Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall elect a Chairperson and a
Vice-Chairperson from its members who shall serve for one year or until
re-elected or until their successors are elected. The Board shall appoint a
Secretary who may be a city officer, an employee of the city or a member of
the Building Board of Adjustments and Appeals. The Board shall adopt rules
and bylaws in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Ordinances.
Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at
other times as the Board may determine. All meetings of the Board shall be
open to the public.



(1985 Code, § 5-3)



§ 150.04  POWER AND DUTIES OF BOARD.



   (A)   The Building Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall have the
following powers and duties:



      (1)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is
error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
Building Official in the enforcement of this chapter; and



      (2)   To authorize upon appeal in specific cases, a variance
from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public
interest, where, owing to specific conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary
hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety
and welfare secured and substantial justice done. The variance may be granted
in the individual cases of unnecessary hardship upon finding by the Building
Board of Adjustments and Appeals.



   (B)   The Building Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall, in every
case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay.



   (C)   If a decision of the Building Board of Adjustments and Appeals
reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the Building
Official, or varies the application of any provision of this chapter, the
Building Official shall immediately take action in accordance with the
decision.



(1985 Code, § 5-4)



§ 150.05  APPEALS; HEARINGS AND NOTICES TO THE BOARD.



   (A)   Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved or
by any officer, department, board or employee of the city. The appeals shall
be taken by filing with the Building Board of Adjustments and Appeals, notice
of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Building Official shall
transmit to the Board the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken.



   (B)   An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken
certifies to the Board after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with
the officer, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would,
in the officer's opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such
case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise then by a restraining order
which may be granted by the Board or by a court of competent jurisdiction, on
notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown.



   (C)   The Board shall be allowed 15 working days for the hearing of
the appeal or other matter referred to it, and give public notice thereof, as
well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a
reasonable time. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent
or by attorney.



(1985 Code, § 5-5)



§ 150.06  REQUIRED VOTE FOR DECISIONS; RECORDS.



   (A)   The concurring vote of three members of the Building Board of
Adjustments and Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision or determination of the Building Official or to decide in favor of
the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
chapter or to affect any variation of this chapter.



   (B)   The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the
vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote,
indicating the fact, and shall keep records of it, examinations and other
official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of
the Building Board of Adjustments and Appeals and shall be a public record.



   (C)   On all appeals, applications and matters brought before the
Building Board of Adjustments and Appeals, the Board shall inform, in
writing, all the parties involved of its decisions and reasons thereof.



(1985 Code, § 5-6)



§ 150.07  FIRE DISTRICT.



   The area within the corporate limits of the city shall constitute the
Fire District of the city.



(1985 Code, § 5-7)




SPECIFIC CODES




§ 150.25 ADOPTING INTERNATIONAL CODES.



   (A)   The following codes, as authorized and mandated by the South
Carolina Building Codes Council and certain documents on file in the Office
of the Building Code Official for the city, being marked and designated as
the International Building Code, 2006 Edition, including all appendix
chapters, are hereby adopted as noted:



      (1)   2006 Edition of the International Building Code,
excluding § 103, including any/all appendices, with SC modifications;



      (2)   2006 Edition of the International Residential Code,
including any/all appendices, with SC modifications;



      (3)   2006 Edition of the International Fire Code, including
any/all appendices, with SC modifications;



      (4)   2006 Edition of the International Plumbing Code,
including any/all appendices, with SC modifications;



      (5)   2006 Edition of the International Mechanical Code,
including any/all appendices, with SC modifications;



      (6)   2006 Edition of the International Energy Conservation
Code, including any/all appendices, with SC modifications;



      (7)   2006 Edition of the International Fuel Gas Code,
including any/all appendices, with SC modifications;



as published by the International Code Council; and



      (8)   2008 Edition of the National Electrical Code, including
any/all appendices, with SC modifications, as published by the National Fire
Protection Association, Section 70.



   (B)   The above is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the city,
in the State of South Carolina, for regulating and governing the conditions
and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the
standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and
conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for
occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit
for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Building Code on file in the Office of the Fire
Chief for the city are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof,
as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes if any.



(1985 Code, §§ 5-8, 5-9, 5-10, 5-11, 5-12, 5-13, 5-14 and 5-15) (Ord.
01-005, passed 8-14-2001; Ord. 03-006, passed 6-3-2003; Ord. 10-004, passed
12-14-2010)



§ 150.26  CODE COMPLIANCE INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   All inspections for new construction, renovation, repair or
alteration of any building shall be accomplished in accordance with the
Building Inspection Program, as adopted by the city. Failure to comply with
these requirements shall be cause to have interim power permit revoked.
Additionally, the responsible person shall be assessed penalties in
accordance with Part III, Item VIII of the Building Inspection Program.  No
building shall be occupied until the time as a certificate of occupancy has
been issued by the Building Official. Copies of the Building Inspection
Program may be obtained from the Building Officials’ office.



   (B)   All ordinances and provisions in conflict herewith are
repealed, and if any sentence, clause or phrase contained herein shall be
held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remainder
of this chapter.



(Ord. 88-11, passed 11-29-1988)




FEES




§ 150.40  BUILDING PERMIT.



   The building permit fees shall be those fees as are established and
approved by City Council, and on file with the City Clerk.



(1985 Code, § 5-16)



§ 150.41  PLUMBING PERMIT.



   The plumbing permit fees shall be those fees as are established and
approved by City Council, and on file with the City Clerk.



(1985 Code, § 5-17)



§ 150.42  GAS PERMIT.



   The gas permit fees shall be those fees as are established and approved
by City Council, and on file with the City Clerk.



(1985 Code, § 5-18)



§ 150.43  MECHANICAL PERMIT.



   The mechanical permit fees shall be those fees as are established and
approved by City Council, and on file with the City Clerk.



(1985 Code, § 5-19)



§ 150.44  SWIMMING POOL.



   The swimming pool fees shall be those fees as are established and
approved by City Council, and on file with the City Clerk.



(1985 Code, § 5-20)



§ 150.45  ELECTRICAL PERMIT.



   The electrical permit fees shall be those fees as are established and
approved by City Council, and on file with the City Clerk.



(1985 Code, § 5-21)



§ 150.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be subject to
punishment as provided in § 10.99. Each day a violation shall continue, such
shall constitute a separate violation.



(1985 Code, § 5-22)



CHAPTER 151: ZONING



Section




Planning Commission




   151.001   Authority and enactment



   151.002   Commission



   151.003   Membership and appointment



   151.004   Organization of Commission; meetings



   151.005   Records



   151.006   Referral of matters to Commission; reports



   151.007   Planning session



   151.008   Rules of procedures



   151.009   Purpose of this chapter




Establishment of Controls and Definitions




   151.025   Administration



   151.026   Short title



   151.027   Interpretation and purposes



   151.028   Definitions of words and terms




Amendments to This Chapter




   151.045   Authority



   151.046   Policy on requirements for change



   151.047   Procedure for amendments




Administration and Enforcement




   151.060   Enforcement of chapter



   151.061   Permit required; penalty



   151.062   Application for permits



   151.063   Construction process



   151.064   Expiration of permit



   151.065   Occupancy permit



   151.066   Temporary uses




General Development Provision




   151.080   Use of land or buildings



   151.081   Flood hazard controls



   151.082   Design standards



   151.083   Landscaping requirements



   151.084   Sign regulations



   151.085   Land use buffers



   151.086   Parking and loading space



   151.087   Development impact fee



   151.088   Land set-aside/dedicated requirements for parks and
recreational areas; adopted by reference




Zoning Districts and Boundaries




   151.105   Establishment of districts and maps



   151.106   Interpretation of district boundaries



   151.107   Change of city boundaries



   151.108   Accessory uses



   151.109   Special uses




Zoning District Regulations




   151.125   Regulations



   151.126   R-1 Low Density Residential District



   151.127   R-2 Medium Density Residential Districts



   151.128   R-3 High Density Residential District



   151.129   Restricted Commercial District



   151.130   Neighborhood Commercial Districts



   151.131   General Commercial District



   151.132   Commercial Industrial District



   151.133   Light Industrial District



   151.134   General Industrial District



   151.135   Conservation/Open Space District



   151.136   Planned Development Districts



   151.137   Multi-family minimum lot requirements




Non-conforming Lots, Structures and Uses




   151.150   Purpose



   151.151   Non-conforming lots



   151.152   Non-conforming structures and uses



   151.153   District change




Zoning Board of Appeals




   151.170   Organization



   151.171   Duties and powers



   151.172   Annual report



   151.173   Organization, meetings and rules of procedure



   151.174   Decisions of the ZBA




Architectural Review Board




   151.190   Organization



   151.191   Application procedure



   151.192   Emergency uses



   151.193   Pre-design conference



   151.194   ARB meeting



   151.195   Application requirements



   151.196   Purview of ARB areas defined



   151.197   Architectural review design guidelines




Legal Status Provisions




   151.210   Interpretation and conflict



   151.211   Violation



 



   151.999   Penalty



   Appendix A:   Table of parking and loading space requirements



   Appendix B:   Table of land uses



   Appendix C:   Table of accessory uses



   Appendix D:   Zoning districts




PLANNING COMMISSION




§ 151.001  AUTHORITY AND ENACTMENT.



   In pursuance of authority conferred by the S.C. Code Title 6, Chapter
29, in accordance with the Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act of May 4,
1994, the Goose Creek City Council, (hereinafter referred to as
“Council”), hereby enacts into law, on this day October 10, 1995,
establishing a Planning Commission, (hereinafter referred to as
“Commission”), and revisions to the following sections and sections, to
include as part of this chapter all maps, codes and regulations referred to
herein.



   (A)   Planning Commission established.  There is hereby established
a Planning Commission for the City of Goose Creek, which shall have the
powers and duties as provided in S.C. Code Title 6, Chapter 29, §§ 6-29-320
et seq.



   (B)   Composition of Commission.  The Planning Commission shall
consist of seven members appointed by the Mayor and City Council for terms of
three years, staggered so that one third of the members shall have terms
expiring in each year. Members shall serve until their successors are
appointed and qualified. A vacancy in the membership of the Commission shall
be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the original
appointment. No member of the Planning Commission shall be the holder of an
elected public office in the City of Goose Creek.



   (C)   Compensation.  Members of the Planning Commission shall
regularly attend meetings and public hearings, and shall serve without
compensation. Reimbursement for actual expenses incurred in the performance
of official duties may be reimbursed from budgeted funds pursuant to
reimbursement policies and procedures for employees of the City of Goose
Creek.



   (D)   Removal of members.  Members of the Planning Commission may
be removed at any time by Council for cause. The existence of cause shall be
discussed by the Mayor and City Council in executive session as permitted by
the Freedom of Information Act, S.C. Code § 30-4-70(a)(1), and the
determination of removal shall be by vote in public session declaring a
vacancy in the position without a statement of cause. Any fact which, in the
discretion of the Mayor and City Council, is deemed to adversely affect the
public interest, including lack of attendance at meetings without just cause,
has not maintained required qualifications, or has been found guilty of
malfeasance or misconduct in office, may constitute cause.



   (E)   Organization and rules of procedures.  The Planning
Commission shall organize, elect officers and adopt rules of procedure as
required by S.C. Code § 6-29-360.



   (F)   Public hearings.  The Planning Commission shall hold all
public hearings on amendments to this chapter and map pursuant to S.C. Code
§ 6-29-760(A).



(1985 Code, Art. I, § 101)  (Ord. 99-005, passed 4-13-1999)



§ 151.002  COMMISSION.



   In the discharge of its responsibilities, the Commission of the City of
Goose Creek (hereinafter referred to as the “city”) has the following
functions, powers and duties:



   (A)   Identify community needs and advise the Council of its short
and long range implications for the total development of the city;



   (B)   Recommend achievable community goals as a basis for long range
planning and development programs;



   (C)   Prepare and revise periodically plans, programs and policies
that will aid the entire community in achieving its defined goals for the
physical, social and economic growth, development and redevelopment of the
city;



   (D)   The plans and programs must be designed to promote public
health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity or the general welfare, as
well as, the efficiency and economy of the city;



   (E)   Specific planning elements must be based upon careful and
comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future
development. and include recommended means of implementation;



   (F)   The Commission, through its designated staff, may make,
publish and distribute maps, plans, reports and recommendations relating to
the plans and programs and the development of the city to public officials
and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional and
other organizations and citizens;



   (G)   The Commission and its designated staff, in the performance of
its functions, may enter upon any land with consent of the property owner or
after ten days' written notification to the owner of record, make
examinations and surveys, and place and maintain necessary monuments and
marks on them; provided, however, that the Commission shall be liable for any
injury or damage to property resulting therefrom;



   (H)   The Commission may serve as an Appeals Board on land
development plans that have been disapproved by the Commission's designated
staff;



   (I)   The Commission shall authorize the naming or renaming of a
street or road laid out within the city;



   (J)   All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the
Commission, within a reasonable time, the available information as it may
require for its work;



   (K)   In general, the Commission has the powers as may be necessary
to enable it to perform its functions and promote the planning of the city;



   (L)   Prepare and recommend for adoption to Council as a means for
implementing the plans and programs in the city:



      (1)   A zoning ordinance to include zoning district maps and
appropriate revisions thereof;



      (2)   Regulations for the subdivision or development of land
and appropriate revisions thereof, and to oversee the administration of the
regulations that may be adopted;



      (3)   An official map and appropriate revision on it showing
the exact location of existing or proposed public street, highway and utility
rights-of-way, and public building sites, together with regulations to
control the erection of buildings or other structure or changes in land use
within the rights-of-way, building sites or open spaces within the city;



      (4)   A landscape ordinance setting forth required planting,
tree preservation and other aesthetic considerations for land and structures;
and



      (5)   Policies or procedures to facilitate implementation of
planning elements as set forth in S.C. Code § 6-29-510, as amended.



   (M)   Interpret the adopted plans and programs to concerned citizens
so that private activities and desires may be accomplished in harmony with
public needs and policies; and



   (N)   Submit an annual report to Council every year, summarizing its
activities and achievements. The report shall include the identity of
Commissioners and their respective meeting attendance record.



(1985 Code, Art. I, § 102)  (Ord. 99-005, passed 4-13-1999)



§ 151.003  MEMBERSHIP AND APPOINTMENT.



   The Commission shall be composed of seven qualified electors of the
city. The Council will consider for appointment to the Commission only those
persons who have demonstrated their professional expertise, civic interest
and general knowledge of the city, independent judgment, interest in planning
and zoning, concern for the future welfare of the total Community and its
citizens and availability to prepare for and attend meetings. It is the
intent of Council that members shall, by reasons of diversity in their
individual occupations, constitute a Commission which is broadly
representative of the Community.



(1985 Code, Art. I, § 103)  (Ord. 99-005, passed 4-13-1999)



§ 151.004  ORGANIZATION OF COMMISSION; MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Commission shall hold an organizational meeting in
November of each year to elect a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson from its
membership, whose terms shall be for one year.



   (B)   Also, a Secretary who may be an officer or an employee of the
Council or of the Commission, and the other officers as the Commission deems
necessary shall be elected, or assignment of staff personnel requested from
the City Administrator.



(1985 Code, Art. I, § 104)  (Ord. 99-005, passed 4-13-1999)



§ 151.005  RECORDS.



   The Commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, findings and
determinations, which record must be a public record.



(1985 Code, Art. I, § 105)  (Ord. 99-005, passed 4-13-1999)



§ 151.006  REFERRAL OF MATTERS TO COMMISSION; REPORTS.



   The Council may provide for the reference of any matters or class of
matters to the Commission, with the provision that final action on it may not
be taken until the Commission has submitted a report on it or has had a
reasonable period of time, as determined by the Council to submit a report.



(1985 Code, Art. I, § 106)  (Ord. 99-005, passed 4-13-1999)



§ 151.007  PLANNING SESSION.



   The Commission may be convened as a committee of the whole in the same
manner as prescribed for calling a special meeting for the purpose of holding
a planning session, provided that no official business shall be conducted
thereat, and no quorum shall be required.



(1985 Code, Art. I, § 107)  (Ord. 99-005, passed 4-13-1999)



§ 151.008  RULES OF PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Organization.



      (1)   Rules.  These rules of procedure are adopted pursuant
to S.C. Code § 6-29-360 for the City of Goose Creek Planning Commission,
which consists of members appointed by City Council.



      (2)   Chairperson.  The Chairperson shall be a voting member
of the Commission and shall:



         (a)   Call meetings of the Commission;



         (b)   Decide all points of order;



         (c)   Act as spokesperson for the Commission;



         (d)   Sign documents for the Commission;



         (e)   Transmit reports and recommendations to Council;
and



         (f)   Perform other duties approved by the Commission.



      (3)   Vice-Chairperson.  The Vice-Chairperson shall exercise
the duties of the Chairperson in the absence, disability or disqualification
of the Chairperson. In the absence of the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson,
an acting Chairperson shall be elected by the members present.



      (4)   Secretary (non-voting member).  The Secretary shall:



         (a)   Provide and publish public hearing and notice of
meetings;



         (b)   Preside at meetings and hearings;



         (c)   Assist the Chairperson in preparation of agenda;



         (d)   Keep minutes of meetings and hearings;



         (e)   Maintain Commission records as public records;



         (f)   Attend to Commission correspondence; and



         (g)   Perform other duties normally carried out by a
Secretary.



   (B)   Meetings.



      (1)   Time and place.  The Commission shall meet at the call
of the Chairperson and at the times as the Chairperson or Commission may
determine. An annual schedule of regular meetings shall be adopted, published
and posted at City Hall in December of each year. Special meetings may also
be called by the Chairperson upon 48 hours notice, posted and delivered to
all members and local news media. Meetings shall be held at the place stated
in the notices, and shall be open to the public.



      (2)   Agenda.  A written agenda shall be furnished by the
Secretary to each member of the Commission and the news media, and shall be
posted at least five days prior to each regular meeting, and at least 48
hours prior to a special meeting. Items may be added to, or removed from the
agenda at a meeting by majority vote.



      (3)   Quorum.  A quorum in all meetings shall be four
members. A quorum shall be present before any business is conducted other
than rescheduling the meeting.



      (4)   Rules of order.  Robert's Rules of Order shall govern
the conduct of meetings except as otherwise provided by these rules of
procedure.



      (5)   Voting.  Motions may be made by any member other than
the presiding official:



         (a)   A member must be present to vote;



         (b)   Each member shall vote on every question unless
disqualified by law;



         (c)   The disqualification shall be decided by the
member affected, however, a member shall disqualify himself or herself from
voting whenever he or she has a personal or monetary interest in the property
under discussion, or upon belief that he or she will be directly affected by
the Commission's decision, or when any applicant/agent has sought to
influence his or her vote (other than influences exerted during public
hearings);



         (d)   The member shall announce the reason for
disqualification, give it to the Chairperson in writing, have it placed in
the minutes and refrain from deliberating or voting on the question;



         (e)   A motion to approve any matter before the
Commission, whether requiring subsequent Council approval or not, shall
require a majority vote of the members present; and



         (f)   Tie votes constitute a failure of the motion.



      (6)   Conduct.  Except for public hearings, no person shall
speak at a Commission meeting unless invited to do so by the Commission.



   (C)   Public hearings.



      (1)   Notice.  The Secretary shall give notices required by
statute or ordinance for all public hearings conducted by the Commission, at
least 15 days notice of the time and place of which shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city, and a sign shall be placed on
the property in question, facing the thoroughfare serving the property,
stating the present zoning classification and other information deemed
necessary in consideration of the proposed action. Members of the public
desiring to be heard shall give written notice to the Secretary prior to
commencement of the hearing.



      (2)   Procedure.



         (a)   The public shall be advised of the procedures to
be followed during the hearing, and the Secretary shall advise the Commission
of relevant communications received prior to hearing public comment of the
matter.



         (b)   The Commission or Secretary, as directed, shall
call each proposal in the order as to be in accord with the hearing time
specified in the notice of public hearing.



         (c)   The Chairperson shall next call on the city staff
for a factual summary and presentation relative to the proposal, and shall be
afforded an opportunity to call to the Commission's attention any additional
pertinent communications.



         (d)   In matters brought before the Commission for
public hearing which were initiated by an applicant, the applicant, his or
her agent or attorney shall be heard first, followed by members of the
public, those in support, followed by those in opposition.



         (e)   In matters not initiated by an applicant, members
of the public shall speak in the order in which requests were received, or in
the order as the Commission shall determine.



         (f)   The applicant shall have the right to reply last.



         (g)   The Chairperson may limit the time for each person
who wishes to speak.



         (h)   The Chairperson shall, when necessary, direct that
all remarks shall be germane to the proposal. No rebuttal shall be permitted
by either side, but the Commission may direct questions to any speaker in
order to clarify statements and information presented. All questions shall be
posed by members of the Commission.



         (i)   The Chairperson shall then declare the public
presentation or hearing closed, as to that proposal.



   (D)   Records.



      (1)   Minutes.  The Secretary shall record all meetings and
hearings of the Commission on tape which shall be preserved until final
action is taken on all matters presented. The Secretary shall prepare minutes
of each meeting for approval by the Commission at the next regular meeting.
Minutes shall be maintained as public records.



      (2)   Reports.  The Secretary shall assist in the preparation
and forwarding of all reports and recommendations of the Commission in
appropriate form. Copies of all notices, correspondence, reports and forms
shall be maintained as public records.



      (3)   Attendance.  The minutes shall show the presence,
absence, vote or abstention of each member, with the reason for absence
submitted by any member. The Commission shall recommend to the governing
body, the removal for cause of any member who is absent from three
consecutive meetings without adequate reason.



      (4)   Official record.  The official record shall be these
regulations and the meetings minutes, together will all findings, decisions
and other records of the Commission. All matters coming before the Commission
shall be made part of the official record, the record to be available to the
public for inspection at city planning during normal working hours.



   (E)   Review procedure.



      (1)   Application procedure.  Every proposal submitted for
Commission consideration shall be in the form required by the Zoning
Administrator, to include filing fees when specified. Any information
supporting a proposal or request for approval or denial, shall be submitted
only in writing through the Secretary, or publicly before the Commission. A
proposal may be withdrawn effective on the date of receipt of written request
by the Secretary. No request shall be valid after the mailing of notices,
except on action of the Commission. Withdrawal at any stage of consideration
terminates all consideration by the city, and files shall be closed. No
refund of required filing fees shall be made.



      (2)   Zoning amendments.  Reference §§ 151.045 through
151.047.



      (3)   Review of plats.  Plats submitted for review pursuant
to land development regulations shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator
who may approve for recording plats of existing lots of record, and
subdivisions of land which meet all zoning requirements.



      (4)   Comprehensive Plan.  All zoning and land development
regulation amendments shall be reviewed first for conformity with the
Comprehensive Plan. Conflicts with the Comprehensive Plan shall be noted in
any report to City Council on a proposed amendment. The elements of the
Comprehensive Plan shall be reviewed and updated on a schedule adopted by the
Commission meeting the requirements of S.C. Code § 6-29-510(E).



      (5)   Street naming and numbering:



         (a)   It shall be unlawful for a person in laying out a
new street or road to name the street or road on a plat, by a marking, or in
a deed or instrument without first getting the approval of the Commission.
Any person violating this provision is guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon
conviction, shall be punished in the discretion of the court.



         (b)   The Commission may, after reasonable notice
through a newspaper having general circulation in the city, change the name
of a street or road within the boundary of its territorial jurisdiction:



            1.   When there is duplication of names or other
conditions which tend to confuse the traveling public or the delivery of
mail, orders or messages;



            2.   When it is found that a change may simplify
marking or giving of directions to persons seeking to locate addresses; or



            3.   Upon any other good and just reason that may
appear to the Commission.



         (c)   On the name being changed, after reasonable
opportunity for a public hearing, the Commission shall issue its certificate
designating the change, which shall be recorded in the office of the Berkeley
County Register of Mesne Conveyances, and the name change and certified shall
be the legal name of the street or road.



   (F)   Reconsideration.  The Commission may reconsider any review
when so requested by City Council, or when an applicant brings to the
attention of the Commission new facts, a mistake of fact in the original
review, correction of clerical error, matters not the fault of the applicant
which affect the result of the review, or upon receipt of written request
from the original applicant stating how conditions have substantially changed
in the community since prior consideration was given the proposal, thereby
justifying earlier review.



   (G)   Amendment.  These rules may be amended by the Commission by a
majority vote of the members present at the public hearing when the matter
was considered. Results of the proposed amendments shall be submitted to the
Council for review and approval.



(1985 Code, Art. I, § 108)  (Ord. 99-005, passed 4-13-1999)  Penalty, see
§ 151.999



§ 151.009  PURPOSE OF THIS CHAPTER.



   (A)   To guide development in accordance with existing and future
needs and in order to protect, promote and improve the public health, safety,
morals, convenience, order, appearance, prosperity and general welfare, the
city does, in accordance with the authority cited in § 151.001, and in
accordance with the following sections, regulate the following:



      (1)   The location, height, bulk, number of stories and size
of buildings and other structures;



      (2)   The percentage of lot which may be occupied;



      (3)   The sizes of yards, courts and other open spaces;



      (4)   The density and distribution of population;



      (5)   The uses of buildings, structures and land for trade,
industry, residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, conservation and
airports and approaches thereto; and



      (6)   Water supply, sanitation, protection against flood,
public activities and other purposes.



   (B)   These regulations are made in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan, and are designed to:



      (1)   Lessen congestion in the street;



      (2)   Secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other dangers;



      (3)   Promote the public health and the general welfare;



      (4)   Provide adequate light, air and open space;



      (5)   Prevent the overcrowding of land;



      (6)   Avoid undue concentration of population;



      (7)   Facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive and
harmonious community;



      (8)   Protect and preserve significant or natural scenic,
historic or ecologically sensitive areas;



      (9)   Protect the unique, special or desired character of the
Commercial and Light Industrial Districts, and uses;



      (10)   Facilitate the adequate provision of transportation,
police and fire protection, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other
recreational facilities, affordable housing and disaster evacuation; and



      (11)   Preserve and protect historic and architecturally
valuable districts and neighborhoods, and other public requirements.



   (C)   The regulations are made with, but not limited to:



      (1)   The character of each area and its peculiar suitability
for a particular use, with a view to promoting desirable living conditions,
and the sustained stability of neighborhoods;



      (2)   Protecting property against blight and depreciation;



      (3)   Securing economy in governmental expenditures;



      (4)   Conserving the value of land and buildings; and



      (5)   Encouraging the most appropriate use of land, buildings
and structures, and to further the public welfare in any other regard
specified by Council.



(1985 Code, Art. I, § 109)  (Ord. 99-005, passed 4-13-1999)




ESTABLISHMENT OF CONTROLS AND DEFINITIONS




§ 151.025  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   All references in this chapter to the title of
“Administrator” shall refer to the Zoning Administrator or other official
so designated.



   (B)   The Planning Commission is one body, the term “Commission”
shall refer to the Commission, and the term “Council” shall refer to the
City Council.



(1985 Code, Art. II, § 201)



§ 151.026  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be cited as the “Zoning Ordinance of Goose Creek,
South Carolina”. The zoning map approved by City Council and on file with
the Planning Director and City Clerk is an inseparable part thereof. A master
copy of both, known as the “Official Zoning Ordinance and Map” shall be
maintained up-to-date in the city offices.



(1985 Code, Art. II, § 202)



§ 151.027  INTERPRETATION AND PURPOSES.



   The provisions contained herein, in their interpretation and
application, shall be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of
the public health, safety and welfare. This chapter has been made in
accordance with the Goose Creek Land Use Plan, for all purposes itemized in
the Code of Laws citation in §§ 151.001 through 151.009, and in §§
151.002 and 151.003.



(1985 Code, Art. II, § 203)



§ 151.028  DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND TERMS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   (B)   The singular number includes the plural, and the plural
includes the singular.



   (C)   The word PERSON includes a corporation, firm, company,
partnership, association, organization or public or private authority, as
well as an individual.



   (D)   The term SHALL is mandatory, and the term MAY is permissive.



   (E)   The word USED or OCCUPIED as applied to any land or building
shall be interpreted to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to
be used or occupied”.



   (F)   The word BUILDING includes the word STRUCTURE, and the word
STRUCTURE includes the word BUILDING.



   (G)   The word LOT includes the words PLOT, PARCEL and TRACT.



   (H)   Terms not specifically defined herein shall have their
customary dictionary definition.



      ABANDONMENT.  A determination that a particular use (of a parcel
of land, or of a structure) has been discontinued, whether with or without
the intent to permanently abandon, for at least 30 days. (See § 151.152(C).)



      ACCESS AISLE.  An accessible pedestrian space between elements,
such as parking spaces, seating and desks that provides clearances
appropriate for use of the elements.



      ACCESSORY.  A use, building or structure customarily incidental
and subordinate to, and detached from, the principal use, structure or
building, and located on the same lot with the principal use, structure or
building. (See § 151.108.)



      ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING).  An extension or increase in
the floor area or height of a building or structure. Additions to existing
buildings shall comply with the requirements for new construction, regardless
as to whether the addition is a substantial improvement or not. Where a
firewall or load-bearing wall is provided between the addition and the
existing building, the addition(s) shall be considered a separate building
and must comply with the standards for new construction.



      ADJOINING LOT.  Land immediately adjacent to the lot in
question, including lots located immediately across streets, alleys, water
courses of less than 100 feet in width, drainage easements and other
rights-of-way.



      ADULT USES.  Uses including, but not limited to, adult book
store, adult entertainment cabaret, adult massage parlor and adult motion
picture theater:



         (a)   ADULT BOOK STORE.  An establishment having as a
substantial portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, films for sale
or viewing on the premises, and periodicals which are characterized by their
emphasis on sexual subject matter.



         (b)   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET.  A nightclub,
theater or other establishment which features performances by topless
dancers, strippers or similar entertainers where the performances are
distinguished or characterized by sexual exploitation.



         (c)   ADULT MASSAGE PARLOR.  Any place where any form
of gratuity occurs in connection with sexual conduct as a result of a
massage, or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body.



         (d)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A building or
structure used regularly or routinely for presenting material having as a
dominant theme material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting sexual activity (or as characterized by the Motion Picture
Code as “X Rated”).



      ALLEY.  A permanent service way used primarily as a secondary
means of access to the side or rear of abutting property or properties.



      ALTER.  As applied to a building or structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural parts or in the external facilities or an
enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height; or
the moving from one location or position to another; or the major renovation
of a building interior when the renovation cost equals or exceeds 50% of the
structure's market value.



      ALTERATIONS OF BUILDING.  Any change in the supporting members
of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or floor
joints; or the major renovation of a building interior when the renovation
cost equals or exceeds 50% of the structure's market value.



      APPEAL.  Process of examining a decision rendered by any person
charged with the administration of this chapter, requested by anyone
aggrieved by the decision. (See § 151.171.)



      AREA, BUILDING.  The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane
at the main grade level of the principal building, and all accessory
buildings exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps.



      AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.  Areas of 1% per year chance of
flooding between depths of one and three feet, and floodwater velocity less
than 15 feet per second, shown as AO Zones on Flood Insurance Rate Maps. (See
§ 151.081.)



      AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.  The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year. (See § 151.081.)



      AREA, SITE.  The total area within the property lines of a
project, excluding external streets.



      AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION.  (Includes gasoline or filling
station). A place where gasoline stored only in underground tanks, kerosene,
lubricating oil or grease, for operation of automobiles, trucks or boats, are
offered for sale at retail directly to the public on the premises, and
including minor accessories and services for motor vehicles and boats, but
not including major motor vehicle or boat repairs or tire recapping, and
including the washing of motor vehicles utilizing car washing equipment, such
as chain conveyors and blowers. When the dispensing, sale or offering for
sale of motor fuels or oil is incidental to the conduct of business, the
premises shall be classified as a commercial garage.



      AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD.  An area outside of a building where
vehicles are disassembled, dismantled, “junked” or “wrecked”, or
where motor vehicles not in operable condition or used parts of motor
vehicles are stored.



      BASE FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. (See § 151.081.)



      BASEMENT.  Any enclosed area of a building that is below grade
on all sides.



      BOARDING HOUSE.  (See also TOURIST HOME). Any dwelling other
than a hotel or motel, in which more than three persons either individually
or as families, who are not members of the operator's family, are housed or
lodged for hire with or without meals. A rooming house, or a “furnished
room” house shall be deemed a BOARDING HOUSE.



      BREAKAWAY WALL.  A wall that is not part of the structural
support of the building and is intended through its design and construction
to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to
the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system.



      BUFFER AREA.  As determined by the Administrator, an area along
a lot or district line reserved in natural vegetation, accompanied by buffer
screens as required, to achieve physical and visual separation of districts
or uses.



      BUFFERS.  Spaces, structures, land forms or vegetation, and/or
combinations of these elements which are reserved or constructed between
lots, districts or uses.



      BUFFER SCREEN.  A fence, wall, hedge or similar barrier placed
close and parallel to a lot line or zoning district line for the purpose of
visually separating one use of district from another. (See § 151.081.)



      BUILDING.  Any structure built for the support, shelter or
enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. The term
BUILDING shall be construed as if followed by the words “or part thereof”.



      BUILDING COVERAGE.  The proportion of the lot area, expressed as
a percent, that is covered by the maximum horizontal cross section of a
building or buildings. Structures which are below the finished lot grade
shall not be included in building coverage.



      BUILDING, HEIGHT OF.  As applied to a building, the vertical
distance from grade to the highest finished roof surface. HEIGHT OF A
BUILDING in stories does not include basements and cellars, except as
specifically provided otherwise.



      BUILDING LINE.  (Including the term SETBACK). That line which
represents the minimum distance, when measured at right angles, which a
building or structure must be placed from a lot line, a street right-of-way
or a street centerline, in accordance with the terms of this chapter. (See
Appendix D.)



      BUILDING PERMIT.  Permission to be obtained from the city prior
to commencing any clearing of land, or any action to change the use of land
or structures. (See § 151.061.)



      BUILDING, PRINCIPAL.  (See also USE, PRINCIPAL). A building or
structure in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which
the building is situated.



      CAR WASH.  (Also, self-service car washes). A building or
portion thereof, where automobiles are washed with the use of a chain
conveyor and blower or steam-cleaning device. Where car washing is the
principal activity, the use is not deemed to be a public gasoline or gasoline
service station.



      CELLAR.  A portion of a building partly underground which has
less than one half of its height measured from finished floor to finished
ceiling above the average grade of the adjoining ground and not deemed a
story.



      CESSATION.  Ceasing to use, occupy or inhabit land or
structures. (See § 151.152(G).)



      CITY.  City of Goose Creek, South Carolina.



      CLUB, LODGE, CIVIC or FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION.  An incorporated
or unincorporated association for civic, social, cultural, religious,
literary, political, recreational or like activities (but not including
shooting clubs) operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the
general public.



      COMMERCIAL.  A use involving the sale or transfer of goods or
services.



      COMMERCIAL FACILITY.  A privately owned, non-residential
facility involved in commercial activity, such as a factory, warehouse,
corporate office building or other facility in which employment occurs.



      COMMERCIAL, RESTRICTED.  A commercial use involving the sale or
rental of specific (or a specific category of) specialty goods or services in
a retail floor or display area not to exceed 1,500 square feet.



      COMMERCIAL, UNRESTRICTED.  A commercial use involving the sale
or rental of a non-specific or varied category of goods or services, light
industrial uses, manufacturing, warehousing or the repair of large
appliances, automobiles, machinery or the like.



      COMMUNICATION (TELECOMMUNICATION) TOWERS.  Including, but not
limited to, a tower or other structure that supports communication equipment,
either broadcasting or receiving. This definition does not include television
reception antennas and satellite dishes, or amateur radio operators as
licensed by the Federal Communication Commission.



      CONDITIONAL USE.  A use not otherwise permitted in a district,
and which would not be appropriate generally or without restriction
throughout a zoning district but which, if controlled as to number, area,
location, relation to the neighborhood and subject to the conditions noted,
would promote the public health, safety, welfare, order, comfort,
convenience, appearance, prosperity or general welfare of the city. (See §
151.171(C).)



      CONDOMINIUM.  A form of fee ownership of whole units or separate
portions of multi-unit buildings, by statue (S.C. Code §§ 27-31-10 et seq.)
which provides the mechanics and facilities for formal filing and recording
of a divided interest in real property, where the division is vertical as
well as horizontal. Fee ownership of units in a multi-unit property includes
joint ownership of the common areas. (See § 151.109(D).)



      CONFORMING.  Complying with all regulations of this chapter.
(See §§ 151.150 through 151.153.)



      COURT.  An open unoccupied space bounded on two or more sides by
the exterior walls of a building or exterior walls and lot lines. An INNER
COURT is enclosed on all sides by exterior walls or lot lines on which walls
are allowable. An OUTER COURT is enclosed on not more than three sides by
exterior walls of a building, or by exterior walls and lot lines on which
walls are allowable, with one side or end open to a street, driveway, alley
or yard.



      CRITICAL DEVELOPMENT.  Development that is critical to the
community’s public health and safety, is essential to the orderly
functioning of a community; stores or produces highly volatile, toxic or
water-reactive materials; or houses occupants that may be insufficiently
mobile to avoid loss of life or injury. Examples of critical development
include jails, hospitals, schools, fire stations, nursing homes, wastewater
treatment facilities, water plants, and gas, oil and propane storage
facilities.



      CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATION.  An occupation, within a dwelling or
a finished room over garage and clearly incidental thereto, carried on by a
member of the family residing in the premises, provided, however, that no
person not a resident of the premises is employed at the premises, no
mechanical equipment is used except such that is normally used for family,
domestic, or household purposes, and there is no exterior indication that the
building is being used for any purpose other than a dwelling. There shall be
no activity conducted outside, nor shall there be any outdoor storage,
display, or refuse area in the yard. These standards must be met to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator. When the above requirements are
met, a home occupation includes but is not limited to the following: an art
studio; dressmaking; professional home office of a lawyer, engineer,
architect, salesperson, or other similar occupation; independent business
contractor who has no other permanent place of business; a family daycare in
which care is given during the day for two or not more than six children,
including the resident's own children.



      DAY NURSERY.  Any agency, institution, center, home nursery
school, kindergarten, play school or other place, however styled and whether
operated under public auspices, as a private business, or by an established
religious denomination, in which are received for temporary custodial care
apart from their parents, part of the day or all of the day or night, and
upon any number of successive days, one or more children not related to the
persons providing the temporary custodial care.



      DENSITY.  The number of dwelling units per acre of land
developed or used for residential purposes. Unless otherwise clearly stated,
density requirements in this chapter are expressed in dwelling units per net
acre; that is, per acre of land devoted to residential use exclusive of land
utilized for streets, alleys, drives, parks, playgrounds, school grounds or
other public uses. GROSS RESIDENTIAL ACRE, where used in this chapter, shall
include all land within a specific parcel or lot. (See § 151.137 and
Appendix D.)



      DEVELOPMENT.  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations or
permanent storage of materials or equipment.



      DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.  See also BUILDING PERMIT. As required in
the pertinent Procedures Manual, the city permits to proceed with the
proposed development, after review by the Zoning Administrator. (See §
151.062.)



      DISABILITY.



         (a)   A physical or mental impairment substantially
limits one or more of the major life activities of an individual;



         (b)   A record of the impairment; and



         (c)   Being regarded as having such an impairment.



      DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT.  A business where a customer is
permitted or encouraged, either by the design of physical facilities or by
service and/or parking procedures, to carry on his or her business, in the
off-street parking area accessory to the business, while seated in his or her
motor vehicle.



      DWELLING.  A building or portion of a building arranged or
designed to provide living quarters for one or more families.



      DWELLING, GROUP.  A building or portion of a building occupied
or intended for occupancy by several unrelated persons or families, but in
which separate cooking utilities are not provided for the resident persons or
families. The term GROUP DWELLING includes the terms rooming house,
fraternity house or sorority house. A hotel, motel or tourist home shall not
be deemed to be a GROUP DWELLING as herein defined.



      DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY.  (Also, an APARTMENT HOUSE). A dwelling
designed for or occupied by three or more families living independently of
each other, with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number
of dwelling units provided. Each multi-family living unit constitutes a
dwelling unit.



      DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY.  A detached dwelling other than a mobile
home designed for or occupied exclusively by one family.



      DWELLING, TOWNHOUSES.  One of a series of three or more
separate, attached one-family dwelling units, which:



         (a)   May or may not have a common roof;



         (b)   Share at least one common wall;



         (c)   Are separate from each other by fire resistive
party wall partitions extending at least from the lowest floor level to the
roof; and



         (d)   Townhouses may be developed as either condominiums
or sold as individual lots of record.



      DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.  A detached or semi-detached dwelling
designed for or occupied exclusively by two families living independently of
each other.



      DWELLING UNIT.  One or more rooms connected together and
constituting a separate independent housekeeping establishment for use on a
basis involving owner occupancy or rental or lease on a weekly, monthly or
longer basis, with provision for cooking, eating and sleeping, and physically
set apart from any other rooms or dwelling units in the same structure.



      ELEVATED BUILDING.  A non-basement building built to have the
lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid
foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls
or breakaway walls.



      EXISTING CONSTRUCTION.  Any structure for which the “start of
construction” commenced before the effective date of this chapter, or
standard based upon specific technical base flood elevation data which
establishes the area of specific flood hazard. (See § 151.081.)



      FACILITY.  All or any portion of buildings, structures, site
improvements, complexes, equipment, roads, walks, parking lot or other real
or personal property located on a site giving access to buildings and
accommodations in those buildings available for use by the public or
employees.



      FAMILY.  The following groups of persons, and no others:



         (a)   Any number of persons related by blood or marriage
and living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit, plus not more
than two unrelated roomers, boarders or domestic servants; or



         (b)   No more than three unrelated persons living and
cooking together as a single housekeeping unit.



      FAMILY CHILDCARE HOME.  A private dwelling which receives for
temporary custody not more than six children, including those children living
in the home and children received for childcare who are related to the
resident, provided said dwelling and childcare provider have received a
license from the State of South Carolina to provide family childcare
services, as defined by S.C. Code, Title 20, Chapter 7.  For purposes of
this chapter, a FAMILY CHILDCARE HOME as herein defined is a customary home
occupation.



      FLOOD or FLOODING.  A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



         (a)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and



         (b)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source.



      FLOOD HAZARD AREA.  Those areas as determined by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, or the United States Army Corps of Engineers,
subject to periodic inundation by large floods which may reasonably be
expected to cause damage or hazard of damage sufficient to justify protection
therefrom. (See § 151.081.)



      FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM).  An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A.



      FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  An official map of a
community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable
to the city.



      FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY.  The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as
well as the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of
the base flood.



      FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
one foot. (See § 151.081.)



      FLOOR.  The top surface of an enclosed area in a building
(including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top
of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the
floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles.



      FLOOR AREA.  The total number of square feet of floor space
within the exterior walls of a building.



      FREEBOARD.  A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a
flood level for purposes of flood plain management. FREEBOARD tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. (See § 151.081.)



      FRONTAGE



         (a)   All the property fronting on one side of the
street between intersecting or intercepting streets, or between a street and
a right-of-way, waterway, end of dead-end street or political subdivision
boundary, measured along the street line.



         (b)   An intercepting street shall determine only the
boundary of the frontage of the side of the street which it intercepts.



      GARAGE.  A structure or any portion thereof in which one or more
automobiles are housed, kept or repaired, not including exhibition or
showrooms, or storage of cars for sale.



      GARAGE, PRIVATE.  An accessory building used for storage
purposes only and which is provided primarily for the occupants of the
premises on which such a garage is accessory, and in which no business,
service or industry connected directly or indirectly with automotive vehicles
is carried on. Space may be rented for not more than two vehicles of others
than occupants of the building to which the garage is accessory.



      GARAGE, PUBLIC.  (Also, a commercial garage). Any garage other
than a private garage, available to the public, operated for gain and which
is used for storage, repair, rental, greasing, washing, servicing, adjusting
or equipping of automobiles or other motor vehicles, but not used for the
storage of dismantled or wrecked motor vehicles or parts.



      GARAGE, REPAIR.  The building and premises designed or used for
purposes indicated under “automobile service station” and/or major
repair, provided that body work and painting shall be conducted within
fully-enclosed buildings, and provided further that self-propelled vehicles
not in safe operating condition shall be stored in fully-enclosed areas
consistent with applicable provisions of §§ 151.080 through 151.087 and
§§ 151.150 through 151.153. A REPAIR GARAGE shall not be operated as a
customary home occupation.



      GRADE.  The average elevation of the surfaces of the ground
adjacent to the exterior walls of a building as officially established by
city authorities.



      GRADE, FINISHED.  The complete surfaces of lawns, walks and
roads brought to grade as shown on official plans or designs relating thereto.



      GOVERNMENTAL BUILDINGS.  All buildings, structures, streets,
sidewalks and access thereto used by the public or in which the physically
disabled persons may be employed that are constructed, purchased, leased or
rented in whole or in part by use of state, county or municipal funds or
funds of any political subdivision of the state; and, to the extent not
required otherwise by federal law or regulations or not beyond the power of
the state to regulate, all buildings and structures used by the public which
are constructed, purchased, leased or rented in whole or in part by use of
federal funds.



      HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE.  The highest natural elevation of ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a building.



      HISTORIC STRUCTURE.  Any structure that is:



         (a)   Listed individually in the National Register of
Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;



         (b)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;



         (c)   Individually listed on a state inventory of
historic places in South Carolina with the South Carolina Archives and
History Department which has been approved by the Secretary of the Interior;
or



         (d)   Individually listed on Berkeley County's inventory
of historic places that has been certified by the South Carolina Archives and
History Department.



      HOTEL.  (Includes motel, tourist courts, motor lodges and auto
courts). A building or buildings containing ten or more rooms intended or
designed to be used or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied for
sleeping purposes by transient or permanent guests, and where only a general
kitchen and dining room are provided within the principal building or in an
accessory building (“Efficiencies” are considered to be dwelling units).



      INCREASED COST OF COMPLIANCE (ICC).  Applies to all new and
renewed flood insurance policies effective on and after June 1, 1997. The
NFIP shall enable the purchase of insurance to cover the cost of compliance
with land use and control measures established under Section 1361. It
provides coverage for the payment of a claim to help pay for the cost to
comply with state or community flood plain management laws or ordinances
after a flood event in which a building has been declared substantially or
repetitively damaged.



      JUNK OR SALVAGE YARDS.  The use of any part of a lot, whether
inside or outside of a building, for the storage, keeping, abandonment, sale
or resale of junk, salvage or scrap materials; or the dismantling, demolition
or abandonment of automobiles and other vehicles or machinery, equipment or
parts thereof.



      LANDSCAPING.  Aesthetic improvement, other than grass cover, of
developed grounds, using natural trees to the maximum extent possible. As
determined by the Administrator, landscaping may include buffer screening and
erosion control measures. (See § 151.083.)



      LIMITED STORAGE.  An area used for storage and intended to be
limited to incidental items that can withstand exposure to the elements and
have low flood damage potential. Such an area must be of flood-resistant or
breakaway material, void of utilities except for essential lighting, and
cannot be temperature-controlled. If the area is located below the base flood
elevation in an A, AE and A1-A30 Zone, it must meet the requirements of §
151.081(N)(l)(d) of this chapter.



      LOADING SPACE.  A space within the main building or on the same
lot, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks/supply
vehicles. (See § 151.086 and Appendix A.)



      LOT.  A plot or parcel of land considered as a unit, devoted to
a certain use or occupied by a building or group of buildings permitted in
this chapter, and having its principal frontage upon a street or access
approved by the Mayor and Council, and the customary accessories and open
spaces belonging to the same. Unless clearly indicated otherwise, the word
LOT, when used alone in this chapter, shall mean a ZONING LOT as herein
defined.



      LOT, CORNER.  A lot at the junction of and fronting on two or
more streets at their intersection.



      LOT, DEPTH OF.  A mean horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines, measured in the general direction of its side lot lines.



      LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE.  A lot having a frontage on two streets,
at a point other than at their intersection, as distinguished from a corner
lot.



      LOT, INTERIOR.  A lot other than a corner lot, having frontage
on only one street other than an alley.



      LOT LINES.  Any lines dividing one lot from another.



      LOT, OF RECORD.  An area designated as a separate and distinct
parcel of land on a legally recorded deed as filed in the official records of
the County Clerk of Court. (See Appendix D for a summary of minimum size lots
of record permitted for all districts.)



      LOT, WIDTH OF.  The distance between side lot lines as measured
at the building line.



      LOT, ZONING.  A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a
principal use or uses, yards and open spaces, which are permitted or required
under the provisions of this chapter having frontage on an officially
accepted street and having not less than the minimum area required by these
regulations for a lot in the zoning district within which the parcel of land
is located. A lot of record may or may not be a zoning lot.



      LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG).  An elevation of the lowest ground
surface that touches any deck support, exterior walls of a building or
proposed building walls.



      LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided,
that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation
of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.



      MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or
without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities. The
term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.



      MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.



      MEAN SEA LEVEL.  For the purpose of this chapter, the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD)
of 1988, or other datum, to which the base flood elevations shown on a
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) are shown.



      MOBILE HOME.  A detached single-family dwelling unit (including
the term “manufactured home”), transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For flood
plain management purposes the term “manufactured home” also includes park
trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for
greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term
“manufactured home” does not include park trailers, travel trailers and
other similar vehicles.



      MOBILE HOME PARK.  Premises where two or more mobile homes are
parked for living or sleeping purposes, or where spaces are approved by the
city and the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control
and set aside or offered for sale or rent for use by mobile homes, including
any land, building, structure or facility used by occupants of mobile homes
or the premises. (See §§ 151.136 and 151.137.)



      MODULAR HOME.  A detached permanent dwelling unit of
conventional floor plan, designed for long-term occupancy after
transportation (as a unit, or as substantially complete sub-units) by truck,
trailer or train to a permanent foundation site, and subsequent completion of
construction. This definition includes manufactured housing, other than
mobile homes, as defined above.



      NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD).  As corrected in 1929,
is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations
within the flood plain.



      NEW CONSTRUCTION.  Any structure for which the “start of
construction” commenced after the effective date of this chapter. The term
also includes any subsequent improvements to the structure.



      NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or
after the effective date of this chapter.



      NON-CONFORMING USE.  A building, structure or parcel of land
lawfully occupied by a use that does not conform to the regulations of the
zoning district in which it is situated, and existed prior to enactment of
this chapter. (See § 151.152.)



      NURSING HOME.  A home for the aged, chronically ill or incurable
persons in which three or more persons not of the immediate family are
received, kept or provided with food and shelter or care for compensation,
but not including hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted
primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick, injured or mentally
ill, and not including rest homes which are primarily nursing homes for
persons of all age groups.



      OCCUPANCY PERMIT.  Permit issued by the city after final
inspection and approval, and prior to any use or occupancy of the land or
structure. (See § 151.064.)



      OCCUPANCY PERMIT, TEMPORARY.  Permission for temporary use or
occupancy. (See § 151.064.)



      OPEN SPACE.  An unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot
with the building and free of automotive traffic, parking and undue hazard,
and readily accessible by all those for whom it is required.



      OUTDOOR ADVERTISING.  The use of signs directing public
attention to any object, product, service or function that may be offered for
sale, lease or hire, or is otherwise offered to provide information, or to
solicit support or compliance. Outdoor advertising shall include only those
signs which are, in any way, visible to the public from a position outside
the premises on which the sign is located.



      PARKING LOT, OFF-STREET.  A paved area provided primarily for
motor vehicle parking purposes, located entirely off a street or alley which
affords ingress and egress for automobiles. (See § 151.086.)



      PARKING SPACE, ONE CAR.  The area required for parking one
automobile, which in this chapter is held to be a minimum paved area of nine
feet wide and 18 feet long, not including passageways, aisles, drives,
maneuvering areas and entryways. (See § 151.086(C).)



      PERMITTED USE.  Any use listed as a use by right in any given
district. (See Appendix B.)



      PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS.  Allow flexibility in the grouping,
placement, size and use of buildings on relatively large tracts of land.
Planned Developments provide for the mixing of building types and/or land
uses and are usually characterized by a unified site design. Planned
Developments have a number of advantages over traditional lot-by-lot
development, including: the mixing of building types or uses creating a more
diversified community, combining often unusable yard space on individual lots
into common open spaces, providing incentives to build low cost housing,
lower street and utility cost resulting from reduced frontage and allow
increased development densities while providing or keeping desired amenities.
(See § 151.136.)



      PLAT.  A map, plan or layout of a tract of land, or a section or
subdivision of land, indicating the location and boundaries of individual
properties, requiring city approval prior to recording with Berkeley County
R.M.C.



      PROCEDURES MANUAL.  A condensed listing of requirements
enumerated in this chapter, pertaining to specific types of development. (See
§ 151.062.)



      PUBLIC BUILDINGS.  All buildings, structures, streets, sidewalks
and access thereto used by the public or in which physically disabled persons
may be employed that are constructed, purchased, leased or rented by the use
of private funds, including rental apartment complexes of 20 units or more
and temporary lodging facilities of 20 units or more, except that the
provisions of this chapter shall apply to only 5% of those units or a minimum
of one unit, whichever is the greater, and provided, further, that the
provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a private residence.



      PUBLIC HEARING.  An assembly to receive the public sentiment
regarding actions pursuant to this chapter.



      PUBLIC USE.



         (a)   A building or property owned or occupied by a use
which is open to all people without or with minimal restrictions or regard as
to membership, and which is established for their common or general use and
enjoyment. A church is a PUBLIC USE.



         (b)   Interior or exterior rooms or spaces that are made
available to the general public. May be a building that is privately or
publicly owned.



      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicle that is:



         (a)   Built on a single chassis;



         (b)   Four hundred square feet or less, when measured at
the largest horizontal projection;



         (c)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck; and



         (d)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel,
or seasonal use.



      REPETITIVE LOSS.  A building covered by a contract for flood
insurance that has incurred flood-related damages on two occasions during a
ten-year period ending on the date of the event for which a second claim is
made, in which the cost of repairing the flood damage, on the average,
equaled or exceeded 25% of the market value of the building at the time of
each such flood event.



      RETAIL STORE.  A business selling or renting goods or
merchandise directly to the consumer for direct consumption or use. Any
merchandise for rent must be merchandise permitted for sale in the respective
district.



      RE-ZONING/ZONING AMENDMENTS.  Re-zoning/zoning amendments are
used to meet the evolving needs of the city. Re-zoning changes the zone
classification on a given parcel of land while amendments usually refer to
changes in this chapter’s text. For example, the construction of a new road
may provide access to areas well suited for commercial uses. Prior to the
construction of the road, the area was zoned residential. For the owner to
construct a commercial facility, he or she must request a re-zoning of the
property. An example involving an amendment to the chapter text might be
changing the definition of townhouses to include them either as multi-family
or single-family dwellings. This may significantly affect where and how
townhouses are permitted. Re-zonings, like the original enactment of the
ordinance, are legislative acts that must be passed by the City Council. (See
§ 151.047.)



      SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA.  Any round, concave, “dish-shaped”
antenna or other apparatus, either mobile or permanently mounted, intended
for the reception of radio frequency signals or earth satellite signals.



      SECTION 1316 OF THE NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE ACT OF 1968.  The
act provides that no new flood insurance shall be provided for any property
found by the Federal Emergency Management Agency to have been declared by a
state or local authority to be in violation of state or local ordinances.



      SEMI-PUBLIC USE.  A building or property owned or occupied by an
organization, institution or group of people which has written and adopted
rules for membership, which is used or enjoyed primarily by that group.



      SETBACK.  See BUILDING LINE, and Appendix D.



      SHOPPING/COMMERCIAL CENTER.  A business use of land which
locates two or more separately licensed businesses on a common parcel or
parcels sharing access.



      SIGN.  A name, identification, image, description, display or
illustration which is affixed to, painted or represented directly or
indirectly upon a building, structure or piece of land and which directs
attention to an object, product, place, activity, facility, service, event,
attraction, person, institution, organization or business and which is
visible from any street, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, park or other public
property.



      SIGN, AREA OF.  For free standing signs (exclusive of supports),
cabinet signage (single or double faced) or signage prepared on material
subsequently intended for attachment to supports or a building structure
which is removable as one piece, or signage painted upon the building
surface, the sign area is that area contained within a single continuous
perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the structure. Where two sides of a
double-faced sign are not more than 24 inches apart at the widest point and
display identical writing or other representation, the sign area shall be
computed by measuring one face only. For signs designed of uniformly colored
individual raised letters separately attached to a building wall or facade
surface, the sign area shall be the sum of the areas of each individual
letter as circumscribed by the outer limits of each letter, provided the
spacing between letters does not exceed one half the median height of letters
used, and spacing of words does not exceed the height of the largest letter
used.



         (a)   BANNER and PENNANT SIGN.  Usually made of cloth
or paper and suspended across streets, display lots or building fronts.



         (b)   BENCH SIGN.  Painted or attached to the backrest
of a bench.



         (c)   PORTABLE SIGN.  A sign which is easily moved from
one location to another. Usually rests on the ground, on wheels or metal legs
and may be temporarily anchored by weights, stakes or cables to the ground.
Common examples include A-FRAME or SANDWICH BOARD signs.



      SIGN, OFF-PREMISE.  A sign that advertises activities, goods,
products and the like, that is available elsewhere than within the building
or on the lot where the sign is located (i.e., billboards, off-premise
outdoor advertising and the like).



      SIGN, ON-PREMISE.  A sign that advertises activities, goods,
products and the like, that is available within the building or on the lot
where the sign is located.



      SIGN, PERMANENT.  A sign which is permanently attached to a
building, the ground or other structures and which meets the structural and
installation standards of the Standard Building Code and the electrical
standards of the National Electric Code.



         (a)   AWNING SIGN.  On or attached to a retractable
shelter that is supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building.



         (b)   CANOPY SIGN.  On or attached to a permanent
overhanging shelter which projects from the face of a building and is
supported only partially by the building.



         (c)   COMBINATION WALL/ROOF SIGN.  A double faced,
projecting wall sign which projects above the roofline of a building and
which is wholly or partially supported by the building.



         (d)   FASCIA SIGN.  Affixed in any manner to any
exterior wall of a building and which projects not more than 18 inches and
does not extend more than six inches above the parapet, eaves or building
facade.



         (e)   FREE-STANDING SIGN.  Supported by one or more
columns, uprights or braces in the ground.



         (f)   MARQUEE SIGN.  On or attached to a permanent
over-hanging shelter which projects from the face of a building and is
entirely supported by the building.



         (g)   PAINTED WALL SIGN.  Painted on any externally
visible surface (wall or window) of a building which advertises a product or
service.



         (h)   PROJECTING WALL SIGN.  A double-faced sign,
mounted to the wall of a building, which projects out from that building for
more than 18 inches.



         (i)   ROOF MOUNT SIGN.  Erected on or above the roof
line of a principal building and which is wholly supported by the building.



         (j)   TEMPORARY SIGNS.  Not permanently attached to a
building, the ground or other structures and which may not meet the
structural and installation standards of the Standard Building Code or
electrical standards of the National Electrical Code. TEMPORARY SIGNS include
“For Sale/Rent” signs, contractor/builder/developer signs and trailer
type signs used to announce a new business. (See § 151.084(C)(1)(c).)



      SIGN PERMIT.  Permit required prior to erection of, or change
in, any sign or sign structure in the city.



      START OF CONSTRUCTION.  For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97
348), includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building
permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement was within 180 days
of the permit date. The ACTUAL START means the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such
as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. PERMANENT CONSTRUCTION does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation
for footings, piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such
as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.



      STORY.  That portion of a building included between the surface
of any floor and the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it,
then the space between the floor and ceiling next above it.



      STORY, HALF.  A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the
wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more
than two feet above the floor of the story, except that any partial story
used for residence purposes, other than for a janitor or caretaker or his or
her family, or by a family occupying the floor immediately below it, shall be
deemed a full story.



      STREET.  Any public or private thoroughfare, street, avenue,
boulevard, way or space, a minimum of 50 feet right-of-way width, which
affords the principal means of access to abutting properties.



      STREET CENTERLINE.  That line surveyed and monumented by the
governing body shall be the centerline of a street, or in the event that no
centerline has been so determined, it shall be that line running midway
between, and parallel to the general direction of the outside right-of-way
lines of the streets.



      STREET LINE.  The dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel
of land and contiguous street.



      STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected which requires a
fixed location on the ground, or which is attached to something having a
fixed location on the ground, including but not limited to buildings, mobile
homes, trailers, signs, satellite dish antennas, billboards, backstops for
athletic activities, swimming pools, walls and fences. The term STRUCTURE
shall be construed as if followed by the words “or part thereof”.



      SUBDIVISION.  A dividing of land for any purpose.



      SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred. Such repairs may be undertaken successively and
their costs counted cumulatively. (See the definition of SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT.)



      SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the
start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures that
have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:



         (a)   Any project of improvement to a structure to
correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety
code specifications that have been identified by the local code enforcement
official, and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or



         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided
that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation
as a historic structure.



Permits shall be cumulative for a period of five years. If the improvement
project is conducted in phases, the total of all costs associated with each
phase, beginning with the issuance of the first permit, shall be utilized to
determine whether SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT will occur.



      SUBSTANTIALLY IMPROVED EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS or
SUBDIVISIONS.  The repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of
the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of
the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or
improvement commenced.



      TATTOO ARTIST. A person who practices body tattooing.



      TATTOO FACILITY. Any room, space, location, area, structure, or
business or any part of any of these places, where tattooing is practiced or
where the business of tattooing is conducted.



      TATTOO OR TATTOOING. The act or practice of indelibly marking or
coloring the skin by subcutaneous introduction of non-toxic dyes or pigments.



      TEMPORARY USE.  Non-permanent land uses, including:



         (a)   Religious meetings in a tent or other temporary
structure in GC, CO, LI Districts, for a period not to exceed 60 days;



         (b)   Open lot sale of Christmas trees in GC, NC, CO and
LI Districts, for a period not to exceed 45 days;



         (c)   Real estate sales office, in any district, except
full or near fully developed residential projects, for a period of one year,
provided no cooking or sleeping accommodations are maintained;



         (d)   Contractor's office (shed or trailer) or equipment
shed, in any district, except full or near fully-developed residential
projects, for a period of one year, provided the office or shed is placed on
the project property, and no sleeping or cooking accommodations are
maintained except for the watch persons in the structure;



         (e)   Temporary uses which would have significant impact
on the city, such as carnivals, circuses, promotions and the like, may be
permitted only by City Council after duly determining that traffic congestion
and neighborhood nuisance can be avoided; and



         (f)   Temporary occupancy permits for divisions (b), (c)
and (d) above may be renewed provided it is determined that the use is
clearly of a temporary nature, will cause no traffic congestion and will not
create a nuisance to surrounding uses. (See § 151.065.)



      TOURIST HOMES.  A dwelling in which sleeping accommodations in
less than ten rooms are provided or offered for the use of guests in return
for compensation, and where meals may or may not be offered. Any dwelling in
which the accommodations are offered in ten or more rooms shall be deemed to
be a “hotel” or “motel” as herein defined. The use of a dwelling as a
tourist home shall not be considered an accessory use nor a customary home
occupation.



      TRAILERS.  Any vehicle or structure capable of moving, or being
moved, over streets and highways on its own wheels or on flat beds or other
carriers, which is designed or utilized to:



         (a)   Provide temporary or permanent quarters for the
conduct of a business, profession, trade or occupation;



         (b)   Serve as a carrier of new or used goods, products
or equipment; or



         (c)   Be used as a selling, advertising or display
device. A trailer is not used as a residence (such as a mobile home), nor as
additional classrooms to an educational facility.



      TRAVEL TRAILER.  A portable vehicular structure designed and
primarily intended by its manufacturer as a temporary dwelling for travel,
recreational and vacation uses, not exceeding eight feet in body width nor
exceeding 4,500 pounds gross weight, as factory equipped for the road.



      USE, PRINCIPAL.  The main or primary purpose for which a
building, other structure and/or lot is designed, arranged or intended, or
for which they may not be used, occupied or maintained under this chapter.
The use of any other building, other structure and/or land on the same lot
and incidental or supplementary thereto and permitted under this chapter
shall be considered an accessory use.



      VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with these regulations.



      WETLANDS.  Those areas that are inundated or saturated by
surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support,
and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life and saturated soil conditions. WETLANDS generally
include swamps, marshes and bogs.



      ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.  The Chief Administrative Officer of this
chapter. (See §§ 151.025 and 151.060.)



      ZONING APPEALS.  A request for relief from the strict provisions
of this chapter. Appeals generally deal with ordinance interpretation. For
example, if a developer disagrees about interpretation of the regulations, he
or she may wish to have the Zoning Board of Appeals settle the issue. It is
impossible to spell out everything in a zoning ordinance and from time to
time interpretations as to intent must be made.



      ZONING PERMIT.  Synonymous with building permit, or development
permit. (See DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.)



(1985 Code, Art. II, § 204)  (Ord. 87-06, passed 2-10-1987; Ord. 87-13,
passed 10-14-1987; Ord. 88-02, passed 3-8-1988; Ord. 89-10, passed 9-12-1989;
Ord. 91-08, passed 9-10-1991; Ord. 95-002, passed 3-14-1995; Ord. 95-003,
passed 3-14-1995; Ord. 96-002, passed 2-13-1996; Ord. 96-009, passed
9-10-1996; Ord. 99-013, passed 8-10-1999; Ord. 08-006, passed 4-15-2008; Ord.
13-006, passed 9-10-2013; Ord. 17-003, passed 3-14-2017; Ord. 17-019, passed
8-8-2017; Ord. 18-018, passed 8-14-2018)




AMENDMENTS TO THIS CHAPTER




§ 151.045  AUTHORITY.



   (A)   This chapter, including the official zoning map approved by
the City Council and on file with the Planning Director and City Clerk, and
the re-zoning of all properties may be amended from time to time by the
Council as herein specified, but no amendment, except cases related to
annexation, shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by, or
shall first have been submitted to the Commission for review and
recommendations.



   (B)   All amendments shall be in conformance with the city's
Comprehensive Plan.



   (C)   The Commission shall have 30 days within which to submit its
report.



   (D)   If the Commission fails to submit a report within the 30-day
period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment.



   (E)   In making its report, the Commission shall consider the
following factors:



      (1)   The relationship of the request to the Comprehensive
Plan;



      (2)   Whether the request violates or supports the
Comprehensive Plan;



      (3)   Whether the use permitted by the proposed change would
be appropriate in the area concerned, in terms of zoning, and general
character of the neighborhoods;



      (4)   What effects, if any, the proposed change has on the
property itself, as well as, on the surrounding properties;



      (5)   Whether adequate infrastructures exist or can be
provided to serve the needs of the development likely to take place as a
result of the change, and the consequence of the change;



      (6)   The amount of vacant land currently classified for
similar development in the vicinity and elsewhere in the city, and any
special circumstances which may make a substantial part of the vacant land
unavailable for development;



      (7)   Recommendation of the Administrator and the city; and



      (8)   Any other considerations the Commission deems
appropriate.



(1985 Code, Art. III, § 301)  (Ord. 99-005, passed 4-13-1999)



§ 151.046 POLICY ON REQUIREMENTS FOR CHANGE.



   As a matter of policy, when the following needs arise that justify an
action to amend these regulations or the map, and after the required review
and report by the Commission (§ 151.047), the Council may undertake the
necessary steps to amend this chapter:



   (A)   To correct a manifest error in the regulations or map;



   (B)   To recognize changes in technology, the style of living or
manner of doing business (in accordance with § 151.009);



   (C)   Where necessary to implement the Comprehensive Plan;



   (D)   Where good planning and zoning practice justify the action(s);
and



   (E)   To recognize substantial change, changing condition or
circumstances in a particular locality or area.



(1985 Code, Art. III, § 302)  (Ord. 99-005, passed 4-13-1999)



§ 151.047  PROCEDURE FOR AMENDMENTS.



   Requests to amend this chapter shall be processed in accordance with
the following requirements.



   (A)   Initiation of amendments to the ordinance.  A proposed
amendment to this chapter may be initiated by the Council, the Commission or
by application filed with the Zoning Administrator by owners of the subject
property; provided, however, that once a decision has been made, action shall
not be initiated for a zoning amendment affecting the same parcel of property
or any part thereof, and requesting the same change in district
classification, more often than once every 12 months. Furthermore, when an
application has been legally advertised for public hearing, it shall not be
considered for an amendment affecting the same property for six months from
the date of withdrawal by the applicant, unless authorized by the Council.
Council may waive the mandatory delay period and authorize the acceptance of
a new application upon receipt of written request from the original applicant
stating how conditions have substantially changed in the community since
prior consideration was given the proposal, thereby justifying earlier review.



   (B)   Application procedure for amendments to the chapter.



      (1)   Amendment requests shall be submitted to the
Administrator in letter form. Amendment requests, together with an
application fee, plus any additional information the applicant feels to be
pertinent, shall be filed with the Administrator. The applications shall also
include a description and/or statement of the present and proposed zoning
regulation or district boundary to be changed, and the names, telephone
numbers and addresses of the owner(s) of the property, including the tax
assessor's assigned number to the property. The application should be signed
and dated, and should also include a narrative addressing the reasons for the
requested amendment. Any communication purporting to be an application for an
amendment shall be regarded as mere notice to seek relief until it is made in
written form and is accompanied by the appropriate fee. In the special case
of planned development, note the public hearing requirements of §
151.136(C)(2). Application for amendments must be submitted, in proper form,
at least 30 working days prior to a Commission meeting in order to be heard
at that meeting. The Commission normally meets the first Tuesday of the month.



      (2)   Application fees as set by the Council, and filed with
the Finance Director, shall be forwarded by the Administrator to the City
Clerk, who shall supervise the application of same to the costs of
advertising and other administrative expenses. Application fee is required to
cover publication and other miscellaneous costs for the change. Application
fees shall not be required of any employee of the city when acting in his or
her official capacity.



   (C)   Commission and Council review.



      (1)   All papers and other data submitted by the applicant on
behalf of the amendment request shall be transmitted to the Commission.



      (2)   The Commission, at regular meetings, shall review the
application and prepare a report, including its recommendation, for
transmittal to the Council.



      (3)   All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the
public. At a meeting, any party may appear in person, or by agent.



      (4)   No member of the Commission shall participate in a
matter in which he or she has any pecuniary or special interest.



      (5)   The Commission and the Council shall have the option to
defer action on any amendment(s) in order to gain additional facts, have
reasonable time to consult with other governmental agencies or to seek the
resolution of any disputes surrounding the amendment(s).



      (6)   The recommendation of the Commission shall be advisory
only, and shall not be binding on Council.



      (7)   Following action by the Commission, all papers and data
pertinent to the application shall be transmitted to the Council for final
action.



      (8)   The Council may then approve the application or
amendment, may include specific modifications of the proposal or other
specific regulations, or may deny the application. The approval of an
application or an amendment by Council shall be based on two readings, at
least six days apart.



      (9)   If the amendment is approved, the proposed development
or application shall be required to be in accordance with all development
rules and regulations of the city and other agencies, and shall conform with
any time or priority limitations established by Council on beginning and
completion of the development as a whole, or in specified stages. All related
agreements, contracts, deed restrictions or other instruments involved shall
be approved by the city before development may proceed.



   (D)   Public hearing on proposed amendment.  Before enacting an
amendment to this chapter, a public hearing shall be held thereon; at least
15 days notice of the time and place of which shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality, and a sign (see §
151.008(C)(1)) shall be placed on the property in question, facing the
thoroughfare serving the property, stating the present zoning classification
and other information deemed necessary in consideration of the proposed
action.



   (E)   Changes in the ordinance.  Following Commission review,
public hearing consideration and final action by the City Council, any
necessary changes shall be made in this chapter and map. A written record of
the type and date of the change shall be maintained by the City Clerk. Until
the change is made, no action by the Council on amendments to this chapter
shall be considered official, unless the Administrator fails to make the
change within seven days after formal action by Council. In the latter event,
action by Council shall be considered official seven days after the date of
the action even if the Administrator has failed to make the appropriate
changes.



(1985 Code, Art. III, § 303)  (Ord. 99-005, passed 4-13-1999)




ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT




§ 151.060  ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   The duty of administering and enforcing the provisions of this
chapter is hereby conferred upon the Administrator.



   (B)   These duties include:



      (1)   Interpreting the terms and provisions of this chapter;



      (2)   Receiving applications for appeals, zoning amendments,
conditional uses and variances;



      (3)   Processing applications for the Architectural Review
Board;



      (4)   Accepting and examining all applications for
construction including signs, land use or reuse;



      (5)   Maintaining the current official zoning ordinance and
map for public review;



      (6)   Ordering the discontinuance of illegal uses of land or
work being done;



      (7)   Issuing citations, warnings or notices where the
violations exist;



      (8)   Attending court hearings and testifying concerning
planning and zoning violations;



      (9)   Maintaining public records related to zoning;



      (10)   Investigating and resolving complaints;



      (11)   Inspecting premises. However, there shall be no
right-of-entry into any building without the consent of the owner;



      (12)   Reviewing and approving plats and plans;



      (13)   Keeping records and files of any and all matters
referred to the Administrator, and to executing any and all reports as the
Council may require;



      (14)   Advising the Planning Commission on matters relating to
the administration of this chapter; and



      (15)   Performing other duties deemed necessary to insure
compliance with this chapter, or to prevent violation of its provisions.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of all officers and employees of the city
to assist the Administrator by reporting to him or her all new construction,
all reconstruction, all changes in land use and all apparent violations of
this chapter.



(1985 Code, Art. IV, § 401)  (Ord. 99-005, passed 4-13-1999)



§ 151.061  PERMIT REQUIRED; PENALTY.



   (A)   General.  It shall be unlawful to initiate any development or
construction in any district without an appropriate permit. Permits shall be
conspicuously posted on premise while work is in progress.



   (B)   Development and construction.  It shall be unlawful to
initiate any development, building construction, grading or clearing of land,
or to commence the moving, occupying, changing, converting, enlarging or the
altering of any building or sign until the Administrator has approved the
appropriate permit for the work. See § 151.008. It shall also be unlawful to
change or implement previously-approved development plans without first
obtaining approval from the city.



   (C)   Penalty.  If work, which in all respects would normally be
permitted, is begun without the proper permit(s) having first been obtained,
subsequent permit(s) shall be issued after payment of the required fee, plus
a penalty equal to the fee. Work illegally begun in other respects shall be
issued a “stop work order”, and shall be subject to penalty as described
in § 151.999. Additional enforcement action may include the following:



      (1)   Revocation of any permit; and



      (2)   The withholding of any related permits, plats,
inspections or other permissions, approvals or privileges authorized by any
city rules and regulations.



   (D)   Non-conformity.  Work initiated prior to this chapter may, or
may not, be non-conforming. See § 151.152(F).



(1985 Code, Art. IV, § 402)  (Ord. 99-005, passed 4-13-1999)  Penalty, see
§ 151.999



§ 151.062  APPLICATION FOR PERMITS.



   (A)   Applications shall include a plan illustrating the shape,
size, dimensions and location of the lot, location and dimensions of existing
and proposed buildings and structures, conditions existing on the lot and
adjacent lots, general area of vegetative cover and buffers if applicable,
the boundaries of flood hazard areas (see § 151.081), proposed dwelling
units, office or commercial units, easements, setback lines or adjacent
structures, off-street parking spaces and all other information required to
determine compliance with this chapter.



   (B)   A scaled plan is only necessary for new construction,
commercial and light industrial applications.



   (C)   Application, permit and inspection procedures for specific
types of construction are detailed in the respective Procedures Manual,
available from the Zoning Administrator.



      (1)    Zoning, development, building or occupancy permit shall
be issued upon determination by the Zoning Administrator that all provisions
of this, and all other city ordinances, are complied with, and any required
fees are paid. The Zoning Administrator shall state reasons for refusal of a
permit in writing.



      (2)   Before commencing any actions described in § 151.061,
the required permit (or copy thereof) shall be placed conspicuously on the
front property line therein described for the project duration, in a manner
to protect it from weather.



      (3)   Permits and certificates of occupancy issued based on
plans and applications approved by the city, and by other officers or
agencies where additional approval is required, shall authorize only the use,
arrangement, location and construction set forth in the approved plans and
applications, and no other use, arrangement, location or construction shall
be authorized unless the approvals have been obtained.



(1985 Code, Art. IV, § 403)  (Ord. 99-005, passed 4-13-1999)



§ 151.063  CONSTRUCTION PROCESS.



   Start of construction, for other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. Law No. 97-348),
being 16 U.S.C. §§ 3501 et seq., includes substantial improvement, and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction or improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such
as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of
columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation
for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure.



(1985 Code, Art. IV, § 404)  (Ord. 99-005, passed 4-13-1999)



§ 151.064  EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   If the work described in any permit has not begun or has not
been completed within six months from the date of issuance thereof, the
permit shall expire and the applicant shall have to reapply for another
permit. It is expected that all new construction be completed within six
months.



   (B)   In the case of new construction, which may reasonably be
expected to require more than six months for completion, the city may specify
a time limit in excess of six months at the time of original issuance of the
building permit on a case-by-case basis, and shall extend the time limit
accordingly.



(1985 Code, Art. IV, § 405)  (Ord. 99-005, passed 4-13-1999)



§ 151.065  OCCUPANCY PERMIT.



   Upon determination that the completed building, sign or structure, or
change in occupancy, as described in the authorizing permits, conforms to
this chapter and all other city ordinances, an occupancy permit will be
issued by the Finance Director, at the direction of the Zoning Administrator.



   (A)   No buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered shall
be used, occupied or changed in use until an occupancy permit is issued
stating that the building or intended use complies with this chapter.



   (B)   Occupancy permits shall be required of all non-conforming
uses, to be applied for within 12 months from the effective date of this
chapter. After this time, occupancy permits will only be granted upon proof
that the non-conforming use predated this chapter.



   (C)   Occupancy permits shall be issued as part of the city permit
administrative process; issuance shall occur within ten days of completion of
final inspection by the Inspection Division.



   (D)   Temporary occupancy letter may be issued at the discretion of
the Administrator in cases where the temporary occupancy represents no threat
to the safety of the occupants, or to the general safety or welfare of the
public. The time frame for temporary occupancy should first be agreed upon
between the occupant and the city.



(1985 Code, Art. IV, § 406)  (Ord. 99-005, passed 4-13-1999)



§ 151.066  TEMPORARY USES.



   The Zoning Administrator is authorized to issue temporary occupancy
permits for particular circumstances, or at the direction of other
appropriate city officials, and for certain temporary uses, as defined in
TEMPORARY USE.



(1985 Code, Art. IV, § 407)  (Ord. 99-005, passed 4-13-1999)




GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PROVISION




§ 151.080  USE OF LAND OR BUILDINGS.



   No land, building or structure, including signs, shall be used or
occupied, and no building or sign shall be constructed, altered or moved,
unless in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the particular
zoning district. When proposed development lies adjacent to an established
area of the city, the design, scale and location of structures or landscaping
on the site shall enhance rather than detract from the character, value and
attractiveness of the established surroundings.



   (A)   Preservation of natural environment.  The intent of this
section is to preserve the natural environment and existing trees to the
maximum extent possible, prevent the unregulated clear-cutting of trees and
natural vegetative cover and provide for the inclusion of natural trees in
the landscape requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   Trees on undeveloped lots.  On undeveloped lots, parcels,
tracts and acreage in any district, it shall be unlawful to fell any tree
measuring four inches in diameter (measured four and one half feet above
grade), or otherwise commence development, clearing, grading, filling or
excavation until the Administrator has approved the appropriate permit. (See
§§ 151.061(C) and 151.999.)



   (C)   Clear-cutting prohibited.  The clear-cutting of trees and
vegetative cover on any lot, parcel, tract or acreage in any district is
specifically prohibited.



   (D)   Removal of trees in public rights-of-way.  In all zoning
districts, the removal or cutting of trees in public rights-of-way (federal,
state or local) shall not be permitted except by governmental entities or
with the permission of governmental entities.



   (E)   Tree conservation.



      (1)   Authority and power.  Pursuant to Objective Seven of
the Natural Resources Element of the Comprehensive Plan, and recognizing the
importance of preserving the natural landscape of the city as a way to
promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizens, the
Council hereby adopts the tree conservation section of this chapter. All
developments and uses proposed within the Commercial and Light Industrial
Districts of the city (NC, RC, GC, LI and PD) and all developments and uses
proposed on undeveloped parcels and tracts in residential districts (R1, R-2,
R-3 and PD) shall be subject to the procedures, standards and guidelines
specified in the following sections, in addition to those standards
pertaining to the particular zoning district in which the development occurs.



      (2)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a
different meaning.



         DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH).  The height at which the
diameter of a tree is measured, a height of four and one half feet above the
ground level.



         REGULATED TREES.  Hardwood trees at least eight inches
DBH, all conifer trees at least 12 inches DBH, and all dogwoods, flowering
trees and American Hollies at least four inches DBH anywhere on a site shall
be considered regulated and protected, and shall be preserved to the greatest
extent practical as determined by city staff and incorporated into required
landscaping.



         SIGNIFICANT TREES.  Hardwood trees at least 24 inches DBH,
and dogwoods, American Hollies and flowering trees at least eight inches DBH,
anywhere on the site shall be considered significant and protected, and must
be preserved to the greatest extent practical.



         TREE.  A woody perennial plant having a single or multiple
elongated main stem (trunk) and height of that particular species. Trees are
distinguished from shrubs by having comparatively greater height and,
characteristically, single or multiple trunks. Common trees, when planted,
shall have a minimum of two and one half inch caliper.



         TREE, CALIPER.  American Association of Nurserymen
standard for trunk measurement of nursery stock. Caliper of the trunk shall
be taken six inches above the ground for and up to and including four inch
caliper size, and 12 inches above the ground for larger sizes.



         TREE, CANOPY.  The over story of a tree area that forms
the top layer or the above-ground parts of a tree, consisting of the
branches, stems, buds, fruits and leaves. Also referred to as a "crown".
Examples of trees include oaks, elms, hickories, maples, poplars and others.



         TREE, CONIFER.  Any tree with needle leaves and a woody
cone fruit.



         TREE, DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH).  The diameter in
inches of a tree trunk measured four and one half feet above grade. For trees
with multiple trunks, the diameter shall be the sum of the diameters of the
trunks. Diameter is calculated as the circumference measured in inches
divided by 3.14 (n).



         TREE, DRIP LINE.  The outermost perimeter of a crown of a
tree projected vertically to the ground.



         TREE, REMOVAL OF.



            1.   Any intentional or negligent act causing a
tree to decline and die within a period of one year from the act as
determined by the city, including but not limited to, damage inflicted upon
the root system of a tree by application of toxic substances, the operation
of machinery or the change of natural grade by excavation or filling;



            2.   Damages from injury or fire inflicted on
trees that result in, or permit pest infestation; and



            3.   Purposeful felling of trees using best
management practices; in accordance with this chapter and following approval
granted by the city.



      (3)   Benefits and values of trees.  The city recognizes that
trees are an essential natural resource, an invaluable economic resource and
a priceless aesthetic resource. The city acknowledges that trees play a
critical role in, and have the following benefits and values:



         (a)   Improve air quality by absorbing carbon dioxide,
returning oxygen into the air, increasing filtration of dust and fumes, and
absorbing emitted exhaust gasses;



         (b)   Reduce water pollution by filtering impurities;



         (c)   Increase ground water recharge by absorbing
rainwater;



         (d)   Reduce noise pollution by blocking and masking
noise, thereby serving as noise buffers;



         (e)   Reduce glare by blocking headlights and reflected
sunlight from vehicles;



         (f)   Prevent soil erosion and improve stormwater
management by holding soils with their root systems, thereby slowing
stormwater runoff and minimizing flooding;



         (g)   Conserve energy by providing shade, reducing heat
levels and the formation of smog;



         (h)   Beautify and enhance improved and undeveloped land
by buffering incompatible land uses, breaking up hard edges of buildings and
hiding unsightly views;



         (i)   Improve the appearance of the city by providing
greenery and a variety of colorful foliage in an urban environment, thereby
preserving the small town character of the city and promoting civic pride and
identity;



         (j)   Establish and preserve scale and spatial identity;



         (k)   Provide focus points for entrances and exits,
thereby providing pleasant transitions for developments;



         (l)   Improve property values and sales by their proven
marketability;



         (m)   Provide and preserve recreational settings for
wildlife habitat by providing food, nesting sites and shelters;



         (n)   Promote commerce and tourism;



         (o)   Improve city-wide economic impact by improving the
quality of life; and



         (p)   Improve the physical well-being and emotional
health of citizens of the city.



      (4)   Intent and purposes.  The city acknowledges that there
is continuing intense development inside the city, and the intense
development sometimes results in the unnecessary or unreasonable removal of
trees and vegetation. The intent of this section is to promote the
preservation, protection and conservation of trees, and to further the goals
and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan of the city. To that end, the city
intends to achieve the following purposes through the tree protection section
of this chapter:



         (a)   Recognize the importance of trees and other
landscaping and their various contributions;



         (b)   Encourage the proliferation of trees and other
landscaping as well as their replacement;



         (c)   Maintain the environment and aesthetic benefits
that trees provide;



         (d)   Promote and increase property value and economic
development through the benefits of trees;



         (e)   Improve the quality of life by insuring adequate
light, air and open space, and by conserving energy;



         (f)   Prevent the unnecessary removal and indiscriminate
cutting of trees while allowing for reasonable and economical development of
land;



         (g)   Promote a positive identity of the city which is
necessary for successful businesses and industries to continue;



         (h)   Recognize the individual rights to develop private
property in a manner which will not be prejudicial to the public interest;



         (i)   Encourage creativity in tree protection, planting
and maintenance, and not to increase monotony;



         (j)   Preserve scenic beauty and provide a sense of
scale, color, silhouette, and mass to the city;



         (k)   Prevent erosion of topsoil for developments;



         (l)   Protect developments against flood hazards and
landslides;



         (m)   Add beauty to the city by softening the harshness
of the urban environment;



         (n)   Help to reduce the negative effects of noise and
glare;



         (o)   Provide a protective physical and psychological
barrier between pedestrians and traffic; and



         (p)   Promote the appreciation and understanding of the
benefits and values of trees to the citizens of the city.



      (5)   Tree removal.  Removal of any tree(s) with a diameter
breast height (DBH) of four inches or more shall be permitted only for the
following reasons:



         (a)   The tree is diseased, dying or dead;



         (b)   The tree poses a safety hazard, or is in violation
of § 151.009;



         (c)   The tree is located within the buildable areas
(buildable area shall mean all planned buildings and parking areas that are
essential to achieve the reasonable goals of the development without
detracting from the natural features of the property to be developed or the
surrounding area), or is shown to hinder development (including preventing
essential grade changes or all reasonable utility installations). All efforts
must be made to save the tree rather than remove it for the sake of
development;



         (d)   It is in the interest of good forestry management;



         (e)   An emergency situation such as an act of nature.
The city reserves the right to review the extent of tree removal and take the
appropriate action after the effects of the emergency situation;



         (f)   Proposed site grading shall minimize the removal
of trees and soil erosion as much as possible; and



         (g)   The city is fully aware of the circumstances
surrounding the removal of trees for any other reasons than the
above-mentioned. Please contact the Planning Director.



      (6)   Site or land clearing.  An applicant shall file, in
letter form, a request for the clearing of land, property or parcel prior to
any clearing activities. A site plan highlighting the areas to be cleared and
areas of trees to be saved shall accompany the clearing request. Substantial
interest in the development of the proposed project or phases of the project
shall be shown prior to the city's approval of a land clearing request. The
intent is to prevent a situation from occurring whereby the land has been
cleared and the development of the proposed project does not materialize. An
applicant may underbrush and remove trees less than four inches DBH in order
to develop a tree survey. The Planning Director must be notified of the
intent prior to the under brushing and the removal of the trees.



      (7)   Tree survey.  A tree survey is required prior to any
new development or substantial redevelopment, or when the Planning Director
deems it necessary. The following information shall be shown on a tree survey:



         (a)   Tree survey clearly identifying the location and
species of significant and regulated trees. Any trees to be relocated will be
identified on the survey;



         (b)   The boundaries of the proposed development,
including the different phases of development;



         (c)   The boundaries of the buildable areas;



         (d)   The location, species and DBH of trees outside of
the buildable areas over four inches DBH;



         (e)   The location, species and DBH of the trees outside
of the buildable areas over four inches in DBH to be removed;



         (f)   The average tree size and the dominant species of
the trees inside the buildable areas;



         (g)   The trees over four inches DBH to be saved inside
the buildable areas;



         (h)   Tree protection methods and specifications;



         (i)   Trees shall be true to name and variety
established by the American Joint Committee on Horticultural Nomenclature
“Standardized Plant Names”;



         (j)   Any other information as deemed necessary by the
applicant or by the Planning Director.



      (8)   Tree protection.  The city expects that the following
tree protection methods shall be followed. The intent is not to have the city
hire an arborist in order to enforce any section of this chapter. It is the
responsibility of every applicant and his or her representative to conserve
and protect trees according to the tree survey.



         (a)   Temporary protective barriers shall be erected at
least up to the drip lines of trees to be saved as practicable as possible.



            1.   Provide protection fencing for trees
designated to remain. The fencing needs to be placed at the outer perimeter
of the spread of branches and be a minimum of four feet high with a top and
middle rail. Posts shall be located no greater than six feet on center.
Fencing shall be made of either fencing steel rails and posts (minimum of one
and a half inch diameter, wood rails (minimum one by four), and wood posts
(minimum two by four), or florescent polyethylene laminar safety fencing.



            2.   Barriers shall be made of sturdy material and
shall be highly visible.



            3.   There shall be no construction, paving,
operation of equipment or vehicles, or storage and dumping of materials
within this protected zone. Where grading must occur, trees shall be
protected.



            4.   Temporary protective barriers shall be
maintained until the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.



            5.   No fill material shall be placed within the
drip line of any tree in excess of acceptable level for the particular
species.



            6.   Landscaping activities taking place after the
removal of temporary protective barriers shall be accomplished with light
machinery or by hand.



            7.   The Planning Director shall be notified prior
to any deviation from the above-mentioned criteria.



         (b)   Protective trees shall be marked with surveyor's
flagging for easy identification and inspection.



         (c)   Any existing natural landscape character shall be
preserved whenever possible. Preservation is the goal rather than destruction
of existing trees or plant life.



         (d)   Flexible approaches such as adjustments to lot
layout, placement of buildings and paved surfaces, and location of utilities
should be pursued in order to save the trees.



         (e)   Corrective measures shall be taken for trees in
declining health. Such measures may include:



            1.   Initiation of pest control measures;



            2.   Pruning for good forestry;



            3.   Fertilizing to restore vigor; and



            4.   Other mitigation measures as deemed necessary.



      (9)   Tree conditions for new planting.



         (a)   All trees planted shall have a minimum of two and
one half inch calipers, eight to ten feet in height. If a tree splits into
multiple trunks below four and one half feet, then the trunk is measured at
its most narrow point beneath the split. The crown material shall be in good
balance with the trunk.



         (b)   Trees shall be free of diseases, fungi, insect
infestations, abrasions or disfigurement.



         (c)   Trees shall be well formed and sturdy, free of
cold injury and sun scald.



         (d)   Lateral branching shall be plentiful and uniformly
distributed. At least half of the trunk shall have lateral branches.



         (e)   Pruning scars shall follow proper horticultural
practices.



         (f)   Trees shall be densely supplied with healthy,
vigorous leaves of normal size, shape, texture and appropriate colors.



         (g)   Rooting medium shall be weed-free.



         (h)   Any new planting shall be done to avoid any
adverse impact to the root systems of existing trees.



         (i)   Tree type substitutions are permitted upon
approval from the Planning Director.



         (j)   All trees shall meet the standards of the latest
edition of the American Standard for Nursery Stock sponsored by the
Association of American Nurserymen.



      (10)   Tree planting and maintenance.



         (a)   All installation shall be accomplished in a sound
workman-like manner, according to accepted good planting procedures with
quantity and quality of plant materials described. Installation shall
include, but not be limited to, planting conditions, planting methods,
staking of trees, fertilizing, irrigating, pruning and tree maintenance until
tree is established.



         (b)   Evergreens shall be planted in clusters rather
than singly in order to maximize their chances of survival.



         (c)   The city has developed master tree plans for
Highway 52 and Highway 176. Street trees shall be planted in accordance with
the master tree plans, and will count toward the tree planting requirements
of a development.



      (11)   Tree replacement, relocation and mitigation.  The
intent of this section is to create conscientiousness in tree conservation
and protection. The objective is to retain existing trees as much as
possible, replant reasonably larger trees and provide alternate methods for
tree replacement. Trees shall be mitigated using Chart 1 to determine percent
mitigation.



         (a)   All significant and regulated trees located at a
distance of 15 feet from the footprint of a building shall be saved. Removal
of the significant trees shall be replaced by the applicant on the property
through the replanting of species approved by the city at a minimum of four
inch calipers equal to the total DBH removed, and a penalty of $500. When it
is not possible to achieve the total number of replacement trees on the piece
of property, a penalty of $500 per each DBH removed above the replacement
trees may be imposed on the applicant along with the original $500 fine. All
monetary fines shall be deposited into the city's Tree Trust Fund for the
planting of trees on public properties.



         (b)   In all buildable areas, a minimum of 12 trees per
acre shall be saved and/or replaced anywhere within the property calculated
at total DBH in order to provide flexibility, with a minimum of two and one
half inch calipers or equivalent size trees:



            1.   All existing trees including significant
trees to be saved within the buildable area may count toward the total number
of replacement trees required; and



            2.   Replacement trees may be the predominant
species on the property, or of species approved by the city.



         (c)   A tree replacement schedule is required showing
the location, species and sizes of any replacement trees to be planted.



         (d)   In areas outside the buildable areas (yard areas),
with the exception of significant trees, all trees over four inches DBH shall
be saved when practicable. This does not preclude an applicant from removing
trees that unnecessarily hinder the development process, or trees that are in
the way of driveways, easements and the like. The Planning Director shall be
consulted prior to removing any trees.



         (e)   In all buildable and yard areas, with the
exception of significant trees, if the applicant removed the trees
inadvertently, the trees died during the development or redevelopment
processes, or if the applicant is in violation of this chapter, the total
number of DBH removed shall be replaced with a minimum of four and one half
inch calipers or equivalent size trees. The city may require trees of larger
DBH as determined appropriate for the nature of the violation or for site
specific conditions and circumstances, lawful or illegal, under which the
removal occurred. Section 151.999 will also be imposed.



         (f)   Compensating (replacement) trees may be planted
within the buildable areas or in the yard areas. Replacement trees shall be
long-lived, hardy, native and compatible with local conditions, with good
aesthetic value, healthy and disease and pest free and approved by the
Planning Director.



         (g)   If trees are to be relocated onto the development
site, the applicant shall identify the original locations of the trees, as
well as, submit to the city site preparations and methods used on the tree
survey. Trees may be relocated provided the environmental conditions of the
new location are favorable to the survival of the trees.



         (h)   For all trees other than significant trees, when
an applicant cannot reasonably plant the required replacement trees or saved
trees, the applicant shall provide the total DBH removed in monetary value
based on tree size of two and one half inch calipers. Replacement trees in
monetary value may be of species approved by the city. All monetary value
shall be deposited into the city's Tree Trust fund for the planting of trees
on public property or property dedicated for public use and enjoyment.



         (i)   All trees planted, replanted, relocated or
mitigated may count toward the landscaping requirement for trees under §
151.197. The City of Goose Creek encourages the planting of trees as an
integral part of the landscaping design of a development. Tree planting shall
be at least 10% of the landscape design of a project. The use of native trees
is preferred.



 


Chart 1: Category I: Mitigate 100%




Common Name

 

Scientific Name






Flowering Dogwood

 

Comus florida




Fosters, Savannah Holly

 

Illex attenuata




Longleaf Pine

 

Pinus palustris




White Oak

 

Quercus alba




Live Oak

 

Quercus virginiana




Crepe Myrtle

 

Lagerstroemia indica




Red Maple

 

Acer rubrum




River Birch

 

Betula nigra




Ginkgo

 

Ginkgo biloba




Loblolly Bay

 

Gordonia Lasianthus




American Holly

 

Illex opaca




Yaupon Holly

 

Illex vomitoria




Tulip or Yellow Poplar

 

Liriodendron tulipifera




Southern Magnolia

 

Magnolia grandiflora




Sweetbay

 

Magnolia virginiana




Blackgum

 

Nyssa sylvatica




Southern Red Oak

 

Quercus falcata




Laurel Oak

 

Quercus laurifolia




Water Oak

 

Quercus nigra




Willow Oak

 

Quercus phellos




Swamp Chestnut Oak

 

Quercus prinus




Shumard Oak

 

Quercus shumardii




Bald Cypress

 

Taxodium distichum




Japanese Zelkova

 

Zelkova serrata





 



 


Category II: Mitigate at 75%




Common Name

 

Scientific Name






Amur Maple

 

Acer ginnala




Hickory

 

Carya species




Pecan

 

Carya illinoensis




Deodar Cedar

 

Cedrus deodara




Lebanon Cedar

 

Cedrus fibani




Sugarberry

 

Celtis Iaevigata




Fringetree-flowering

 

Chionanthus species




Kousa Dogwood

 

Comus kousa




Loquat

 

Eriobotrya japonica




Green or Red Ash

 

Fraxinus pennsylvanica




Eastern Red Cedar

 

Juniperus virginiana




Golden Raintree

 

Koelreuteria paniculata




Sweetgum

 

Liquidambar styraciflua




Saucer Magnolia

 

Magnolia soulangiana




London Planetree

 

Platanus acerifolia




Japanese (Kwansan)

 

Cherry Prunus




Yoshinio Cherry

 

Prunus yedoensis




Sawtooth Oak

 

Quercus acutissima




Sassafras

 

Sassafras albidum




Chinese or Lacebark Elm

 

Ulmus parvifolia




American Redbud Flowering

 

Cercis canadensis




Hawthorn Flowering

 

Crataegus species




American Beech

 

Fagus grandifolia




Black Walnut

 

Juglans nigra




American sycamore

 

Platanus occidentalis




Littleleaf Linden

 

Tilia cordata





 



 


Category III: Mitigate at 50%




Common Name

 

Scientific Name






Southern Sugar Maple

 

Acer barbatum




Trident Maple

 

Acer Bbuergeranum




Hedge Maple

 

Acer campsestre




Japanese Maple

 

Acer palmatum




Japanese Cryptomeria

 

Cryptomeria japonica




Chinafir

 

Cunninghamia lanceolata




Common Persimmon

 

Diospyros virginiana




Franklinia

 

Franklinia alatamaha




Scarlet Oak

 

Quercus coccinea




Post Oak

 

Quercus stellata




American Linden

 

Tilla amerianca




American Elm

 

Ulmus americana




Carolina silverbell

 

Halesia carolina




Loblolly Pine

 

Pinus taeda




Carolina Cherry Laurel

 

Prunus caroliniana




Black Cherry

 

Prunus serotina




Pin Oak

 

Quercus palustris




Stewartia

 

Stewartia species




Snowbell

 

Styrax species





 



 


Category IV: Mitigate at 25%




Common Name

 

Scientific Name






Silver Maple

 

Acer saccharinum




Sugar Maple

 

Acer saccharum




Mimosa

 

Albizia julibrissin




Catalpa

 

Catalpa species




Carolina Ash

 

Fraxinmum caroliniana




Honeylocust

 

Gleditsia triacanthos




Crabapple

 

Malus species




Mulberry

 

Morus species




Virginia Pine

 

Pinus virginiana




Poplar

 

Populus species




Chokecherry

 

Prunus virginiana




Flowering Pear

 

Pyrus calleryana




English Oak

 

Quercus robur




Willow

 

Salix species




Palms

 

All species





 



(1985 Code, Art. V, § 501)  (Ord. 91-09, passed 9-10-1991; Ord. 08-004,
passed 2-12-2008) Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.081  FLOOD HAZARD CONTROLS.



   (A)   General standards.



      (1)   Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the State of
South Carolina has in S.C. Code  Title 5 and Title 6, and amendments
thereto, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council does ordain as follows.



      (2)   Findings of fact. The special flood hazard areas of the
city are subject to periodic inundation resulting in loss of life, property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare.



      (3)   Furthermore, these flood losses are caused by the
cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood
heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses
vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands that are inadequately
elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages.



   (B)   Statement of purpose and objectives.



      (1)   It is the purpose of this section to protect human life
and health, minimize property damage, and encourage appropriate construction
practices to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions by
requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.



      (2)   Uses of the floodplain that are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or that increase flood
heights, velocities, or erosion, are restricted or prohibited.



      (3)   These provisions attempt to control the alteration of
natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers
involved in the accommodation of flood waters, and to control filling,
grading, dredging and other development that may increase flood damage or
erosion.



      (4)   This section prevents or regulates the construction of
flood barriers that will unnaturally divert floodwaters or that may increase
flood hazards to other lands.



      (5)   The objectives of this section are to protect human life
and health, to help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize
flood-blight areas, and to ensure that potential home buyers are notified
that property is in a flood area.



      (6)   The provisions of this section are intended to minimize
damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains,
electric, telephone, and sewer tines, streets and bridges, located in the
floodplain, and prolonged business interruptions. Also, an important
floodplain management objective of this section is to minimize expenditure of
public money for costly flood control projects and rescue and relief efforts
associated with flooding.



      Floodplains are an important asset to the community. They perform
vital natural functions such as temporary storage of floodwaters, moderation
of peak flood flows, maintenance of water quality, groundwater recharge,
prevention of erosion, habitat for diverse natural wildlife populations,
recreational opportunities, and aesthetic quality. These functions are best
served if floodplains are kept in their natural state. Wherever possible, the
natural characteristics of floodplains and their associated wetlands and
water bodies should be preserved and enhanced. Decisions to alter
floodplains, especially floodways and stream channels, should be the result
of careful planning processes that evaluate resource conditions and human
needs.



   (C)   Lands to which this section applies.



      (1)   This section shall apply to all areas of special flood
hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of Goose Creek, as identified by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study,
dated October 16, 2003, with accompanying maps and other supporting data that
are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this section.



      (2)   Upon annexation, any special flood hazard areas
identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood
Insurance Study for the unincorporated areas of Berkeley County, with
accompanying map and other data, are adopted by reference and declared part
of this section.



   (D)   Establishment of development permit.  A development permit
shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this section prior to
the commencement of any development activities.



   (E)   Compliance.  No structure or land shall hereafter be located,
extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the
terms of this section and other applicable regulations.



   (F)   Interpretation.



      (1)   In the interpretation and application of this section,
all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements, liberally
construed in favor of the governing body, and deemed neither to limit nor
repeal any other powers granted under state law.



      (2)   This section is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or
impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However,
where this section and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the
more stringent restrictions, shall prevail.



   (G)   Partial invalidity and severability. If any part of this
section is declared invalid, the remainder of this section shall not be
affected and shall remain in force.



   (H)   Warning and disclaimer of liability. 



      (1)   The degree of flood protection required by this section
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific
and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions.



      (2)   Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes.



      (3)   This section does not imply that land outside the areas
of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.



      (4)   This section shall not create liability on the part of
the city, or by any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this section, or on any administrative decision
lawfully made hereunder.



   (I)   Penalties for violation.



      (1)   Violation of the provisions of this section or failure
to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and
safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special
exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor.



      (2)   Any person who violates this section or fails to comply
with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not
more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. Each day the
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.



   (J)   Executive Order 11988 (Floodplain Management), issued by
President Carter in 1977, requires that no federally assisted activities be
conducted in or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard
areas, unless there is no practicable alternative.



   (K)   Administration.



      (1)   Designation of local floodplain administrator. The
Director of Planning and Zoning is hereby appointed to administer and
implement the provisions of this section.



      (2)   Adoption of Letters of Map Revision (LOMR). All Letters
of Map Revision (LOMR) that are issued in the areas identified in §
151.081(C) are hereby adopted.



      (3)   Development permit and certification requirements.



         (a)   Application for a development permit shall be made
to the local floodplain administrator, on forms furnished by him or her,
prior to any development activities. The development permit may include, but
not be limited to, plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing: the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or
proposed structures; and the location of fill materials, storage areas, and
drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required.



         (b)   A plot plan that shows the 100-year floodplain 
contour, or a statement that the entire lot is within the floodplain,  must
be provided by the development permit applicant when the lot is within or
appears to be within the floodplain  as mapped by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency or the floodplain identified pursuant to either the duties
and responsibilities of the local floodplain  administrator of §
151.081(L)(11), or the standards for subdivision proposals of §
151.081(S)(2) and the standards for streams without estimated base flood
elevations and floodways of § 151.081(S)(3). The plot plan must be prepared
by or under the direct supervision of, and certified by, a registered land
surveyor or professional engineer. The plot plan must show the floodway, if
any, as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, or the
floodway identified pursuant to either the duties or responsibilities of the
local floodplain administrator of § 151.081(L)(11), or the standards for
subdivision proposals of § 151.081(O)(13), and the standards for streams
without estimated base flood elevations and floodways of § 151.081(Q).



         (c)   Where base flood elevation data is provided as set
forth in § 151.081(C) or the duties and responsibilities of the local
floodplain administrator of § 151.081 (L)(11), the application for a
development permit within the flood hazard area shall show:



            1.   The elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
of the lowest floor of all new and substantially improved structures; and



            2.   If the structure will be floodproofed in
accordance with the non-residential construction requirements of §
151.081(O)(2), the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the
structure will be floodproofed.



         (d)   Where base flood elevation data is not provided as
set forth in § 151.081(C) or the duties and responsibilities of the local
floodplain  administrator of § 151.081(L)(11), then the provisions in the
standards for streams without estimated base flood elevations and floodways
of § 151.081(S)(3) must be met.



      (4)   Where any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a
result of proposed development, the application for a development permit
shall include a description of the extent of watercourse alteration or
relocation, an engineering study to demonstrate that the flood-carrying
capacity of the altered or relocated watercourse is maintained, and a map
showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation.



         (a)   When a structure is floodproofed, the applicant
shall provide certification from a registered, professional engineer or
architect that the non-residential, floodproofed structure meets the
floodproofing criteria in the non-residential construction requirements of §
151.081(O)(2).



         (b)   A lowest floor elevation or floodproofing
certification is required after the lowest floor is completed. As soon as
possible after completion of the lowest floor and before any further vertical
construction commences, or floodproofing by whatever construction means,
whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit
to the local floodplain administrator a certification of the elevation of the
lowest floor, or floodproofed elevation, whichever is applicable, as built,
in relation to mean sea level. The certification shall be prepared by or
under the direct supervision of, and certified by, a registered land surveyor
or professional engineer. Any work done prior to submission of the
certification shall be at the permit holder’s risk. The local floodplain
administrator shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. The
permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being
permitted to proceed shall correct deficiencies detected by the review.
Failure to submit the survey or failure to make the corrections required
hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.



         (c)   Upon completion of the development, a registered,
professional engineer, land surveyor or architect, in accordance with state
law, shall certify, according to the requirements of § 151.081(K)(4)(a) and
(b), that the development is built in accordance with the submitted plans and
previous pre-development certifications.



   (L)   Duties and responsibilities of the local floodplain
administrator.



      (1)   Review all development permits to assure that the
requirements of this section have been satisfied.



      (2)   Review proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which
approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.



      (3)   Review permits to assure the following process is
followed in the event there are proposed watercourse alterations.



         (a)   Notify adjacent communities and the South Carolina
Department of Natural Resources, Land, Water, and Conservation Division,
State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program, prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.



         (b)   In addition to the notifications required prior to
watercourse alterations per § 151.081(L)(3)(a), written reports of
maintenance records must be maintained to show that maintenance has been
provided within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that
the flood-carrying capacity is maintained. This maintenance must consist of a
comprehensive program of periodic inspections, and routine channel clearing
and dredging, or other related functions. The assurance shall consist of a
description of maintenance activities, frequency of performance, and the
local official responsible for maintenance performance. Records shall be kept
on file for FEMA inspection.



         (c)   If the proposed project will modify the
configuration of the watercourse, floodway, or base flood elevation for which
a detailed Flood Insurance Study has been developed, the applicant shall
apply for and must receive approval for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision
with the Federal Emergency Management Agency prior to the start of
construction.



         (d)   Within 60 days of completion of an alteration of a
watercourse, referenced in the certification requirements of §
151.081(K)(4)(c), the applicant shall submit as-built certification, by a
registered, professional engineer, to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.



      (4)   Prevent encroachments within floodways unless the
certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of § 151.081(O)(7) are
met.



      (5)   Cooperate with neighboring communities with respect to
the management of adjoining floodplains and/or flood-related erosion areas in
order to prevent aggravation of existing hazards.



      (6)   Notify adjacent communities prior to permitting
substantial commercial developments and large subdivisions to be undertaken
in areas of special flood hazard and/or flood-related erosion hazards.



      (7)   Obtain and certify elevations and certifications.



         (a)   Obtain and review actual elevation (in relation to
mean sea level) of the lowest floor of all new or substantially improved
structures, in accordance with administrative procedures outlined in §
151.081(K)(4)(b).



         (b)   Obtain the actual elevation (in relation to mean
sea level) to which the new or substantially improved structures have been
floodproofed, in accordance with the floodproofing certification outlined in
§ 151.081(K)(4)(a).



         (c)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular
structure, obtain certifications from a registered, professional engineer or
architect in accordance with the nonresidential construction requirements
outlined in § 151.081(O)(2).



      (8)   Map interpretation. Where interpretation is needed as to
the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this section.



      (9)   Prevailing authority.  Where a map boundary showing an
area of special flood hazard and field elevations disagree, the base flood
elevations for flood protection elevations (as found on an elevation profile,
floodway data table, and the like) shall prevail. The correct information
should be submitted to FEMA as per the map maintenance activity requirements
outlined in § 151.081(P)(5).



      (10)   Use of best available data. When base flood elevation
data and floodway data have not been provided in accordance with §
151.081(C), obtain, review, and reasonably utilize the best base flood
elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other
source, including data developed pursuant to the standards for subdivision
proposals outlined in § 151.081(O)(13), in order to administer the
provisions of this section. Data from preliminary, draft, and final Flood
Insurance Studies constitutes the best available data from a federal, state,
or other source. Data must be developed using hydraulic models meeting the
minimum requirement of NFIP-approved model. If an appeal is pending on the
study in accordance with 44 C.F.R. Ch. 1, pts. 67.5 and 67.6, the data does
not have to be used.



      (11)   Special flood hazard area and topographic boundaries
conflict. When the exact location of boundaries of the areas special flood
hazards conflict with the current, natural topography information at the
site; the site information takes precedence. When the lowest adjacent grade
is at or above the BFE, the property owner may apply and be approved for a
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) by FEMA. The local floodplain administrator
will maintain a copy of the Letter of Map Amendment issued from FEMA in the
permit file.



      (12)   Records maintenance.  Maintain all records pertaining
to the administration of this section and make these records available for
public inspection.



      (13)   Annexations and detachments.  Notify the South
Carolina Department of Natural Resources Land, Water and Conservation
Division, State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program, within
six months of any annexations or detachments that include special flood
hazard areas.



      (14)   Federally funded development. The President issued
Executive Order 11988, Floodplain Management in May 1977. E.O. 11988 directs
federal agencies to assert a leadership role in reducing flood losses and
losses to environmental values served by floodplains. Proposed developments
must go through an eight-step review process. Evidence of compliance with the
executive order must be submitted as part of the permit review process.



      (15)   Substantial damage determination. Perform an assessment
of damage from any origin to the structure using FEMA’s Residential
Substantial Damage Estimator (RSDE) software to determine if the damage
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.



      (16)   Substantial improvement determination.  Perform an
assessment of permit applications for improvements or repairs to be made to a
building or structure that equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure before the start of construction. Cost of work counted for
determining if and when substantial improvement to a structure occurs shall
be cumulative for a period of five years. If the improvement project is
conducted in phases, the total of all costs associated with each phase,
beginning with the issuance of the first permit, shall be utilized to
determine whether “substantial improvement” will occur.



      The market values shall be determined by one of the following
methods:



         (a)   The current assessed building value as determined
by the County Assessor's office, or the value of an appraisal performed by a
licensed appraiser at the expense of the owner within the past six months.



         (b)   One or more certified appraisals from a
registered, professional, licensed appraiser in accordance with the laws of
South Carolina. The appraisal shall indicate actual replacement value of the
building or structure in its pre-improvement condition, less the cost of site
improvements and depreciation for functionality and obsolescence.



         (c)   Real estate purchase contract within six months
prior to the date of the application for a permit.



   (M)   Administrative procedures.



      (1)   Inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to
a permit progresses, the local floodplain administrator shall make as many
inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the work is being
done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the terms of the
permit. In exercising this power, the floodplain administrator has a right,
upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction at any reasonable hour for the purposes of
inspection or other enforcement action.



      (2)   Stop-work order. Whenever a building or part thereof is
being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation of this
section, the floodplain  administrator may order the work to be immediately
stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to the person
doing the work. The stop-work order shall state the specific work to be
stopped, the specific reasons for the stoppage, and the conditions under
which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a
misdemeanor.



      (3)   Revocation of permits. The local floodplain 
administrator may revoke and require the return of the development permit by
notifying the permit holder in writing, stating the reason for the
revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans, or specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements
or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any permit mistakenly
issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may also be revoked.



      (4)   Periodic inspections.  The local floodplain
administrator and each member of his or her inspections department shall have
a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour
for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.



      (5)   Violations to be corrected.  When the local floodplain
administrator finds violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall
be his or her duty to notify the owner or occupant of the building of the
violation. The owner or occupant shall immediately remedy each of the
violations of law on the property he or she owns.



      (6)   Actions in event of failure to take corrective action.
If the owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective
action, the floodplain administrator shall give the owner written notice, by
certified or registered mail to the owner’s last known address or by
personal service, that:



         (a)   The building or property is in violation of the
flood damage prevention ordinance;



         (b)   A hearing will be held before the local
floodplain  administrator at a designated place and time, not later than ten
days after the date of the notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled
to be heard in person or by counsel, and to present arguments and evidence
pertaining to the matter; and



         (c)   Following the hearing, the local floodplain 
administrator may issue such order to alter, vacate, or demolish the
building, or to remove fill, as appears appropriate.



      (7)   Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held
pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the floodplain administrator shall
find that the building or development is in violation of the flood damage
prevention ordinance, he or she shall make an order in writing to the owner,
requiring the owner to remedy the violation within such period, not less than
60 days, the floodplain  administrator may prescribe; provided that where
the floodplain administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or
other property, he or she may order that corrective action be taken in such
lesser period as may be feasible.



      (8)   Appeal.  Any owner who has received an order to take
corrective action may appeal from the order to the local elected governing
body by giving notice of appeal in writing to the floodplain  administrator
and the Clerk within ten days following issuance of the final order. In the
absence of an appeal, the order of the floodplain administrator shall be
final. The local governing body shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time
and may affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke the order.



      (9)   Failure to comply with order.  If the owner of a
building or property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action
from which no appeal has been taken, or fails to comply with an order of the
governing body following an appeal, he or she shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished in the discretion of the court.



      (10)   Denial of flood insurance under the NFIP. If a
structure is declared in violation of this section, and after all other
penalties are exhausted to achieve compliance with this section, then the
local floodplain administrator shall notify the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) to initiate a Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act
of 1968 action against the structure, upon the finding that the violator
refuses to bring the violation into compliance with this section. Once a
violation has been remedied, the local floodplain administrator shall notify
FEMA of the remedy and ask that the Section 1316 be rescinded.



      (11)   The following documents are incorporated by reference
and may be used by the local floodplain administrator to provide further
guidance and interpretation of this section, as found on FEMA’s website at
www.fema.gov:



         (a)   FEMA 55, Coastal Construction Manual;



         (b)   All FEMA technical bulletins;



         (c)   All FEMA floodplain management bulletins;



         (d)   FEMA 348, Protecting Building Utilities from Flood
Damage;



         (e)   FEMA 499, Home Builder’s Guide to Coastal
Construction Technical Fact Sheets.



   (N)   Provisions for flood hazard reduction; general standards.
Development may not occur in the special flood hazard area (SFHA), where
alternative locations exist, due to the inherent hazards and risks involved.
Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall demonstrate that new
structures cannot be located out of the SFHA, and that encroachments onto the
SFHA are minimized. In all areas of special flood hazard, the following
provisions are required.



      (1)   Reasonably safe from flooding. Review all permit
applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably
safe from flooding.



      (2)   Anchoring.  All new construction and substantial
improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement of the structure.



      (3)   Flood-resistant materials and equipment.  All new
construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with
flood-resistant materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage, in
accordance with Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials
Requirements, dated August 2008, and available from the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.



      (4)   Minimize flood damage. All new construction and
substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that
minimize flood damages.



      (5)   Critical development.  Critical development shall be
elevated to the 500-year flood elevation, or be elevated to the highest known
historical flood elevation (where records are available), whichever is
greater. If no data exists establishing the 500-year flood elevation or the
highest known historical flood elevation, the applicant shall provide a
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis that generates 500-year flood
elevation data.



      (6)   Utilities. Electrical, ventilation, plumbing, heating
and air conditioning equipment (including ductwork), and other service
facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of the base
flood plus one foot.



      (7)   Water supply systems. All new and replacement water
supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system.



      (8)   Sanitary sewage systems. New and replacement sanitary
sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems, and discharges from the systems into
floodwaters. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed
to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding.



      (9)   Gas or liquid storage tanks. All gas or liquid storage
tanks, either located above ground or buried, shall be anchored to prevent
floatation and lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads.



      (10)   Alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement. Any
alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement to a structure that is in
compliance with the provisions of this section, shall meet the requirements
of “new construction” as contained in this section. This includes
post-FIRM development and structures.



      (11)   Nonconforming buildings or uses. Nonconforming
buildings or uses may not be enlarged, replaced, or rebuilt unless such
enlargement or reconstruction is accomplished in conformance with the
provisions of this section. Provided, however, nothing in this section shall
prevent the repair, reconstruction, or replacement of an existing building or
structure located totally or partially within the floodway, provided that the
bulk of the building or structure below base flood elevation in the floodway
is not increased, and provided that such repair, reconstruction, or
replacement meets all of the other requirements of this section.



      (12)   American with Disabilities Act (ADA). A building must
meet the specific standards for floodplain construction outlined in §
151.081(O), as well as any applicable ADA requirements. The ADA is not
justification for issuing a variance or otherwise waiving these requirements.
Also, the cost of improvements required to meet the ADA provisions shall be
included in the costs of the improvements for calculating substantial
improvement.



   (O)   Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard
(Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-A30, V, and VE) where base flood elevation data has
been provided, as set forth in § 151.081(C), or outlined in the duties and
responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator, § 151.081(L), the
following provisions are required.



      (1)   Residential construction. New construction and
substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured
homes) shall have the lowest floor elevated no lower than one foot above the
base flood elevation. No basements are permitted. Should solid foundation
perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, flood openings sufficient to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces, shall be provided in
accordance with the elevated buildings requirements in § 151.081(O)(2).



      (2)   Non-residential construction. New construction and
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential
structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the lowest floor elevated
no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation. Should
solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, flood
openings sufficient to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces, shall
be provided in accordance with the elevated buildings requirements in §
151.081(O)(2). No basements are permitted. Structures located in A Zones may
be floodproofed in lieu of elevation, provided that all areas of the
structure below the required elevation are watertight, with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effect of buoyancy.



      A registered, professional engineer or architect shall certify
that the standards of this division are satisfied. Such certifications shall
be provided to the official as set forth in the floodproofing certification
requirements in § 151.081(K)(4)(a). A variance may be considered for wet
floodproofing agricultural structures in accordance with the criteria
outlined in § 151.081(S)(5). Agricultural structures not meeting the
criteria of § 151.081(S)(5) must meet the non-residential construction
standards and all other applicable provisions of this section. Structures
that are floodproofed are required to have an approved maintenance plan with
an annual exercise. The local floodplain administrator must approve the
maintenance plan and notification of the annual exercise shall be provided to
it.



      (3)   Manufactured homes. Manufactured homes that are placed
or substantially improved on sites outside a manufactured home park or
subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion
to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has
incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood, must be elevated
on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home
is elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation, and must
be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.



      Manufactured homes that are to be placed or substantially
improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that
are not subject to the provisions for residential construction in §
151.081(O)(1) must be elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured
home is elevated no lower one foot than above the base flood elevation, and
must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.



      Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement. For the purpose of this requirement,
manufactured homes must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement in accordance with Section 40-29-10 of the South Carolina
Manufactured Housing Board Regulations, as amended. Additionally, when the
elevation requirement would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36 inches
or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by
reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis
is above 36 inches in height, an engineering certification is required.



      An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all
residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood-prone areas.
This plan shall be filed with and approved by the local floodplain
administrator and the local emergency preparedness coordinator.



      (4)   Elevated buildings. New construction and substantial
improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building
access, or limited storage in an area other than a basement, and that are
subject to flooding, shall be designed to preclude finished space, and to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of floodwaters.



      Designs for complying with this requirement must either be
certified by a professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed all of
the following minimum criteria.



         (a)   Provide a minimum of two openings on different
walls, having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding.



         (b)   The bottom of each opening must be no more than
one foot above the higher of the interior or exterior grade immediately under
the opening.



         (c)   Only the portions of openings that are below the
base flood elevation (BFE) can be counted towards the required net open area.



         (d)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves, or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic
flow of floodwaters in both directions.



         (e)   Fill placed around foundation walls must be graded
so that the grade inside the enclosed area is equal to or higher than the
adjacent grade outside the building on at least one side of the building.



      (5)   Hazardous velocity. Hydrodynamic pressure must be
considered in the design of any foundation system where velocity waters or
the potential for debris flow exists. If flood velocities are excessive
(greater than five feet per second), foundation systems other than solid
foundations walls should be considered so that obstructions to damaging flood
flows are minimized.



      (6)   Enclosures below the lowest floor.



         (a)   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum
necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door), or limited storage
of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard
exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).



         (b)   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall
not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms, must be void of utilities
except for essential lighting as required for safety, and cannot be
temperature-controlled.



         (c)   One wet location switch and/or outlet connected to
a ground fault interrupt breaker may be installed below the required lowest
floor elevation specified in the specific standards outlined in §
151.081(O)(1)(a), (b), and (c).



         (d)   All construction materials below the required
lowest floor elevation specified in the specific standards outlined in §
151.081(O)(1), (2), (3), and (4) should be of flood-resistant materials.



      (7)   Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard
established in § 151.081(C), are areas designated as floodways. The floodway
is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry
debris and potential projectiles, and has erosion potential. The following
provisions shall apply within such areas.



         (a)   No encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, additions, and other developments
shall be permitted unless:



            1.   It has been demonstrated, through hydrologic
and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering
practice, that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in
the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood. Such certification
and technical data shall be presented to the local floodplain administrator.



            2.   A Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR)
has been approved by FEMA. A Letter of Map Revision must be obtained upon
completion of the proposed development.



         (b)   If § 151.081(O)(7)(a) is satisfied, all new
construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable
flood hazard reduction provisions of § 151.081(N).



         (c)   No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except
in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A replacement
manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision, provided the anchoring and the elevation standards of §
151.081(O)(3) and the encroachment standards of § 151.081(O)(5) are met.



         (d)   Permissible uses within floodways may include:
general farming, pasture, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, forestry,
wildlife sanctuary, game farm, and other similar agricultural, wildlife, and
related uses. Lawns, gardens, play areas, picnic grounds, and hiking and
horseback riding trails are also acceptable uses, provided that they do not
employ structures or fill. Substantial development of a permissible use may
require a no-impact certification. The uses listed in this division are
permissible only if and to the extent that they do not cause any increase in
base flood elevations or changes to the floodway configuration.



      (8)   Recreational vehicles. 



         (a)   A recreational vehicle is READY FOR HIGHWAY USE if
it is:



            1.   On wheels or jacking system;



            2.   Attached to the site only by
quick-disconnect-type utilities and security devices; and



            3   Has no permanently attached additions



         (b)   Recreational vehicles placed on sites shall either
be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or be fully licensed and
ready for highway use, or meet the development permit and certification
requirements of § 151.081(K), the general standards outlined in §
151.081(N)(l), and the manufactured homes standards in § 151.081(O)(1), (3)
and (4).



      (9)   Accessory structures.



         (a)   A detached accessory structure or garage, the cost
of which is greater than $3,000, must comply with the requirements as
outlined in FEMA’s Technical Bulletin 7-93, Wet Floodproofing Requirements,
or be elevated in accordance with § 151.081(O)(1) and (4), or dry
floodproofed in accordance with § 151.081(O)(2).



         (b)   If accessory structures of $3,000 or less are to
be placed in the floodplain, the following criteria shall be met:



            1.   Accessory structures shall not be used for
any uses other than the parking of vehicles and storage;



            2.   Accessory structures shall be designed to
have low flood-damage potential;



            3.   Accessory structures shall be constructed and
placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow
of floodwaters;



            4.   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure;



            5.   Service facilities such as electrical and
heating equipment shall be installed in accordance with § 151.081(N)(l)(e);



            6.   Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure
during a flood shall be provided below base flood elevation in conformance
with § 151.081(O)(4)(a); and



            7.   Accessory structures shall be built with
flood-resistant materials in accordance with Technical Bulletin 2, Flood
Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, dated August 2008, and available
from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Class 4 and 5 materials,
referenced therein, are acceptable flood-resistant materials.



      (10)   Swimming pool utility equipment rooms. If the building
cannot be built at or above the BFE because of functionality of the
equipment, then a structure to house the utilities for the pool may be built
below the BFE, with the following provisions:



         (a)   Meet the requirements for accessory structures in
§ 151.081(O)(9); and



         (b)   The utilities must be anchored to prevent
flotation, and shall be designed to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of the base flood.



      (11)   Elevators.



         (a)   Install a float switch system or another system
that provides the same level of safety necessary for all elevators, where
there is a potential for the elevator cab to descend below the BFE during a
flood, per FEMA’s Technical Bulletin 4-93, Elevator Installation for
Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas.



         (b)   All equipment that may have to be installed below
the BFE, such as counterweight roller guides, compensation cable and pulleys,
and oil buffers for traction elevators, and the jack assembly for a hydraulic
elevator, must be constructed using flood-resistant materials where possible,
per FEMA’s Technical Bulletin 4-93, Elevator Installation for Buildings
Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas.



      (12)   Fill.  An applicant shall demonstrate that fill is the
only alternative to raising the building to meet the residential and
non-residential construction requirements of § 151.081(O)(1) and (2), and
that the amount of fill used will not affect the flood-storage capacity or
adversely affect adjacent properties. The following provisions shall apply to
all fill placed in the special flood hazard area.



         (a)   Fill may not be placed in the floodway unless it
is in accordance with the requirements in § 151.081(O)(7)(a).



         (b)   Fill may not be placed in tidal or non-tidal
wetlands without the required state and federal permits.



         (c)   Fill must consist of soil and rock materials only.
A registered, professional geotechnical engineer may use dredged material as
fill only upon certification of suitability. Landfills, rubble fills, dumps,
and sanitary fills are not permitted in the floodplain.



         (d)   Fill used to support structures must comply with
ASTM Standard D-698, and its suitability to support structures certified by a
registered, professional engineer.



         (e)   Fill slopes shall be no greater than two
horizontal to one vertical. Flatter slopes may be required where velocities
may result in erosion.



         (f)   The use of fill shall not increase flooding or
cause drainage problems on neighboring properties.



         (g)   Fill may not be used for structural support in the
coastal high hazard areas.



         (h)   Fill will meet the requirements of FEMA Technical
Bulletin 10-01, Ensuring That Structures Built On Fill in or Near Special
Flood Hazard Areas Are Reasonable Safe from Flooding.



      (13)   Standards for subdivision proposals and other
development.



         (a)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed new
development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage, and
are subject to all applicable standards in these regulations.



         (b)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed new
development shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems, located and constructed to minimize flood
damage.



         (c)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed new
development shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.



         (d)   The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit
technical data to FEMA in § 151.081(P) when a hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis is completed that generates base flood elevations.



   (P)   Map maintenance activities; requirement to submit new
technical data.  The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) requires that
flood data be reviewed and approved by FEMA. This ensures that flood maps,
studies and other data identified in § 151.081(C) accurately represent
flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain management criteria are based
on current data. The following map maintenance activities are identified.



      (1)   For all development proposals that impact floodway
delineations or base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that
technical or scientific data reflecting such changes is submitted to FEMA as
soon as practicable, but no later than six months of the date such
information becomes available. These development proposals include; but not
limited to:



         (a)   Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease
base flood elevations or alter floodway boundaries;



         (b)   Fill sites to be used for the placement of
proposed structures where the applicant desires to remove the site from the
special flood hazard area;



         (c)   Alteration of watercourses that result in a
relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the
placement of culverts; and



         (d)   Subdivision or large-scale development proposals
requiring the establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with §
151.081(O)(6)(a).



      (2)   It is the responsibility of the applicant to have
technical data, required in accordance with § 151.081(P), prepared in a
format required for a Conditional Letter of Map Revision or Letter of Map
Revision, and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for these map
revisions shall also be the responsibility of the applicant.



      (3)   The local floodplain administrator shall require a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain
development permit for:



         (a)   Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the
base flood elevation; and



         (b)   Proposed development that increases the base flood
elevation by more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood
elevations but no floodway.



      (4)   Floodplain development permits issued by the local
floodplain administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a
Letter of Map Revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to §
151.081(P).



      (5)   Right to submit new technical data. The floodplain
administrator may request changes to any of the information shown on an
effective map that does not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or
base flood elevations, such as labeling or planimetric details. Such a
submission shall include appropriate supporting documentation made in writing
by the local jurisdiction and may be submitted at any time.



   (Q)   Standards for streams without established base flood
elevations and floodways.  Located within the areas of special flood hazard
(Zones A and V) established in § 151.081(C), are small streams where no base
flood data has been provided, and where no floodways have been identified.
The following provisions apply within such areas.



      (1)   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood
elevation data are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic
and hydraulic engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for
all subdivision proposals and other proposed developments containing at least
50 lots or five acres, whichever is less.



      (2)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and new development shall be permitted within 100
feet of the stream bank, unless certification with supporting technical data
by a registered, professional engineer is provided, demonstrating that such
encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.



      (3)   If § 151.081(O)(1) is satisfied and base flood
elevation data is available from other sources, all new construction and
substantial improvements within such areas shall comply with all applicable
flood hazard ordinance provisions of § 151.081(N), and shall be elevated or
floodproofed in accordance with elevations established in accordance with §
151.081(M)(11).



      (4)   Data from preliminary, draft, and final Flood Insurance
Studies constitutes the best available data. Refer to FEMA Floodplain
Management Technical Bulletin 1 -98, Use of Flood Insurance Study (FIS) Data
as Available Data. If an appeal is pending on the study in accordance with 44
C.F.R. Ch. 1, pts. 67.5 and 67.6, the data does not have to be used.



      (5)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available
from a federal, state, or other source, one of the following methods may be
used to determine a BFE. For further information regarding the methods for
determining BFEs listed below, refer to FEMA’s manual, Managing Floodplain
Development in Approximate Zone A Areas.



         (a)   Contour interpolation.



            1.   Superimpose approximate Zone A boundaries
onto a topographic map and estimate a BFE.



            2.   Add one-half of the contour interval of the
topographic map that is used to the BFE.



         (b)   Data extrapolation. A BFE can be determined if a
site within 500 feet upstream of a reach of a stream reach for which a
100-year profile has been computed by detailed methods, and the floodplain
and channel bottom slope characteristics are relatively similar to the
downstream reaches. No hydraulic structures shall be present.



         (c)   Hydrologic and hydraulic calculations.  Perform
hydrologic and hydraulic calculations to determine BFEs using FEMA-approved
methods and software.



   (R)   Standards for streams with established base flood elevations
but without floodways.  Along rivers and streams where base flood elevation
(BFE) data is provided, but no floodway is identified for a special flood
hazard area on the FIRM or in the FIS.



      No encroachments including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development shall be permitted, unless certification
with supporting technical data by a registered, professional engineer is
provided, demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community.



   (S)   Variance procedures.



      (1)   Establishment of appeal board. The Zoning Board of
Appeals, as established by the city, shall hear and decide requests for
variances from the requirements of this section.



      (2)   Right to appeal.  Any person aggrieved by the decision
of the appeal board or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the court.



      (3)   Historic structures. Variances may be issued for the
repair or rehabilitation of historic structures, upon the determination that
the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.



      (4)   Functionally dependent uses. Variances may be issued for
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependant use,
provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative
exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood
damage and create no additional threat to public safety.



      (5)   Agricultural structures. Variances may be issued to wet
floodproof an agricultural structure, provided it is used solely for
agricultural purposes. In order to minimize flood damages during the base
flood and the threat to public health and safety, the structure must meet all
of the conditions and considerations of § 151.081(S)(8), this section, and
the following standards.



         (a)   Use of the structure must be limited to
agricultural purposes as listed below:



            1.   Pole frame buildings, with open or closed
sides, used exclusively for the storage of farm machinery and equipment;



            2.   Steel grain bins and steel frame corncribs;



            3.   General-purpose barns for the temporary
feeding of livestock that are open on at least one side;



            4.   For livestock confinement buildings, poultry
houses, dairy operations, and similar livestock operations, variances may not
be issued for structures that were substantially damaged. New construction or
substantial improvement of such structures must meet the elevation
requirements of § 151.081(O)(2); and



         (b)   The agricultural structure must be built or
rebuilt, in the case of an existing building that is substantially damaged,
with flood-resistant materials for the exterior and interior building
components, and elements below the base flood elevation.



         (c)   The agricultural structure must be adequately
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. All of the
structure’s components must be capable of resisting specific flood-related
forces, including hydrostatic, buoyancy, hydrodynamic, and debris-impact
forces. Where flood velocities exceed five feet per second, fast-flowing
floodwaters can exert considerable pressure on the building’s enclosure
walls or foundation walls.



         (d)   The agricultural structure must meet the venting
requirement of § 151.081(O)(4).



         (e)   Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility
equipment must be located above the base flood elevation (BFE), plus any
required freeboard, or be contained within a watertight, floodproofed
enclosure that is capable of resisting damage during flood conditions in
accordance with § 151.081(N)(l)(e).



         (f)   The agricultural structure must comply with the
floodway encroachment provisions of § 151.081(O)(7).



         (g)   Major equipment, machinery, or other contents must
be protected. Such protection may include protective, watertight floodproofed
areas within the building, the use of equipment hoists for readily elevating
contents, permanently elevating contents on pedestals or shelves above the
base flood elevation, or determining that property owners can safely remove
contents without risk to lives, and that the contents will be located to a
specified site out of the floodplain.



      (6)   Considerations. In passing upon such applications, the
appeal board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
all standards specified in other divisions of this section, and:



         (a)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other
lands to the injury of others;



         (b)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage, and the safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



         (c)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and
its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;



         (d)   The importance of the services provided by the
proposed facility to the community;



         (e)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront
location, where applicable;



         (f)   The availability of alternative locations, not
subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;



         (g)   The compatibility of the proposed use with
existing and anticipated development, and the relationship of the proposed
use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;



         (h)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of
rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site;



         (i)   The costs of providing governmental services
during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems,
and streets and bridges; and



         (j)   Agricultural structures must be located in wide,
expansive floodplain  areas, where no other alternative location for the
agricultural structure exists. The applicant must demonstrate that the entire
farm acreage, consisting of a contiguous parcel of land on which the
structure is to be located, must be in the special flood hazard area, and no
other alternative locations for the structure are available.



      (7)   Findings. Findings listed above shall be submitted to
the appeal board, in writing, and included in the application for a variance.
Additionally, comments from the Department of Natural Resources, Land, Water
and Conservation Division, State Coordinator's Office, must be taken into
account and included in the permit file.



      (8)   Floodways. Variances shall not be issued within any
designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result, unless a CLOMR is obtained prior to issuance of the
variance. In order to ensure the project is built in compliance with the
CLOMR for which the variance is granted, the applicant must provide a bond
for 100% of the cost to perform the development.



      (9)   Conditions. Upon consideration of the factors listed
above and the purposes of this section, the appeal board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this section. The following conditions shall apply to all
variances.



         (a)   Variances may not be issued when the variance will
make the structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws,
regulations, or ordinances.



         (b)   Variances shall only be issued upon a
determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the
flood hazard, to afford relief.



         (c)   Variances shall only be issued upon a showing of
good and sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship, and a determination that the granting
of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats
to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance, cause
fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws
or ordinances.



         (d)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall
be given written notice, specifying the difference between the base flood
elevation (BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is to be built, and
a written statement that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate
with the increased risk. Such notification shall be maintained with a record
of all variance actions.



         (e)   The local floodplain administrator shall maintain
records of all appeal actions, and shall, upon request, report any variances
to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).



         (f)   Variances shall not be issued for unpermitted
development or other development that is not in compliance with the
provisions of this section. Violations must be corrected in accordance with
§ 151.081(M)(5).



   (T)   Legal status provisions.



      (1)   Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing
flood damage prevention ordinance.  This section in part comes forward by
re-enactment of some of the provisions of the flood damage prevention
ordinance enacted March 14, 2006, and it is not the intention to repeal, but
rather to re-enact and continue to enforce without interruption of such
existing provisions, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued
there under are reserved and may be enforced. The enactment of this section
shall not affect any action, suit or proceeding instituted or pending. All
provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance of the city, enacted on
March 14, 2006, as amended, which are not reenacted herein, are repealed.



      (2)   Effect upon outstanding building permits. Nothing herein
contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size or
designated use of any building, structure, or part thereof, for which a
building permit has been granted by the Chief Building Inspector, or his or
her authorized agents, before the time of passage of this section; provided,
however, that when start of construction has not occurred under such
outstanding permit within a period of 60 days subsequent to passage of this
section, the construction or use shall be in conformity with the provisions
of this section.



(1985 Code, Art. V, § 502)  (Ord. 91-08, passed 9-10-1991; Ord. 96-013,
passed 11-26-1996; Ord. 06-007, passed 3-14-2006; Ord. 17-004, passed
3-14-2017)



§ 151.082  DESIGN STANDARDS.



   Attention to these standards is intended to further the goals expressed
in § 151.003, and assist developers in achieving maximum marketability and
aesthetic value.



   (A)   Architectural conformity and review.  In any zoning district,
subdivision, Planned Development or other area of the city which has a
majority of the zoning lots built upon, all subsequently permitted buildings
must substantially conform to the architectural standards established by the
majority of existing structures. By determination of the Zoning
Administrator, subsequent structures must conform as to architectural style,
general design, square footage of living area (exclusive of garages and
porches), external siding materials and overall treatments.



   (B)   Exterior yard provisions.



      (1)   Yard depth shall be measured perpendicular to the lot
line; for a curved or irregular lot line, depth shall be measured
perpendicular to a straight line connecting the two lot corners. At least one
yard shall have the full required depth, and no other yard on the lot shall
have less than one half the required depth, except as provided in division
(B)(2) below; and



      (2)   In lots between two non-intersecting streets, having one
yard with a depth not in keeping with the prevailing yard depth pattern, the
Zoning Administrator may approve a special minimum yard depth equal to the
average yards of adjoining lots. If the city approves a plat with less than
normal yard depth along on the two streets, the building set back line shall
be the minimum yard depth for the lot(s).



   (C)   Other yard provisions.



      (1)   Depth of interior yards shall be measured perpendicular
to the lot lines;



      (2)   Accessory buildings shall not be located closer than
five feet to any property boundary;



      (3)   Commercial, industrial and residential dish antennae
shall meet all minimum setback requirements for their respective districts
(see Appendix D):



         (a)   In Commercial and Light Industrial Districts, dish
antennae may be permitted in rear yard or on rooftop only so as to present
the least conspicuous visual appearance; and



         (b)   Dish antennae of 18 inches in diameter or smaller
may be roof-mounted on residences and shall not be visible from the roadway
directly in front of the dwelling.  FCC regulations shall prevail regarding
the placement of antennae; however, when there is no impact on service
reception, antennae shall be permanently mounted so that they shall not be
visible from the street.



      (4)   Fences, poles and other customary fixed yard
accessories, (dish antennae excepted) and roof overhangs not over 36 inches,
may be permitted in any minimum required yard, subject to height, safety and
visibility limitations, of the respective district.  Privacy fences located
within residential communities must be no more than four feet high when
located forward of the front corner of the principal structure of the
property:



         (a)   Fencing shall be constructed of traditional
fencing materials, that is materials expressly designed for residential
fencing. No residential perimeter fencing may be constructed of rope, string,
barbed and/or razor wire, wire fabric, and/or broken glass and may not be
constructed of damaged or unsafe materials; however, chain link fence
material is allowed. The Building Official of the building department or
his/her designee may require the homeowner to provide the manufacturer's
standards to establish intended use of a proposed fencing material; and



         (b)   Fences and/or structures that are nonconforming in
regard to the materials used for construction shall have six months to
conform after the date of acceptance of the chapter; and



      (5)   Solar panels and associated fixtures shall be located to
the rear of all residential structures whenever feasible, and if not, shall
be mounted so as to be flush to the roof of the house.



   (D)   Height limitations.  Zoning district height regulations shall
not apply to building fixtures usually required to be placed above the roof
and not intended for habitation, for example: spires, water tanks, chimneys
and the like.



   (E)   Visual clearance.  No structure or object obstructing
motorist vision between three and ten feet above street grade shall be
located in street corners according to the table and chart below. The line of
vision (L.O.V.) when more restrictive than the building setback line, shall
become the required setback line:



      (1)   Driveway or alley and street: ten feet;



      (2)   Minor streets: 25 feet;



      (3)   Collector streets: 30 feet; and



      (4)   Major thoroughfares: 40 feet.



   (F)   Property access.



      (1)   No building shall be placed on a lot not located on an
existing publicly maintained paved street, or street shown on a city approved
development plan, except for an accessory structure fully conforming to the
provisions of § 151.108 of this chapter where the accessory structure is to
serve an existing, otherwise legally established principle residential
structure conforming to the use and minimum yard requirements of Appendices B
and D, respectively; and



      (2)   Curbing and curb cuts shall comply with standards of the
South Carolina Department of Highway and Public Transportation.



   (G)   Minimum design standards; subdivisions, planned developments
and commercial sites.  In addition to other provisions of this chapter,
adopted Building Codes and the like, these supplemental minimum design
standards apply in designing planned developments, subdivisions and
commercial site:



      (1)   Curbs and gutters (concrete) are required. The minimum
standard to be 18 inch concrete roll;



      (2)   Drainage ditches (two to one sidewall slope), with all
soil removed from shoulders, and all shoulders and sidewalls seeded. All
ditches used as collectors for street run-off will be piped to the point they
discharge into a drainage canal;



      (3)   Open space reservation for parks, playgrounds or
recreation areas shall be required for all residential subdivisions of 20 or
more building lots and for all high density residential developments
(multi-family projects).



         (a)   Open space may include land with minimal
improvements, such as limited clearing, appropriate grading, and the
installation of low impact physical improvements such as pedestrian trails
and grassed areas as well as picnic tables, play equipment, recreational
areas, barbecue grills, covered open structures, plazas or squares, and
amenity centers.



         (b)   Parking lots and RV/boat storage areas are not to
be considered open space.



         (c)   Significant physical features of the project area
such as the location of grand trees, scenic vistas, wildlife habitats, and
water access shall be considered when siting open space.



         (d)   Open space shall be landscaped throughout and be
designed for active and passive recreational purposes. No more than 50% of
created water features may be included in the open space requirement.



         (e)   Wetland and marshland areas are generally not to
be included in area calculations.



         (f)   The calculation for determining required open
space area for all residential subdivisions of 20 or more lots and all
multi-family developments shall be as follows:




(#homes) x (sq. ft. of typical unit) x 0.375
43,560 ft/acre




            Example:



            (325 homes x 1,500 sq. ft. x 0.375) ÷ 43,560 = 4.2
acres of required open space



      (4)   Minimum street rights-of-way shall be 50 feet; street
paving: minimum width of 24 feet (curb to curb), minimum base course, (six
inches R.O.C.) with a minimum surface (one and one half: asphalt/four feet
reinforced concrete);



      (5)   All sidewalks must be concrete, shall be a minimum width
of 48 inches, and shall meet all ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act)
requirements;



      (6)   Street or security lighting is required in all
subdivisions at a minimum ratio of one light per six residential lots, in all
Planned Developments at a ratio of one light per 40,000 square feet of land
area in the development, and for commercial sites at a ratio of one light per
2,000 square feet of leasable area;



      (7)   Utilities shall provide all distribution systems
underground; and



      (8)   Builders/developers shall place the assigned house/unit
number (minimum height: three inches) on or in close proximity to the
structure's main entrance (uniformly on all units) as soon as practical.



   (H)   Minimum design standards; factory manufactured housing.  In
addition to all other provisions of this chapter, adopted Building Codes and
other regulations and policies of the city, any manufactured (modular)
building, for either residential or commercial use, must meet the minimum
standards listed herein for placement in any zoning district of the city,
excepting the Planned Development/Mobile Home District:



      (1)   License in South Carolina as a general contractor, home
builder, plumber or electrician (as appropriate) is required of all modular
structure set-up personnel;



      (2)   Metal chassis structures are prohibited as modular
structures. No steel undercarriage or chassis which remains attached to the
structure after on-site setup, nor any metal in the primary or secondary
floor or wall systems, is permitted;



      (3)   Southern Building Code Congress International seal and
the SBCCI compliance report number must be affixed to each modular structure;



      (4)   Third party inspection, by an inspection agency duly
certified by the South Carolina Residential Home Builders Association, must
be indicated by affixed seal;



      (5)   Unit must be approved for mortgage financing by the
Veterans Administration (VA) and the Federal Housing Administration (FHA);



      (6)   Minimum foundation shall be a properly ventilated and
drained continuous eight inch block wall; and



      (7)   Minimum first floor elevation shall be 32 inches above
finished grade, in any area not requiring a higher minimum finished first
floor elevation under the provisions of § 151.081.



   (I)   Recreational facilities adjacent to residential uses. 
Outdoor recreational facilities adjacent to lots used for residential
purposes shall comply with the following:



      (1)   No swimming pool, playground, ball field or court, or
miniature golf course shall be closer than 50 feet from a residential lot
line;



      (2)   No outdoor recreational facility lighting shall be
installed closer than 50 feet from a residential lot line;



      (3)   A solid wall or fence, or combination vegetative screen
and wall or fence, may be required for screening of noise or light; and



      (4)   Recreational uses in recreational zones shall have no
commercial aspect, except:



         (a)   Fee for use of recreational facility; and



         (b)   Other activity directly related to the
recreational use, when approved by the Zoning Administrator.



   (J)   Swimming pools.  An outdoor swimming pool is recognized as a
potential attractive nuisance, whether privately, publicly or commercially
owned or operated:



      (1)   Water supply and sanitary facilities shall comply with
local and S.C.D.H.E.C. regulations;



      (2)   Swimming pools may be located in a minimum yard space,
however, they shall not be closer than five feet from the rear or side lot
lines, nor shall they be located in front yards. Swimming pools shall not be
located in easements;



      (3)   Swimming pools as part of a multi-family development
shall not be located within 100 feet of adjacent single-family or duplex
residential communities, unless closer location, with buffering and
screening, are provided suitable to the Zoning Administrator;



      (4)   The pool shall comply with the “Standard Swimming Pool
Code” of the Southern Building Code Congress, except as to schedule of
fees, which shall be posted in the office of the City Clerk;



      (5)   A wall or fence at least four feet high, with
self-locking gates, shall completely enclose the pool or surrounding yard;



      (6)   Lighting shall be so placed or shielded as to prevent
direct rays being visible on adjacent properties; and



      (7)   A public address system for the supervision and safety
of swimmers shall be the only broadcast device permitted.



   (K)   (1)   The design guidelines below apply to mini-warehouses
where storage units are fully enclosed within a single building structure and
access to all units is from a common entrance into the building and where the
proposed development will occur on a parcel zoned General Commercial (GC),
Commercial Industrial (CI), and Light Industrial (LI).



      (2)   The intent of the following guidelines is to encourage
aesthetically pleasing development whihc should be designed to be in harmony
with surrounding commercially zoned properties.



         (a)   The first-floor frontage of the structure shall be
designed to accommodate retail/office space to a depth of no less than 30
feet and not be occupied as mini-warehouse/self-storage space.



         (b)   The facade of the structure facing the street
shall be designed to appear as retail/office space and blend with surrounding
properties.



         (c)   The site shall incorporate interesting
architectural features such as a water fountain, flag pole, or decorative
wrought iron fencing to the front of the site at the entryway as approved and
at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator.



   (L)   The design guidelines below apply to mini-warehouses with
units having access from the exterior of unit and where the proposed
development will occur on a parcel zoned Commercial Industrial(CI) and
General Industrial (GI).



      (1)   The main office building shall be located to the front
of the mini-warehouse thus screening the storage activity.



      (2)   All loading bays shall be oriented so as not to be
visible from any street unless screened by fencing or landscaping materials.



(1985 Code, Art. V, § 503) (Ord. passed - -; Ord. 87-06, passed 2-10-1987;
Ord. 87-15, passed 11-24-1987; Ord. 88-01, passed 1-12-1988; Ord. 89-02,
passed 3-14-1989; Ord. 94-004, passed 4-28-1994; Ord. 95-009, passed
1-13-1995; Ord. 97-003, passed 2-11-1997; Ord. 08-007, passed 4-15-2008; Ord.
13-006, passed 9-10-2013; Ord. 15-008, passed 8-11-2015; Ord. 15-106, passed
12-8-2015; Ord. 16-006, passed 3-8-2016; Am. Ord. 17-014, passed 6-13-2017;
Am. Ord. 17-025, passed 11-14-2017) Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.083  LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   For all commercial and light industrial uses, at least 10% of
each lot shall be landscaped in a manner approved by the Zoning Administrator.



   (B)   For all single family residential properties at least 7% of
each lot shall be landscaped in a manner approved by the Zoning Administrator.



      (1)   The clear cutting of trees and vegetative cover on any
lot, parcel, tract, or acreage in any district is specifically prohibited.



      (2)   Removal or cutting of trees in any public right-of-way
shall not be permitted.



      (3)   The natural landscape character shall be preserved in
every reasonable instance. Existing trees measuring eight inches in diameter,
when measured at four and one half feet above grade, shall be incorporated
into the landscaping plan where feasible. Flowering trees four inches in
diameter, when measured at four and one half feet above grade, shall be saved
or mitigated.



      (4)   Materials shall be planted at regular intervals along
the front and both sides of new residential units. Other natural or newly
planted landscaping material shall be planted in various areas of the
property to meet the 7% requirement.



      (5)   In all buildable areas, a minimum of 12 trees per acre
shall be saved and/or replaced anywhere within the property with a minimum of
two and one half inch calipers or equivalent sized trees.



      (6)   At least one canopy tree shall be planted in the front
yard of a residential lot, with a maximum distance of 50 feet between trees.



   (C)   This requirement pertains to all new commercial developments
and existing building renovations which equal 50% of the building's value.



   (D)   Landscaping not completed at the time of occupancy must be
completed within 45 days under bond (see § 151.065) after occupancy.



      (1)   The natural landscape character shall be preserved in
every reasonable instance. (See § 151.061.) Existing trees measuring four
inches in diameter and measured four and one half feet above grade shall be
incorporated in the landscaping plan where practically feasible.



      (2)   Landscaping shall be maintained so as to present a
healthy, neat appearance, with dead vegetation promptly replaced.



(1985 Code, Art. V, § 504)  (Ord. 89-02, passed 3-14-1989; Ord. 95-010,
passed 8-8-1995; Ord. 15-008, passed 8-11-2015)



§ 151.084  SIGN REGULATIONS.



   It is the city's intent to reduce the proliferation of signs, reduce
distractions and obstructions to motor vehicle operators and pedestrians that
might lead to accidents or traffic congestion, enhance and preserve the
natural scenic beauty or aesthetic features of highways, streets and adjacent
areas and beautify the community by removing obstructions to light, air and
open space.



   (A)   Definitions.  Specific definitions of types of signs and
related terminology is contained in  the definitions of sign above.



   (B)   General provisions.  All signs shall comply with the
following.



      (1)   Traffic. No advertising sign shall interfere with
motorists' vision, nor simulate traffic control or emergency vehicle lighting.



      (2)   Hazard and directional signs.  Signs less than four
square feet in area, consisting of arrows, name and colors of the business,
graphics or such words as “Step”, “Fire”, “Escape”, “Danger”
or similar symbols, shall not be included in computing maximum allowable sign
area.



      (3)   Illumination.



         (a)   No sign lighting is allowed which switches on and
off intermittently, changes intensity and/or color or otherwise creates an
illusion of flashing or movement;



         (b)   All bare light bulbs, except bulbs less than 15
watts, shall be directed toward the face of the sign;



         (c)   Signs within 50 feet of a residential district
shall be shielded from casting glare into the district; and



         (d)   Signs within residential districts shall be
shielded from casting illumination into residences within 100 feet.



      (4)   Height, setback and location.



         (a)   A projecting wall sign shall project no more than
five feet from a building, have bottom ten feet (minimum) above grade and top
25 feet above grade or height of the building, whichever is lower and have no
exposed guy wires;



         (b)   Free-standing signs, awning signs, canopy signs,
marquee signs and temporary signs shall have a minimum setback of ten feet
from the street curb, and shall not be installed within, nor project into the
vertical plane of, the street right-of-way;



         (c)   Fascia signs may project no more than 18 inches
from a wall, and extend no more than 18 inches above the parapet, eaves or
building facade;



         (d)   Roof mounted signs may project no more than ten
feet above the highest point of the roof or parapet;



         (e)   Combination roof/wall mounted signs must comply
with points of divisions (B)(4)(a) and (d) above;



         (f)   No sign shall be attached to or obstruct any fire
escape or opening intended as a fire fighting point of ingress or egress,
interfere with any opening required for legal ventilation or prevent free
passage from one part of a roof to another;



         (g)   Street furniture, such as benches, waste
receptacles, fountains and the like shall not be used for advertising
purposes; and



         (h)   When a sign extends over sidewalks, walkways or
other spaces accessible to pedestrians, the bottom of the sign structure
shall be at least eight feet above the ground.



      (5)   Construction of signs.  All permanent signs shall
conform to International Building Code and National Electrical Code
requirements as to design, materials, support, installation, fixtures and
wiring. Specifically, all permanent signs must be able to withstand a
pressure of 24 pounds per square foot, which is equivalent to 110 mph wind.
The Administrator may require certification by an engineer when he or she is
uncertain that the proposed method of construction is adequate.



   (C)   Administration and enforcement.



      (1)   Sign permit required.  Except for signs described in
division (D)(1) below, a permit must be obtained prior to placing a sign
within the city limits:



         (a)   A new petition for a sign permit must be obtained
if an owner wishes to alter a sign for which a permit has been issued;



         (b)   At the time of passage of this chapter, the
existence of a permanent sign not conforming to these regulations constitutes
a vested right; however, the sign shall not be replaced if removed or
renovated at a cost over 50% of the sign replacement cost, except that it be
replaced in conformity with these regulations;



         (c)   A temporary sign shall be allowed only once, and
only for 30 days, to advertise the establishment of a new business. In
addition, temporary signs are only allowed if the business has a new owner,
or has changed its business name. Relocation of a business shall not qualify
the business owner for a temporary sign. The temporary sign permit (protected
from weather) shall be attached to the sign structure during its permitted
use;



         (d)   Pennants or bench signs are prohibited; and



         (e)   Portable signs. Portable signs shall be permitted
in the Commercial and Light Industrial zoning districts and shall comply with
the following:



            1.   There shall be only one portable sign
permitted per business.



            2.   The portable sign shall be located within ten
feet of subject business entrance.



            3.   The portable sign shall not exceed 24 inches
in width or 36 inches in height.



            4.   The portable sign shall be heavy enough or
otherwise weighted to prevent being blown over.



            5.   The portable sign shall not be internally or
externally illuminated.



            6.   The portable sign shall only be displayed
during the hours of operation of the subject business and shall be removed
daily after close of business.



            7.   The portable signs hall employ a high level
of traditional design and material and shall not include reader boards,
changeable letter copy, plastic or similar material.



      (2)   Petition for sign permit.  A petition for the permit
required by this section shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator, and
prepared in the form required, to include a scale drawing of the proposed
sign(s), a plat of the property the sign is to be located on or a rendering
of subject building elevation, to illustrate proposed sign location(s).



      (3)   Action on petition.  The petition shall be promptly
investigated by the Zoning Administrator, and action taken for approval or
denial.



      (4)   Sign permit issuance, refusal or appeal.  If a sign is
authorized as described in the petition, a sign permit will be issued. The
permit expiration date of temporary sign permit will be indicated on the
permit:



         (a)   If not authorized as described in the petition,
the petitioner will be promptly informed; and



         (b)   Appeals of refused petition shall be made to the
Zoning Board of Appeals.



      (5)   Sign permit records.  A duplicate of the permit shall
be attached to the petition and maintained on file in the city offices.



      (6)   Enforcement.  Violation of these sign regulations shall
be a misdemeanor, punishable as described in division (C)(8) below and §
151.192.



      (7)   Penalty.



         (a)   Abandonment.  Obvious lack of maintenance or
abandonment shall be reported to the property owner by the Administrator,
with a request for sign removal within 30 days. After 30 days, the city shall
have the sign removed and the owner shall be responsible for expenses
incurred.



         (b)   Appeal.  Appeal of a decision by the
Administrator that a sign has been abandoned shall be made to the Zoning
Board of Appeals, who shall instruct the Administrator in writing of the
disposition of the matter.



      (8)   Fees.



         (a)   Fees shall be paid upon filing a petition for a
sign permit, in the amount established in the fee schedule on file in the
City Clerk's office. Signs erected, or work begun, without obtaining a
permit, shall be subject to penalty, as described in § 151.061;



         (b)   Signs in division (D)(1) below are exempt from
fees, but shall conform in all other respects to these regulations; and



         (c)   A sign confiscated in violation of the city's sign
ordinance may be reclaimed upon payment of a $25 fee. Any sign confiscated by
the city will not be kept more than 30 days from the date the sign was
confiscated.



   (D)   Regulations by zoning district.



      (1)   Residential.  Only the following signs are allowed in
any residential district:



         (a)   One sign, no more than three square feet in area,
attached to a rod or post not more than five feet high, or attached to the
building, stating only the street number or occupants name, or both. Separate
street numbers attached to the building shall not be included in computing
sign area;



         (b)   One sign, bulletin board or entrance marker not
exceeding 32 square feet in area for each church or institution, however, if
building street frontage exceeds 100 feet, up to three signs may be placed,
one sign per 100 feet of frontage, or portion thereof;



         (c)   One “For Sale”, “Sold” or “For Rent”
sign not over eight square feet in area, advertising the lot on which the
sign is placed, for each licensed realtor listing the property, to be removed
within 30 days after sale;



         (d)   One builder's or developer's sign not over 20
square feet in area, on a lot where the building is under construction, and
one sign not over eight square feet per subcontractor, all to be removed
within 30 days after project completion; and



         (e)   Subdivision entrance sign(s), to be approved as
part of Planning Commission's subdivision review procedure.



      (2)   Multi-Family, Business and Light Industrial.  Only the
following signs are allowed:



         (a)   Signs allowed in division (D)(1) above, or, for
any lot or parcel of two acres or larger and lots or parcels with a front
footage exceeding 199 linear feet, one “For Sale”, “Sold” or “For
Rent” sign not over 20 square feet in area, advertising that lot or parcel
on which the sign is placed. All signs are to be removed within 30 days after
sale, rental or lease;



         (b)   One freestanding sign, no more than 50 square feet
in area, nor exceeding ten feet height above grade, and of a monument design.
A business may substitute a freestanding sign for one additional building
sign, provided that the cumulative square footage does not exceed the maximum
allowable area pursuant to division (D)(2)(d) below;



         (c)   Reader board signs may be mounted onto the
free-standing sign provided that the signs have been approved by the
Architectural Review Board for aesthetic purposes, the signs are within the
50 square feet limit and are permanently attached as close to the
free-standing sign as possible in order to provide a unified appearance;



         (d)   The size, area and numbers of all signs to be
located in Commercial and Light Industrial Districts of the city shall be
governed by the following table. This shall include any combinations of
building, projecting wall, painted wall and/or window, roof mounted, marquee
or illuminated signs which are located interior to a business and visible
from the exterior of a business establishment:



 


Distance From Front Property Line To Business Front:

 

Business Frontage Multiplied By:

 

Total Area (Square Feet) Not To Exceed:

 

Total Number Of Signs Not To Exceed:




0-99 feet

 

1

 

200

 

2




100-399

 

1.5

 

300

 

3




400 feet or more

 

2

 

400

 

4



Note: The intent of this section is to not have a sign dominating the overall
size of the building. Any sign is subject to the aesthetic review of the
Architectural Review Board.



 



         (e)   A shopping center may erect a maximum of two
freestanding signs with a maximum total area of one square foot per frontage
foot, but not to exceed 500 square feet per sign. The freestanding sign(s)
shall advertise the shopping center development, and are not considered in
the requirements of division (D)(2)(d) above. Businesses located in
established shopping centers are not authorized to erect freestanding signs;



         (f)   Petroleum product pumps and dispensers shall be
permitted to display only information required by law and the brand name and
type of product being dispensed. Height of letters for price and information
shall not exceed six inches. Pump and dispenser signs shall not exceed ten
square feet in surface area per side, and shall not exceed the face of the
pump. Pumps and dispenser signs shall not be counted in the maximum number of
building signs for a business; however, the designs of the signs shall meet
with the approval of the City Planner;



         (g)   Gasoline canopy signs shall be subject to the
maximum size and number of building signs for each business except
height-warning signs;



         (h)   Holiday decorations such as Christmas lights and
ornaments may be installed with the exception that the decorations cannot
flash, and decorations shall contain no commercial copy or commercial
graphics;



         (i)   Permanent signs on windows or doors (interior or
exterior, or a combination thereof) shall not exceed 50% of the gross
transparent area of any one window or door;



         (j)   Exterior vending machines, newspaper stands and
telephone booths on the property shall not bear advertisements for the
businesses and shall advertise only the products or services available from
those machines or booths;



         (k)   Informational signs are permitted provided that no
sign shall exceed six square feet. Informational signs shall not count toward
the maximum number of signs allowable or the maximum allowable sign area;



         (l)   Special event sign/banner, professional in
appearance that is intended to inform the public of a special event. An
applicant is limited to two special event signs/banners during the calendar
year and must obtain a permit from the Zoning Administrator. The sign or
banner must be located on the property on which the event is being held and
be germane to that event. Special event signs/banners are restricted to
businesses, churches, schools and governmental entities and are subject to
the following conditions:



            1.   Banners and special event signs do not
include pennants, flags or bench signs;



            2.   Only one banner or special event sign is
allowed for each business at any given time;



            3.   Banners and special event signs may be
displayed up to a maximum of 30 days and no more than twice per year. The
frequency of displaying banners by local municipal government entity shall be
subject to the permission of the city. Applicants shall indicate on the
permit the number of days for banners to be displayed;



            4.   Banners and special event signs shall be
properly secured and maintained at all times, and shall not interfere with
pedestrian or vehicular movement. Banners shall not be strewn between
buildings or utility poles;



            5.   Banners and special event signs may be used
as temporary signs for the opening of a new business, or to promote special
events. Banners shall be treated as temporary in nature, and shall not be
perceived as permanent signs;



            6.   Banners and special event signs are exempt
from review by the Architectural Review Board;



            7.   The maximum size of a banner or special event
sign shall be 50 square feet;



            8.   The design, colors and overall appearance of
the banner or special event sign shall be subject to staff review and
approval. Gaudy, distasteful or cluttered-looking banners shall not be
permitted; and



            9.   Street banners as proposed for the city as
part of the strategy of the Downtown Business District shall not be subject
to the requirements of this section.



         (m)   Painted wall and/or window signs, signs painted
directly on an externally visible wall or window (including glass doors) to
advertise the business in the building may be allowed only in the commercial
and light industrial zoning districts, subject to division (D)(2) above and
upon approval by the Zoning Administrator. Painted wall or window signs may
be allowed for the purpose of advertising nationally recognized trademarks or
logos, or legitimate business names, but shall not display any other
pictorial scenes, free-hand advertising creations, “sale” or pricing
information. A permit for a painted wall or window sign shall be granted only
upon presentation of a guarantee that the sign will be well-maintained,
re-painted at intervals frequent enough to guarantee its professional
appearance and painted over or removed upon cessation of the business at that
location.



   (E)   LED (light emitting diode) signs.  LED signs are permitted
within the city under the following restrictions.



      (1)   Permitted locations.  Schools, places of worship and
municipal complexes.



      (2)   Sign, style, height, width and setback.  The LED
portion of the sign shall be integrated into a low profile monument sign with
a brick or stone base. The sign shall not exceed eight feet in height and ten
feet in width, including the base and all brickwork. The sign shall be
setback with a minimum of ten feet from the front property line. The LED
portion of the sign may display letters only, with a maximum of three lines
of text. No characters are permitted.



      (3)   LED sign area.  The maximum area of the LED sign
component shall not exceed 40 square feet or 50% of the total sign area,
whichever is less.



      (4)   Color and brightness control.  Message copy shall be
limited to one color, white or amber on a black background. The sign shall be
equipped with photosensitive equipment which automatically adjusts to the
brightness and contrast of the sign in direct relation to the ambient outdoor
illumination.



      (5)   Minimum interval.  The sign may only display one new
message per hour.



      (6)   Movement restriction.  The use of animation, flashing,
scrolling or blinking characters is prohibited.



   (F)   Display of national, state and organizational flags.



      (1)   Review, approval and permitting;



      (2)   A permit shall be required for the installation of all
flag poles or flag display devices;



      (3)   Applicant must submit with the permit application a
scaled site plan giving the location of flagpole(s) and complete dimensional
and installation engineering data;



      (4)   Applicant must provide documentation of minimum
clearance from electric, telephone or cable TV lines as certified by the
proper utility prior to issuance of permit, or installation;



      (5)   Height of poles, types of flags, size flags and number
of flags;



      (6)   The maximum height above grade for a ground mounted
flagpole shall be 35 feet or 15 feet above the highest point of the roof or
parapet of the building for roof/wall mounted installations;



      (7)   United States national flags, South Carolina state flags
and approved organizational flags may be flown in accordance with accepted
protocol, however, no flag may be flown except in conjunction with the
national flag;



      (8)   No individual flag may exceed 50 square feet in area;



      (9)   No more than three flags may be displayed from a single
pole or device; no more than three flags may be displayed on a single site,
lot or parcel, whether on single or multiple poles;



      (10)   Inclement weather/hours of darkness display;



      (11)   All flags to be displayed must be maintained in a neat
and clean condition, free of fading colors and/or frayed edges. Flags showing
obvious signs of fading or wear will be immediately replaced; and



      (12)   Illuminated signs located interior to a business and
visible from the exterior of a business establishment shall be included as
part of the total square footage of signage authorized by division (D)(2)
above.



   (G)   Political signs and posters.  Political signs and posters
promoting the candidacy of a person or persons for elected public office may
be erected or posted within the City of Goose Creek 30 days prior to a
general or special election. A candidate shall be limited to one political
sign per lot, and signs shall be self supporting. It shall be the
responsibility of the candidate for public office, whose name or
advertisement appears on the signs and posters, to remove the same within 48
hours after the closing of the polls at the general or special election.
Failure to remove the signs or posters constitutes a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction. shall be punishable by fine not to exceed $500 or 30 days of
imprisonment. In no case shall political signs or posters be placed, erected
or posted upon any public right-of-way, easement, tree or utility pole.
Political signs shall be no larger than eight square feet in residential
areas, and 32 square feet in commercial and light industrial areas. It is
permissible for signage to appear on both sides of the sign.



   (H)   Installation of signs in wetland.  In all zoning districts,
the installation of signs in wetlands shall not be permitted except by
governmental entities or with the permission of governmental entities.



   (I)   Prohibited signs.  Except as may be hereinafter specifically
permitted, it shall be unlawful after the effective date of this chapter, or
amendment thereto, for any person to erect, place or use within the city, any
of the following signs in addition to the requirements of this chapter:



      (1)   Off-premise signs;



      (2)   A sign which contains any moving, rotating, animated
lights, visible moving or movable parts (with the exception of time and
temperature signs), or giving the appearance of animation;



      (3)   Stationary or abandoned vehicle signs. The parking in
public view of any vehicle not in operation condition or lacking current
registration shall be prohibited;



      (4)   Any sign which emits a sound, odor or visible matter;



      (5)   Signs using the words “Stop”, “Danger” or any
word, phrase, symbol or character in a manner that misleads, confuses or
distracts a vehicle driver;



      (6)   Signs painted on or attached to trees, fences, rocks or
natural features, telephone or utility poles or painted on the roofs of
buildings visible from any public thoroughfare;



      (7)   Any sign towed behind a boat, raft, aircraft, helicopter
or recreational vehicle;



      (8)   Any sign which exhibits statements, words or pictures of
obscene or pornographic subjects;



      (9)   Inflatable signs, including balloons;



      (10)   Streamers, ribbons, windblown propellers, strung light
bulbs, pennants, bench or furniture signs; and



      (11)   Visible angle or other frames supporting projecting
signs, roof and canopy signs, as well as chain supports are prohibited.



(1985 Code, Art. V, § 505)  (Ord. 05-008, passed 7-12-2005; Ord. 05-018,
passed 11-8-2005; Ord. 17-012, passed 5-9-2017; Ord. 18-018, passed
8-14-2018) Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.085  LAND USE BUFFERS.



   (A)   Buffers required.



      (1)   Land use buffers shall be provided between all
incompatible zoning districts in accordance with the provisions of this
section. Buffers shall function as aesthetically pleasing visual transitional
areas between land uses and shall be integrated into the overall landscape
design.



      (2)   All sites not in compliance with this section at the
time of its adoption shall be considered preexisting nonconforming and shall
be required to comply with this section when there are renovations or
improvements made totaling more than 50% of the reasonable replacement costs
of the principle structure(s).



   (B)   Purpose.  The purpose of the land use buffer is to balance
the impacts of different types of land uses and to mitigate the impacts that
certain land uses may impose on adjacent properties.



   (C)   Location.  Buffers shall be provided along property
boundaries separating zoning districts or along a delineated area on the site
other than near the property boundary as approved pursuant to this section.



   (D)   Buffer design standards.



      (1)   Plant material. All buffers shall contain appropriate
plant material to provide adequate screening from public view and from
adjacent property. Existing trees and understory vegetation shall be retained
wherever possible, with additional plantings as necessary to achieve the
required buffer. Plant material shall be designed and maintained in such a
manner so as to create a naturally appearing buffer area. Within the required
buffer area, plant materials and structural elements shall be designed and
maintained in a staggered and undulating manner to create a more natural
looking buffer. The use of native species is preferred.



      (2)   Structural elements in buffers. Structural elements,
such as fences, privacy walls, berms or other elements approved by the Zoning
Administrator, may also be required, depending on adjacent existing or zoned
land uses. Structural elements shall be at least six feet in height, although
such height may be less at specific points if required to preserve
significant land forms or other aesthetically desirable features. Wood
picket, rail, stockade and masonry walls and fences may be used.



      (3)   The type of required structure and exact placement of
required plants shall be determined through the design approval process based
upon the proposed use of the subject property, the uses of the adjoining
properties, site lines, and any design elements established by surrounding
properties. In instances of significant incompatibility in use intensity or
density changes, the Zoning Administrator has the authority to amend the
buffer requirements for a specific site, including the discretion to require
additional buffering, including depth of buffer, density and number of trees,
and/or the requirement for a structural screen.



   (E)   Measurement of buffer areas.  Buffer area depth shall be
measured at intervals no greater than ten feet.



   (F)   Maintenance of buffers.  All buffer areas shall be maintained
in good condition at all times. Trees and shrubs shall be maintained in
healthy growing condition. All structural elements shall be constructed in a
workmanlike manner, and well maintained in a safe and sound condition.



   (G)   Buffer specifications.



      (1)   Buffers shall be provided in accordance with the table
and specifications listed below.



         (a)   Buffer 1.



            1.   A buffer 15 feet deep that shall consist of
at least four canopy trees, eight understory trees, and 30 shrubs per 100
feet of buffer yard width; or



            2.   A buffer 20 feet deep that shall consist of
at least four canopy trees, six understory trees, and 20 shrubs per 100 feet
of buffer yard width; or



            3.   A buffer 30 feet deep wide that shall consist
of at least four canopy trees, six understory trees, and 15 shrubs per 100
feet of buffer yard width.



         (b)   Buffer 2.



            1.   A buffer 30 feet deep that shall consist of
at least five canopy trees, seven understory trees, and 20 shrubs per 100
feet of buffer yard width. In addition, a structural element shall be
required; or



            2.   A buffer 40 feet deep that shall consist of
at least four canopy trees, five understory trees, and 20 shrubs per 100 feet
of buffer yard width. In addition, a structural element shall be required; or



            3.   A buffer 50 feet deep that shall consist of
at least four canopy trees, four understory trees, and ten shrubs per 100
feet of buffer yard width. In addition, a structural element shall be
required.



         (c)   Buffer 3.



            1.   A buffer 50 feet deep that shall consist of
at least five canopy trees, seven understory trees, and 20 shrubs per 100
feet of buffer yard width. In addition, a structural element shall be
required; or



            2.   A buffer 60 feet deep that shall consist of
at least five canopy trees, five understory trees, and 15 shrubs per 100 feet
of buffer yard width. In addition, a structural element shall be required; or



            3.   A buffer 75 feet deep that shall consist of
at least four canopy trees, four understory trees, and ten shrubs per 100
feet of buffer yard width.



         (d)   Buffer 4.



            1.   A buffer 75 feet deep that shall consist of
at least ten canopy trees, 18 understory trees, and 60 shrubs per 100 feet of
buffer yard width. In addition, a structural element shall be required; or



            2.   A buffer 100 feet deep that shall consist of
at least ten canopy trees, 15 understory trees, and 60 shrubs per 100 feet of
buffer yard width. In addition, a structural element shall be required; or



            3.   A buffer 125 feet deep that shall consist of
at least eight canopy trees, ten understory trees, and 30 shrubs per 100 feet
of buffer yard width. In addition, a structural element shall be required; or



            4.   A buffer 150 feet deep that shall consist of
at least eight canopy trees, eight understory trees, and 20 shrubs per 100
feet of buffer yard width. In addition, a structural element shall be
required.



         (e)   Buffer 5.



            1.   A buffer 100 feet deep that shall consist of
at least 12 canopy trees, 18 understory trees, and 60 shrubs per 100 feet of
buffer yard width. In addition, a structural element shall be required; or



            2.   A buffer 125 feet deep that shall consist of
at least ten canopy trees, 15 understory trees, and 40 shrubs per 100 feet of
buffer yard width. In addition, a structural element shall be required; or



            3.   A buffer 150 feet deep that shall consist of
at least ten canopy trees, 15 understory trees, and 30 shrubs per 100 feet of
buffer yard width. In addition, a structural element shall be required.



 

PROPOSED USE
 
ADJACENT USE



Single- Family Residential

 

Multi- Family Residential

 

Restricted Commercial

 

Neighborhood Commercial

 

General Commercial and Institutional

 

General Commercial and Institutional
Over 5 Acres

 

Commercial Industrial

 

Light Industrial

 

General Industrial





Single- Family Residential

(R1, R2, R3)
 

NA

 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

Buffer 3



50 - 75 feet

 

Buffer 3



50 - 75 feet

 

Buffer 4



100 - 150 feet

 

Buffer 5



100 - 150 feet



Multi- Family Residential

(R3)
 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

NA

 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

Buffer 2



30 - 50 feet

 

Buffer 2



30 - 50 feet

 

Buffer 3



50 - 75 feet

 

Buffer 4



75 - 100 feet



Restricted Commercial
 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

NA

 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

Buffer 2



30 - 50 feet

 

Buffer 2



30 - 50 feet

 

Buffer 2



30 - 50 feet

 

Buffer 4



75 - 100 feet



Neighborhood Commercial
 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

NA

 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

Buffer 2



30 - 50 feet

 

Buffer 2



30 - 50 feet

 

Buffer 2



30 - 50 feet

 

Buffer 4



75 - 100 feet



General Commercial and Institutional (GC)
 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

Buffer 1



30 - 50 feet

 

NA

 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

Buffer 2



30 - 50 feet

 

Buffer 3



50 - 75 feet



General Commercial and Institutional Over 5 Acres
 

Buffer 3





 

Buffer 2





 

Buffer 2





 

Buffer 2



30 - 50 feet

 

Buffer 1





 

NA

 

NA

 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

Buffer 3



50 - 75 feet



Commercial Industrial
 

Buffer 3



50 - 75 feet

 

Buffer 2



30 - 50 feet

 

Buffer 2



30 - 50 feet

 

Buffer 2



30 - 50 feet

 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

NA

 

NA

 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

Buffer 3



50 - 75 feet



Light Industrial (LI)
 

Buffer 4



100 - 150 feet

 

Buffer 3



50 - 75 feet

 

Buffer 2



30 - 50 feet

 

Buffer 2



30 - 50 feet

 

Buffer 2



30 - 50 feet

 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

Buffer 1



15 - 30 feet

 

NA

 

Buffer 3



50 - 75 feet



General Industrial (GI)
 

Buffer 5



100 - 150 feet

 

Buffer 4



75 - 100 feet

 

Buffer 4



75 - 100 feet

 

Buffer 4



75 - 100 feet

 

Buffer 3



50 - 75 feet

 

Buffer 3



50 - 75 feet

 

Buffer 3



50 - 75 feet

 

Buffer 3



50 - 75 feet

 

NA





 



 


MINIMUM PLANTING REQUIREMENTS




PLANT MATERIAL

 

SIZE



Canopy Tree
 
 


   Single trunk
 
2.5-inches caliper


 
 
8-feet height


Understory Tree
 
2-inches caliper/6-feet height


Shrubs
 
24-inches height



 



   (H)   Exemptions.  An application for a variance from this section
may be made to the city's Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to § 151.171.
Upon approval of the variance, the property would then be exempted from
meeting the requirements of this section.



   (I)   Compliance review for installed buffers.  Prior to the
issuance of the certificate of occupancy and one year after a certificate of
occupancy has been issued, the buffer shall be reviewed by the Zoning
Administrator to determine its adequacy in regard to softening and screening
as required above. Where insufficient plant materials were originally
installed, plant materials have died, or the buffer is otherwise deemed to be
inadequate, the landowner shall remedy the problems within 30 days of
receiving notice of inadequacy.



(1985 Code, Art. V, § 506)  (Ord. 13-007, passed 9-10-2013; Ord. 16-010,
passed 7-12-2016)



§ 151.086  PARKING AND LOADING SPACE.



   Paved off-street automobile parking shall hereafter be required in all
zoning districts at the time of initial construction of any principal
building, or when changes in a principal building require more parking.
Off-street parking shall have direct access to a street and shall in all
respects conform to this chapter.



   (A)   Required space.  The number of off-street parking space, or
loading space, shall be calculated on the basis of land use, or use of the
principal building, as specified in Columns 2 and 3 of Appendix A. For those
uses not specifically identified in the annexation, required space shall be
determined by the Zoning Administrator.



   (B)   Application of parking requirements.



      (1)   All required parking spaces shall be located on the same
lot with the principal building or use, except as provided in division (D)
below.



      (2)   In the case of mixed or joint use of a building or lot,
the required spaces shall be equal to the sum of the spaces required for each
use individually.



      (3)   Uses not specifically listed in Appendix A shall require
parking spaces equal to a listed use of similar parking demand generation, as
determined by the Administrator.



      (4)   The total number of spaces required may be reduced up to
10% when the reduction is warranted by unusual circumstances, as determined
by the Administrator.



      (5)   The number of employees used for determining parking
requirements shall be the average number on the shift of greatest employment.



      (6)   If fractional numbers result from parking space
computations, the next highest whole number (as to number of spaces required)
shall be used.



   (C)   Area and paving required for parking spaces.  Each automobile
parking space shall measure nine feet by 18 feet minimum (162 square feet),
excluding any aisle or maneuvering space. Areas in public rights-of-way shall
not be used in providing parking or maneuvering space. Curb cuts shall be as
specified in § 151.082(F)(2). Parking plans shall be submitted in the form
of a scale drawing of the proposed parking and loading spaces, with
landscaped areas and demonstrated conformance with these regulations.
Approved parking spaces shall be paved.



   (D)   Exceptions to off-street parking areas.  Required off-street
parking for one and two-family residences shall be located on the same lot as
the principal building served. In unusual circumstances or hardships,
however, the Commission may approve off-site parking for all other permitted
areas, provided the parking area is not more than 300 feet from the principal
building or use served, and that the owner of the parking site relinquishes
development rights of the property until parking is provided elsewhere. Where
the off-site parking is proposed, recorded covenants as to parking use and
development rights shall be provided.



   (E)   Joint use off-street parking areas.  Two or more principal
uses may utilize a common off-street area in compliance with divisions (B)(2)
and (D) above. Total spaces required may be reduced by the Commission if a
reduction is warranted by the particular grouping of uses.



   (F)   Off-street loading area required.  Areas suitable for loading
and unloading motor vehicles in off-street locations, and specifically
designated for this purpose, shall be required upon initial construction,
alteration or conversion of any building intended for commercial, industrial
or governmental purposes. The off-street loading area shall have access to a
public street and be provided as specified in Appendix A in addition to the
preceding off-street parking requirements.



   (G)   Area required per loading space.  Each off-street loading
space shall be at least 12 feet wide, 40 feet long and 14 feet high,
maintained clear of obstructions at all times.



   (H)   Location of off-street loading areas.  Off-street loading
areas shall be located on the same lot as the structure served, and in no
case counted as part of the off-street parking requirements.



   (I)   Adequacy of off-street loading area.  Whether specified in
this chapter or not, all uses shall provide off-street loading areas
sufficient for their requirements that no vehicle being loaded or unloaded
shall stand in, nor project into, any public way.



   (J)   Fire lanes required.  Commercial or light industrial
facilities which have a floor area greater than 7,000 square feet or whose
setback is 100 feet or greater from the road right-of-way, are required to
establish and maintain fire lanes in compliance with § 3-2 of the State Fire
Code. Fire lanes must be a minimum of 20 feet in width and be posted with
signs which specifically state “No Parking - Tow Away Zone”.



   (K)   Parking requirements for the disabled person(s).  All
governmental buildings, public buildings, commercial facilities and places
for public uses, including churches and private clubs, with the exception of
single-family and two-family residences, shall have parking spaces designated
and signs posted in accordance with the following requirements.



      (1)   The international symbol of access to the physically
disabled person(s) shall be permanently displayed (marked) on the ground for
parking spaces that are reserved for such use. In addition, a sign bearing
the international symbol of access to the physically disabled person(s) shall
be posted facing each reserved parking space for the disabled person(s).
Examples of the signs included one foot by one and one half foot in
dimension, with the international symbol and “reserved parking” clearly
marked on the sign.



      (2)   Parking spaces shall measure 13 feet by 18 feet minimum
(234 square feet), including a five feet minimum access aisle. Parking spaces
for the disabled person(s) shall be near main building entrances. Parking
spaces and passenger loading zones for the disabled person(s) shall be as
follows.



      (3)   Parking spaces and passenger loading zones for the
disabled person(s):



 


Total Spaces Or Zones

 

Required Number To Be Reserved For The Disabled Persons(s)






1-25

 

1




26-50

 

2




51-75

 

3




76-100

 

4




101-150

 

5




151-200

 

6




201-300

 

7




301-400

 

8




401-500

 

9




501-1,000

 

2% of total




Over 1,000

 

20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000



One in every eight accessible spaces, but not less than one, shall be served
by an access aisle 96 inches (eight feet) wide minimum and shall be
designated “van accessible”.




 



(1985 Code, Art. V, § 507)  (Ord. 90-16, passed 9-11-1990; Ord. 96-009,
passed 9-10-1996)



§ 151.087  DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE.



   (A)   Title. This section shall be referred to as the “Development
Impact Fee Ordinance for the City of Goose Creek, South Carolina.”



   (B)   Authority. This section is adopted pursuant to and in
compliance with the authority of the South Carolina Development Impact Fee
Act, Code of Laws of South Carolina, Title 6, Article 9, Chapter 1 (the
"Act"), and is to be interpreted in accordance with such Act, or as it may be
amended in the future.



   (C)   Findings. The City of Goose Creek City Council hereby declares
that:



      (1)   Adequate general government, police, fire protection,
public works and parks and recreation facilities and equipment are vital and
necessary to the health, safety, welfare and prosperity of the city and its
citizens. Substantial growth and new construction is taking place within the
city and is anticipated to continue. This growth creates substantial need for
new infrastructure capacity. Meeting these needs is very costly; however,
failure to do so will result in an inadequate system of facilities and
equipment to accommodate anticipated demand. This would make the city a less
desirable place to live and do business.



      (2)   To the extent that future growth and new construction in
the city place demands on general government, police, fire protection, public
works and parks and recreation facilities and equipment, those demands and
needs should be met by shifting a portion of the capital costs for providing
new capacity to serve new development, which creates, in whole or in part,
these demands and needs.



      (3)   The Planning Commission recommended to City Council to
adopt the impact fee rates as defined by the City of Goose Creek Development
Impact Fee Study Report and Capital Improvement Plan dated June 26, 2018,
with projects eligible for impact fee funding from FY2019 - FY2028.



      (4)   This section is enacted to implement the findings and
recommendations of the City of Goose Creek Development Impact Fee Study
Report and endorse the list of capital projects eligible for impact fee
funding in the City of Goose Creek Capital Improvements Plan.



      (5)   The impact fees prescribed in this section are
equitable, do not impose an unfair or disproportionate burden on developers
and new construction, and are in the best interests of the general welfare of
Goose Creek and its citizens.



      (6)   New facilities or equipment eligible for development
impact fee funding will benefit all new development or redevelopment in city
limits. Therefore, it is appropriate to treat the entire city as one service
area for calculating, collecting and spending development impact fees.



      (7)   This section provides the procedures for timely
processing of applications for determination of appropriate development
impact fees applicable to all development inside city limits subject to the
impact fees, and for the timely processing of applications for individual
assessment of development impact fees, credits or reimbursements allowed or
paid.



      (8)   The maximum allowable recreation impact fee determined
in the City of Goose Creek Development Impact Fee Study Report has been
reduced by 54% for the general development impact fee schedule summarized in
Exhibit A of this chapter, setting the fees at 46% of the maximum amount to
provide a reasonable fee for residential investment and to ensure that the
impact fees collected do not exceed the cost to provide capital facilities
that accommodate new development.



      (9)   Property for which a valid building permit has been
issued prior to the effective date of this section shall not be subject to
the updated development impact fees.



   (D)   Definitions. The following definitions apply within this
ordinance consistent with the provisions set forth in the South Carolina
Development Impact Fee Act, or as it may be amended in the future. Where
terms are not defined, the definitions used in the City of Goose Creek Code
of Ordinances shall apply:



      AFFORDABLE HOUSING. Housing affordable to families whose incomes
do not exceed 80% of the median income for the service area or areas within
the jurisdiction of the city.



      BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued for construction on or
development of land.



      CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT. Improvements with a useful life of five
years or more, by new construction or other action, which increase the
service capacity of the public facility. Public facility categories for the
purpose of this section include general government, police, fire protection,
public works and parks and recreation facilities and equipment.



      CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN (CIP). A multi-year planning tool used
to identify capital projects and coordinate financing and implementation. The
plan also identifies capital improvements for which impact fees may be used
as a funding source.



      CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A certificate allowing the occupancy or
use of a building and certifying that the structure or use has been
constructed or will be used in compliance with the City of Goose Creek Code
of Ordinances and all other applicable regulations.



      CREDITS. Impact fee deductions allowed to a fee payer for
eligible off-site capital improvements funded by the fee payer.



      DEVELOPER. An individual, corporation, partnership or other legal
entity undertaking new development.



      DEVELOPMENT. Construction or installation of a new building or
structure, or a change in use of an existing building or structure, any of
which creates additional demand and need for public facilities (i.e., general
government, police, fire protection, public works and parks and recreation
facilities and equipment). A building or structure shall include, but not be
limited to, modular buildings and manufactured housing. Development does not
include alterations made to existing single-family homes.



      DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL. A document that authorizes the commencement
of a development.



      DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE. A financial payment imposed as a
condition of development approval to pay a proportionate share of the cost
for certain off-site system improvements needed to accommodate future growth.
Development impact fees (or "impact fees") are collected by the city for
general government, police, fire protection, public works and parks and
recreation facilities and equipment.



      DWELLING UNIT. Shall include the definitions for DWELLING as
follows: duplex; group dwelling; group care dwelling; manufactured housing
unit; multi-family dwelling; single-family dwelling; and townhouse dwelling
contained in the City of Goose Creek Zoning Ordinance.



      FEE PAYER. A fee payer is any person who, after the effective
date of this section, seeks to develop land by applying for the issuance of a
building permit, or other development permit, subject to development impact
fees.



      FIRE PROTECTION IMPACT FEE. A payment of money imposed as a
condition of approval to pay a proportionate share of the cost for
improvements to the fire protection system identified to serve new
development.



      MUNICIPAL FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT IMPACT FEE. A payment of money
imposed as a condition of approval to pay a proportionate share of the cost
for improvements to the municipal facilities and equipment system identified
to serve new development: police, fire, and government services associated
with managing growth (i.e., planning and development, public services, and
the administrative offices), and parks and recreation.



      OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS. Capital improvements located outside of
the boundaries of a development that are required to serve the development's
proportionate share of future year system demands and needs.



       PROPORTIONATE SHARE. The portion of system improvements costs
for public facilities determined in the City of Goose Creek Development
Impact Fee Study Report that reasonably relates to the service demands and
needs of the development.



      PUBLIC FACILITIES. Improvements to and/or construction of capital
improvements identified in the City of Goose Creek Capital Improvements Plan,
or the City of Goose Creek Development Impact Fee Study Report as described
in division (E) hereof. Public facilities for the purpose of this section
shall include general government facilities and equipment (including
administration; law enforcement; fire protection; and public works) and parks
and recreation facilities and equipment.



      RECREATION IMPACT FEE. A payment of money imposed as a condition
of approval to pay a proportionate share of the cost for improvements to the
recreation system identified to serve new development.



      SERVICE AREA. A defined geographic area in which specific public
facilities provide service to development within the area defined.



      SQUARE FOOTAGE. The total floor space within the exterior walls
of a building not including space in cellars or basements.



      SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT. A capital improvement to a public facility
which is designed to provide service to a service area.



      SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT COSTS. The costs incurred for construction and
reconstruction of system improvements, including design, acquisition,
engineering and other costs attributable to the improvements, and also
including the cost of providing additional public facilities needed to serve
new growth and development. System improvement costs do not include:



         (a)   Construction, acquisition, or expansion of public
facilities other than capital improvements eligible for impact fee funding
that are identified in the City of Goose Creek capital improvements plan;



         (b)   Repair, operation or maintenance of existing or
new capital improvements;



         (c)   Upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing
existing capital improvements to serve existing development in order to meet
stricter safety, efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards;



         (d)   Upgrading, updating, expanding or replacing
existing capital improvements to provide better service to existing
development;



         (e)   Administrative and operating costs of the
governmental entity; or



         (f)   Principle payments and interest or other finance
charges on bonds or other indebtedness except financial obligations issued by
or on behalf of the governmental entity to finance capital improvements
eligible for impact fee funding that are identified in the City of Goose
Creek capital improvements plan.



   (E)   Supporting documentation.



      (1)   This section is based upon the conclusions and
recommendations presented in the City of Goose Creek development impact fee
study report, and City of Goose Creek capital improvements plan, prepared
consistent with the provisions set forth in the act. Both documents are on
file in the city's Clerk of Council Office and are incorporated into this
section by reference.



      (2)   All development impact fees collected pursuant to this
section shall be used to implement any or all of the public facilities deemed
eligible for impact fee funding identified in the City of Goose Creek capital
improvements plan as prioritized therein.



   (F)   Jurisdiction. A development impact fee shall apply to all new
development or redevelopment located within city limits, including those
locations annexed by the city in the future.



   (G)   Application and exemptions. The provisions of the section
shall apply to all new development or redevelopment within city limits for
which a building permit or development approval is required except for the
following:



      (1)   Rebuilding the same amount of floor space of a structure
that was destroyed by fire or other natural catastrophe;



      (2)   Remodeling or repairing a structure with the same use of
land that does not result in an increase in the number of service units or
place new demand on general government, police, fire protection, public works
and parks and recreation facilities and equipment;



      (3)   Replacing a residential unit, including a manufactured
home, with another residential unit on the same lot, if the amount of demand
for facilities and services generated by the new residential unit does not
increase;



      (4)   Placing a construction trailer or temporary office on a
lot during the period of construction on the same lot;



      (5)   Construction of an addition to a residential structure
that does not increase the amount of demand for facilities and services
generated by the same use of land;



      (6)   Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential
uses, such as a tennis court or a clubhouse, unless it is demonstrated
clearly that the use creates new demand for general government, police, fire
protection, public works and parks and recreation facilities and equipment;



      (7)   All or part of a particular development project if:



         (a)   The project is determined to create affordable
housing; and



         (b)   The exempt development's proportionate share of
system improvements is funded through a revenue source other than development
impact fees;



      (8)   Constructing a new elementary, middle or secondary
school; and



      (9)   Constructing a new volunteer fire department.



   (H)   Determination of fees.



      (1)   General provisions.



         (a)   The City Finance Department shall determine and
collect all development impact fees administered within city limits.



         (b)   Upon the effective date of this section,
development impact fees shall be charged to new development or redevelopment
in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section. The fees to be
collected for a development will be determined at the time of application for
a building permit. If the development is one that does not require a building
permit, the impact fee for the development will be determined at the time of
development approval. No building permit or development approval shall be
issued for any development requiring the payment of development impact fees
until the fees have been remitted to the City Finance Department, or in the
case of affordable housing, the appropriate financial guarantees have been
filed with the City Finance Director. Payment of such fees shall not relieve
the developer from obligations to comply with any other applicable city
ordinances, regulations or requirements prior to receiving a certificate of
occupancy.



         (c)   All monies paid by the fee payer pursuant to this
ordinance shall be identified as development impact fees and promptly
deposited in the appropriate development impact fee trust fund described
under division (I) of this section.



         (d)   For the purpose of calculating development impact
fees, the use of land types assumed in the General Development impact fee
schedule of this section (i.e., Exhibit A) shall be defined in accordance
with the definitions contained City of Goose Creek development impact fee
study report as follows:



            1.   Single family. Detached and attached one-unit
dwellings.



            2.   Multi-family. All attached multi-family
dwellings including duplexes and condominiums.



            3.   Commercial. All commercial, retail,
educational, and hotel/motel development.



            4.   Office. All general, professional, and
medical office development.



            5.   Industrial. All manufacturing and warehouse
development.



         (e)   Payment of development impact fees according to
the general development impact fee schedule (i.e., Exhibit A), or independent
impact fee calculation study as provided for in this section, shall
constitute full and complete payment of the new development's proportionate
share of public facilities costs.



         (f)   A developer may negotiate and contract with the
city to provide facilities or services in lieu of payment of development
impact fees in accordance with Section 6-1-1050 of the Act.



      (2)   General government facilities and equipment impact fee
formula. General government facilities and equipment impact fees (including
administration, police, fire protection, and public works) collected within
city limits shall be in accordance with one of the following formulas:



 






Land Use

 

A



Cost Per Capita

 

B



Densit y

 

C= A x B



Base Fee1

 

D= C x 0.02



Admin Charge1, 2

 

E = C + D



Total Fee1

 

E/1,000



Fee per Sq. Ft.





Residential
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Single family unit
 

$932

 

2.70

 

$2,517

 

$50

 

$2,567

 





   Multi-family unit
 

$932

 

2.03

 

$1,888

 

$38

 

$1,926

 





Non-residential
 



 



 



 



 



 





   Commercial
 

$289

 

2.00

 

$578

 

$12

 

$590

 

$0.59



   Office
 

$289

 

1.52

 

$439

 

$9

 

$448

 

$0.45



   Industrial
 

$289

 

0.90

 

$260

 

$5

 

$265

 

$0.27



1   Fee per dwelling unit (residential) or per 1,000 square feet
(non-residential).

2   Administrative charge of 2.0% for:

      (a)   Legal, accounting, and other administrative support; and

      (b)   Impact fee program.

   Administrative costs including revenue collection, revenue and cost
accounting, mandated public reporting, and fee justification analyses.


A    Cost per Capita. The estimated cost per resident or worker to provide
public facilities and equipment.

B    Density. The estimated number of persons per dwelling unit or
employee space ratio.

C    Base fee. The cost per capita multiplied by the density assumptions.

D    Administration charge. The assumed administrative charge of 2.0% for:

   (a)   Legal, accounting, and other administrative support; and

   (b)   Impact fee program administrative costs including revenue
collection, revenue and cost accounting, mandated public reporting, and fee
justification analyses.

E   Total Fee. the sum of the Base Fee plus the Administration Charge.

E/1,000   For commercial development, the total fee per 1,000 square feet
of development.




 



      (3)   Recreation impact fee formula. Recreation impact fees
collected within city limits shall be in accordance with the following
formula:



 






Land Use

 

A



Cost Per Capita

 

B



Densit y

 

C= A x B



Base Fee1

 

D= C x 0.02



Admin Charge1, 2

 

E = C + D



Total Fee1



Residential
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


   Single family
 
$249
 
2.70
 
$673
 
$13
 
$686


   Multi-family
 
$249
 
2.03
 
$504
 
$10
 
$514


1   Fee per dwelling unit (residential) or per 1,000 square feet
(non-residential).

2   Administrative charge of 2.0% for:

      (a)   Legal, accounting, and other administrative support; and

      (b)   Impact fee program.

   Administrative costs including revenue collection, revenue and cost
accounting, mandated public reporting, and fee justification analyses.


A    Cost per Capita. The estimated cost per resident or worker to provide
public facilities and equipment.

B    Density. The estimated number of persons per dwelling unit or
employee space ratio.

C    Base fee. The cost per capita multiplied by the density assumptions.

D    Administration charge. The assumed administrative charge of 2.0% for:

   (a)   Legal, accounting, and other administrative support; and

   (b)   Impact fee program administrative costs including revenue
collection, revenue and cost accounting, mandated public reporting, and fee
justification analyses.

E   Total Fee. the sum of the Base Fee plus the Administration Charge.

E/1,000   For commercial development, the total fee per 1,000 square feet
of development.



 



      (4)   Determining general government facilities and equipment
impact fees. The amount of general government facilities and equipment impact
fees attributable to a specific development shall be determined through the
following process:



         (a)   Verify the type and number of new residential
dwelling units or the type and intensity of new nonresidential square footage
or other use of land measuring criteria for which the building permit is
being sought;



         (b)   Determine the applicable use of land category and
impact fee per unit set forth in Exhibit A (as applicable) of this chapter;
and



         (c)   Multiply the development impact fee rate for the
specified use of land category by the number of net new units or net new
square footage within the development (as applicable) and the average persons
per household or employee space ratio estimate (as applicable in the City of
Goose Creek Development Impact Fee Study Report).



      (5)   Determining recreation impact fees. The amount of
recreation impact fees attributable to a specific development shall be
determined through the following process:



         (a)   Verify the type and number of new residential
dwelling units for which the building permit is being sought;



         (b)   Determine the applicable residential dwelling unit
category set forth in Exhibit A (as applicable) of this section; and



         (c)   Multiply the development impact fee rate for the
residential dwelling unit category by the number of net new units within the
development and the average persons per household estimate.



      (6)   Special cases. The city shall take the following special
cases into account when calculating development impact fees for a building
permit application:



         (a)   When an application for a building permit has been
made that contains two or more uses of land in any combination, including two
or more uses of land within a single building or structure, the total
development impact fee assessment shall be the sum of the products, as
calculated above, for each use of land unless an independent impact fee
calculation is performed, and approved for use by the City Administrator, or
its designee, consistent with divisions (1) through (5) of this division (as
applicable).



         (b)   In the case of a change, redevelopment or
modification of a use of land which requires a building permit, and which is
not exempted from development impact fees under division (G) of this
ordinance, the impact fee calculation shall be based upon the net increase in
new or proposed use of land as compared to the existing or previous use of
land.



         (c)   In the case of a demolition or termination of an
existing use or structure, development impact fees for future redevelopment
shall be based upon the net increase in development impact fees for the new
or proposed use of land as compared to the existing actual active previous
use of land since its original occupancy. Credit for the prior use shall not
be transferable to another location.



         (d)   In the case of relocating an existing use of land,
development impact fees shall be assessed to the relocated use at its new
location. Future redevelopment of the old location from which the use was
removed will receive a credit against development impact fees assessed equal
to the impact fees that would have been assessed against the relocated use.
Credits shall not be transferable to the new location.



         (e)   Before a building permit application may become
eligible for the provisions set forth in divisions (H)(6)(b) through (d), a
developer shall provide reasonably sufficient evidence that a previous use of
land had been actively maintained on the site within 12 months of the date of
application for a building permit. Such evidence may include proof of utility
records, records for the use sought to be shown, business license records or
other documentation.



         (f)   Any claim of existing or previous use must be made
no later than the time for application of a building permit. Any claim made
after such time shall be deemed invalid.



   (I)   Impact fee trust funds.



      (1)   Development impact fees collected pursuant to this
section shall be kept separate from other revenue of the city. There shall be
one trust fund established for each development impact fee category depicted
in Exhibit A of this chapter: general government and parks and recreation
facilities and equipment. All development impact fees collected shall be
properly identified by property address noted on the approved building permit
and by the appropriate trust account.



      (2)   Any funds on deposit not immediately necessary for
expenditure shall be maintained in an interest-bearing account prior to
expenditure on recommended projects. Interest earned on development impact
fees in deposit must be considered revenue to the trust fund account for
which income is earned and must be subject to all restrictions placed on the
use of development impact fees pursuant to this section.



   (J)   Limitation on expenditures of funds collected.



      (1)   Eligible system improvement costs. Funds from
development impact fee trust accounts shall be expended only for the public
facilities and system improvements identified as eligible for impact fee
funding in the City of Goose Creek Capital Improvements Plan, incorporated
herein by reference. No funds shall be used for administrative or operating
costs associated with imposing any of the development impact fees. Eligible
components of a public facility may include, but are not limited to, the
following:



         (a)   Design and construction plan preparation;



         (b)   Right-of-way acquisition;



         (c)   Construction of new facilities, structures, or
amenities that provide additional capacity;



         (d)   Purchase of new equipment (greater than $100,000
purchase price) that provide additional capacity;



         (e)   Construction of new drainage facilities associated
with capital improvements;



         (f)   Purchase and installation of traffic
signalization; and



         (g)   Principle payments, interest and other finance
charges on bonds or other indebtedness issued by or on behalf of the city for
financing any or all public facilities.



      (2)   Rationale nexus test. The city's Finance Director, or
its designee, shall make an annual report to the City Council and publish
this report for access by the general citizenry showing where development
impact fees have been collected and what projects have been funded with these
revenues. The Council shall consider this report and whether the fees are
being spent for the benefit of new development within ity limits. If the
Council determines that this is not the case, then it shall adjust the City
of Goose Creek Capital Improvements Plan and other projected capital
expenditures to correct the condition.



      (3)   Expenditure of funds. Development impact fee funds shall
be expended in the order in which they were collected. The disbursal of such
funds shall require approval of the City Council, upon recommendation of the
City Administrator or its designee.



      (4)   Reimbursement. Impact fee funds not obligated for
expenditure within three years of the date that they are scheduled to be
expended in the City of Goose Creek Capital Improvements Plan shall be
returned, with actual interest earned, to the record owner of the property
for which the fees were collected, on a first-in, first-out basis.



   (K)   Credits/reimbursements.



      (1)   General provisions.



         (a)   A developer shall be entitled to a credit against
development impact fees assessed pursuant to this section, assuming the same
discount rates applied to maximum allowable impact fees presented in this
section for the various impact fee categories, for city-approved monetary or
in-kind contributions toward some or all of the public facilities included in
the City of Goose Creek capital improvements plan that are eligible for
impact fee funding.



         (b)   Development impact fees shall not be imposed on a
fee payer or developer who has entered into a credit agreement with the city
for certain contribution, payment, construction or dedication of land up to
the cash value of the specific improvements identified within the agreement.
Any difference between total development impact fees due, by impact fee
category, for the development and the cash value of the executed credit
agreement remain eligible for collection pursuant to the rules and
requirements of this section.



         (c)   Any request for development impact fee credit or
reimbursement shall be submitted to the City Administrator prior to issuance
of a building permit.



      (2)   Application for credit agreement.



         (a)   The determination of the amount of any credit
shall be undertaken through submission of an application for credit
agreement, which shall be submitted through the City Finance Department for
review by the City Administrator, or its designee.



         (b)   The application for credit agreement shall include
the following information:



            1.   The following documentation must be provided
if the proposed application involves a credit for any cash contribution:



               A.   A certified copy of the development
approval in which the contribution was agreed; and



               B.   Proof of payment (if already made); or



               C.   Proposed method of payment (if not
already made).



            2.   The following documentation must be provided
if the proposed application involves credit for dedication of land:



               A.   Drawing and legal description of the
land;



               B.   The appraised fair market value of the
land at the date a building permit application is sought for the use of land,
prepared by a professional Real Estate Appraiser who is a member of the
member Appraisal Institute (MAL) or who is a member of Senior Residential
Appraisers (SRA); and



               C.   A certified copy of the development
permit in which the land was agreed to be dedicated (if applicable).



            3.   The following documentation must be provided
if the proposed application involves credit for construction:



               A.   The proposed construction documents of
the specific construction project prepared and certified by a duly qualified
and licensed engineer in the State of South Carolina;



               B.   The projected costs for the suggested
improvements, which shall be based on local information for similar
improvements, along with the construction schedule for the completion of said
improvements. Such estimated cost shall include construction or
reconstruction of the project; the cost of labor and materials; the cost of
all lands, property, rights, easements and franchises acquired; financing
charges or interest prior to and during construction and for one year after
completion of construction; costs of plans and specifications; surveys of
estimates of costs and revenues; costs of professional services; and all of
the expenses necessary or incidental to determining the feasibility or
practicability of such construction or reconstruction.



               C.   Within 14 days of receipt of the
proposed application for credit agreement, the City Finance Director, or its
designee, shall determine if the application is complete. If it is determined
that the proposed agreement is not complete, the City Finance Director shall
send written notification to the applicant outlining the deficiencies. The
city shall take no further action on the proposed application for credit
agreement until all such deficiencies have been corrected or otherwise
settled.



               D.   Once the City Finance Director
determines the proposed application for credit agreement is complete, it
shall be reviewed within 30 days by a committee of designated staff composed
of the City Administrator, City Finance Director, City Planning Director, and
the Department Head for the impact fee category under consideration (either
the Recreation Director for the recreation impact fee, the Fire Chief for the
fire protection impact fee, the Director of Public Works). Together, this
group will be known as the Development Impact Fee Credit Review Committee.



               E.   If the application for credit agreement
is approved by the development impact Fee Credit Review Committee, a credit
agreement shall be prepared and signed by the applicant and the City
Administrator. It shall specifically outline the contribution, payment,
construction or land dedication; the time by which it shall be complete,
dedicated or paid, and any extensions thereof; and the dollar credit the
applicant shall receive for the contribution, payment or construction against
development impact fees. Any credit agreement shall be limited to the impact
fee dollars owed for the project, by the developer, for the impact fee
category under consideration, unless City Council decides to entertain a
credit agreement in excess of fees owed that may be transferred to another
project of the same developer in the same service area (see division (C)(3)
for definition of SERVICE AREA). The agreement may also include provisions
for rescinding the credit and issuing stop work orders if the dedication
and/or work and/or construction are not timely accomplished.



               F.   A fee payer affected by the decision of
the Credit Review Committee regarding credits may appeal such decision
pursuant to division (M)(1) of this section.



   (L)   Penalties. City Council shall have the following remedies,
which may be exercised individually or collectively, for collecting
development impact fees. The failure to pursue any remedy at any time shall
not be deemed as a waiver of city rights to pursue any remedy at such other
time as may be deemed appropriate.



      (1)   Interest and penalties. The city may, at its discretion,
add to the amount of calculated development impact fees due prior to award of
a certificate of occupancy, reasonable interest and penalties for nonpayment
or late payment of required funds. Penalties for unpaid development impact
fees shall be administered consistent with the city's Code of Ordinances,
which declares the violation a penalty subject to a fine not to exceed $500
or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day of violation shall be deemed
a separate offense.



      (2)   Withholding certificate of occupancy. The city may
withhold a certificate of occupancy until full and complete payment has been
made by the developer of development impact fees due for the development.



      (3)   Lien. The city may impose a lien on the developer's
property for failure of the developer to pay required development impact fees
in full.



      (4)   Other. The city may pursue the collection of the
development impact fees, including interest, by way of civil process in the
Court of Common Pleas for Berkeley County.



   (M)   Appeal process. A developer shall have the following rights
for appeal of development impact fees imposed by the city on their
development pursuant only to this section:



      (1)   Administrative appeal.



         (a)   A developer may file an administrative appeal with
the City Administrator regarding the payment of development impact fees,
independent calculation of impact fees, or credits or reimbursements by
filing a written notice of appeal. Said notice shall be filed within 30 days
of the decision sought to be appealed. The filing of an appeal will
immediately halt the building permit application process, unless the
developer posts a bond or submits an irrevocable letter of credit for the
full amount of the development impact fees as calculated by the city to be
due. All notices of appeal shall include a full explanation of the reasons
for the appeal, specifying the grounds therefore, and containing any
documentation that the developer desires to be considered. The appeal shall
contain the name and address of the developer filing the appeal and shall
state their capacity to act as a representative or agent if they are not the
owner of the property to which impact fees or credits pertain.



         (b)   Within 30 days following receipt of the written
notice of appeal, the city administrator will review the appellant's written
report, supporting documentation and departmental staff reports. The 30 day
review period may be extended if additional information is needed from the
appellant in order to render a decision. Upon completion of the
administrative review, the City Administrator will provide a written response
to the appellant constituting a final administrative determination.



         (c)   Any person desiring to appeal the final
administrative determination of the City Administrator regarding payment of
development impact fees or credits shall file a written notice of appeal to
the City Council. Said notice of appeal to City Council shall be filed with
the Clerk of City Council within 15 days following receipt of the final
administrative determination. Receipt shall be construed to have occurred
when the final administrative decision is deposited in the United States mail
postage prepaid to the person whose name and address is identified in the
original notice of appeal.



         (d)   The City Clerk of Council will schedule all impact
fee appeals for the first City Council meeting following ten days from
receipt of the written notice of appeal to the City Council. Postponements of
the City Council appeal date may be granted by the City Administrator if they
are requested in writing at least ten days in advance of the scheduled City
Council meeting date.



         (e)   When an appeal is scheduled for oral presentation
before the City Council, the appellant and city staff shall each be given ten
minutes at the oral argument to present the appeal and to discuss the
submitted written record.



      (2)   Payment under protest. A fee payer may pay development
impact fees under protest. Payment under protest does not preclude the
developer from filing an administrative appeal nor is the fee payer estopped
from receiving a refund of an amount considered to have been collected
illegally. A fee payer, at its option, may also post a bond or submit an
irrevocable letter of credit for the amount of development impact fees due
instead of making a cash payment under protest, pending the outcome of an
appeal.



      (3)   Mediation. City Council shall provide for mediation by a
qualified independent party, upon voluntary agreement by both the developer
and the city, to address a disagreement related to development impact fees
calculated by the city. Neither a request for, nor participation in,
mediation shall preclude a fee payer from pursuing other developer rights or
remedies otherwise available by law.



   (N)   Refunds.



      (1)   General provisions.



         (a)   Funds not obligated for expenditure within three
years of the date that they are scheduled to be expended in the City of Goose
Creek capital improvements plan shall be refunded to the record owner of
property for which the impact fees were paid, with actual interest earned, on
a first-in, first-out basis. For the purpose of determining whether fees have
been spent or encumbered, the first money placed in a trust fund account
shall be deemed to the first money taken out of that account when withdrawals
have been made.



      (2)   Refund process.



         (a)   The owner of property eligible for a refund of one
or more development impact fee payments shall submit to the City Finance
Director a notarized sworn statement that the person is the current owner of
the property for which a refund is due, a certified copy of the latest
recorded deed, and a copy of the most recent ad valorem tax bill for the
property.



         (b)   When a right to a refund exists, the city shall
send a refund to the current owner of record within 90 days after it is
determined by City Council that a refund is due.



         (c)   All refunds shall include the pro rata portion of
the interest earned while on deposit in the specific development impact fee
trust account.



         (d)   A record owner of property for which one or more
development impact fee refunds are due has standing to sue for such refund
pursuant to Section 6-l-1020(D) of the Act if there has not been a good-faith
effort towards a timely payment of a refund pursuant to division (b) of this
division (N)(2).



   (O)   Review.



      (1)   City Council shall be responsible for preparing and
publishing an annual report describing the amount of development impact fees
collected, appropriated and spent during the preceding fiscal year. This may
be done as part of the city's annual budget.



      (2)   The city's planning commission shall be responsible for
a holistic review and update of the City of Goose Creek development impact
fee study report, City of Goose Creek capital improvements plan in support of
a development impact fee study in goose creek, and the development impact fee
ordinance for the City of Goose Creek on the same review cycle as the City of
Goose Creek comprehensive plan.



   (P)   Termination of development impact fee. Development impact fees
for the City of Goose Creek shall be terminated within 15 years after the
effective date of this section, or when sufficient fees have been collected
to fund all of the projects eligible for development impact fee funding that
are identified in the City of Goose Creek Capital Improvements Plan,
whichever shall first occur, unless:



      (a)   City Council adopts a revised City of Goose Creek
Development impact fee study report or amends the City of Goose Creek capital
improvements plan for a subsequent amount of time; or



      (b)   City Council adopts an updated development impact fee
ordinance for the City of Goose Creek pursuant to the substantive and
procedural requirements set forth in the South Carolina Development Impact
Fee Act, as amended.



   (P)   Liberal construction. The provisions of this section shall be
liberally construed to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of
further promoting and protecting public health, safety, welfare and
convenience.



(1985 Code, Art. V, § 508)  (Ord. 88-12, passed 12-13-1988; Ord. 95-002,
passed 3-14-1995; Ord. 118-014, passed 7-10-2018)



§ 151.088  LAND SET-ASIDE/DEDICATED REQUIREMENTS FOR PARKS AND RECREATIONAL
AREAS; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   The City of Goose Creek’s land set-aside/dedicated requirements for
parks and recreational areas policy is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full.



(Ord. 88-01, passed 1-12-1988)




ZONING DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES




§ 151.105  ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND MAPS.



 

Updated Zoning, Flood Plain and City Boundary Maps can be found in the office
of the Planning Director.



 



   (A)   To accomplish the purposes set forth in § 151.027, the City
of Goose Creek is hereby divided into the zoning districts described below
and illustrated on the zoning map approved by City Council and on file with
the Planning Director and City Clerk. Regardless of the existence of copies
of the zoning map, the Official Zoning map, signed by the Mayor, and located
in the city offices, shall be the final authority on the zoning status of
buildings and land and water areas of Goose Creek.



   (B)   For the purposes of these regulations, the City of Goose Creek
is hereby classified according to these ten districts:



      (1)   R-1 Low-Density Residential District;



      (2)   R-2 Medium-Density Residential District;



      (3)   R-3 High-Density Residential District;



      (4)   RC Restricted Commercial District;



      (5)   NC Neighborhood Commercial District;



      (6)   GC General Commercial;



      (7)   L-1 Light Industrial District;



      (8)   CO Conservation and Open Space;



      (9)   PD Planned Development; and



      (10)   PD/MH Planned Development-Mobile Home.



(1985 Code, Art. VI, § 601)



§ 151.106  INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   In dispelling uncertainties with respect to zoning district boundaries
on the map, the following shall apply:



   (A)   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately
following the center lines of street or highway rights-of-way lines, the
center lines shall be construed to be the boundaries;



   (B)   Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately
following incorporated area lines, the city limit lines shall be constructed
to be the boundaries;



   (C)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they appear to
follow property lines, the lot lines shall be construed as the district
boundaries;



   (D)   Where district boundaries are so indicated as to appear
parallel to center lines or right-of-way lines of streets or highways, the
parallel lines shall be construed as the district boundaries, at the distance
as is interpreted from the zoning map scale;



   (E)   Where a district boundary follows a railroad line, the
boundary shall be construed as the line midway between the main tracks of the
railroad line;



   (F)   Where a district boundary follows a stream or water body, the
boundary shall be construed as the limits of the city's jurisdiction, unless
otherwise indicated; and



   (G)   Where a district boundary line divides a parcel of land, the
regulations for the unrestricted portion of the parcel shall extend not more
than 30 feet into the more restricted portion, provided the parcel of land
has street frontage in the unrestricted district.



(1985 Code, Art. VI, § 602)



§ 151.107  CHANGE OF CITY BOUNDARIES.



   In the event of changes in the city limits removing lands from the
city, the district boundaries shall be construed as moving with the city
limits. In the event of annexation of new lands, the areas shall be
considered to be in the CO District until otherwise re-zoned in accordance
with these regulations, or when otherwise approved by City Council prior to a
referendum of annexation. All changes shall be recorded on the zoning map
approved by City Council and on file with the Planning Director and City
Clerk. Non-conforming uses in newly annexed areas shall cease according to
the schedule in § 151.152(G).



(1985 Code, Art. VI, § 603)



§ 151.108  ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Accessory buildings.  Any use may be established as an
accessory use to any permitted principal use in any zoning district provided
that the accessory use:



      (1)   Is customarily incident to, maintained and operated as
part of the principal use;



      (2)   Does not impair the use or enjoyment of nearby property
(nor create hazard) in greater degree than the associated principal use;



      (3)   Does not create levels of noise, odor, lighting,
vibration, dust, pollution or traffic hindrance in greater degree than the
associated principal use;



      (4)   Complies with the size, location and appearance
standards below; and



      (5)   Is not used in residential districts for commercial
purposes, specifically as rental or lease property.



   (B)   Size of accessory buildings.  Accessory structures shall meet
the following criteria to accommodate the variety of lot sizes, building
design and community aesthetics.



      (1)   Accessory buildings on residential lots whose area is
less than 8,000 square feet shall not occupy more than 676 square feet or be
larger than 50% of the floor area of the principal building on the zoning
lot, whichever is less.



      (2)   Accessory buildings on residential lots whose area is
greater than 8,000 square feet but less than 10,000 square feet shall not
occupy more than 832 square feet or be larger than 50% of the floor area of
the principal building on the zoning lot, whichever is less.



      (3)   Accessory buildings on residential lots whose area is
greater than 10,000 square feet shall not occupy more than 1,000 square feet
or be larger than 50% of the floor area of the principal building on the
zoning lot, whichever is less.



      (4)   Accessory buildings which serve mobile or modular homes
shall not exceed 50% of the floor area of the principal structure.



      (5)   Carports which are attached to, or share a roof with, an
accessory building will not be counted in the square footage of the accessory
building, but must remain open on three sides and extend no further than 20
feet from the side of the building. All carports are subject to set back
requirements as specified in division (D) below.



   (C)   Accessory building height.  Accessory buildings which serve
single story principal structures are limited to 15 feet in height, and those
accessory buildings serving structures which are two stories or greater are
limited to 27 feet in height.



   (D)   Location of accessory buildings.  Shall not be closer than
five feet to a side or rear lot line, except in the case of a corner lot, the
more restrictive of these two rules applies:



      (1)   Accessory building shall not be closer to the side
street than the side building line of the principal building; or



      (2)   Accessory building shall not be closer to the side
street than the front building line of the adjacent principal building which
faces the side street.



   (E)   Accessory building appearance.



      (1)   Shall be constructed of similar materials as the
principal building, or finished in a similar fashion, so as to present a
complimentary appearance;



      (2)   Shall not detract from the principal building, nor
disturb the quality of the neighborhood appearance, by displaying unpainted,
bright metal or garish contrasting surfaces; and



      (3)   Pre-manufactured accessory or storage buildings
displaying an unfinished bright metal exterior are prohibited. Shipping
containers or truck bodies are prohibited from any use except in LI
Districts, except as approved for temporary use.



   (F)   Accessory uses.  Are illustrated in Appendix C. Uses not
specifically identified in Appendix C, are subject to the approval of the
Zoning Administrator.



   (G)   Portable storage systems. Portable storage systems are mobile
mini-storage units that are allowed in residential districts using the
specific criteria as enumerated within this chapter. Unit sizes cannot exceed
20 feet in length. The use of a unit is limited to one per structure for a
maximum of 30 days, and a permit is required. The Zoning Administrator may
allow a one-time extension to the approved time limitation not to exceed 30
days and may also order the immediate removal of the portable storage unit. A
unit may not block access or egress to a principal structure and must meet
side and rear setback requirements for the residential district in which it
is located and shall not be placed in a right-of-way, buffer area, or
easement At no time shall the portable storage unit be allowed to store solid
waste, construction debris, demolition debris, recyclable materials, business
inventory, commercial goods, and/or goods for property other than that of the
property of where the unit is located or for any other illegal use/purpose or
storage of hazardous material. The business that provides the portable
storage unit shall have a current business license to operate within the city.



   (H)   Construction dumpsters. Construction dumpsters must be
permitted in conjunction with an approved building permit. The dumpster may
remain on site for 30 days, and, at the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator, the permit, with additional fees, may be extended for another
30-day period. Upon expiration of a permit, the dumpster shall be promptly
removed from the property. Once the dumpster has been removed from the
property for at least an additional 30 days, the Zoning Administrator may
approve a new permit if the project requires it.



   (I)   Non-construction dumpsters. Non-construction dumpsters may
remain on site for 15 days, and, at the discretion of the Zoning
Administrator, the permit, with additional fees, may be extended for another
15-day period. Upon expiration of a permit, the dumpster shall be promptly
removed from the property. Once the dumpster has been removed from the
property for at least an additional 15 days, the Zoning Administrator may
approve a new permit if the project requires it.



(1985 Code, Art. VI, § 604)  (Ord. 91-02, passed 1-8-1991; Ord. 95-02,
passed 3-14-1995; Ord. 95-002, passed 3-14-1995; Ord. 04-008, passed
7-20-2004; Ord. 13-006, passed 9-10-2013; Ord. 17-013, passed 5-9-2017; Am.
Ord. 17-022, passed 11-14-2017)



§ 151.109  SPECIAL USES.



   (A)   Home occupation(s), as defined in § 151.028 may be permitted
in any residential zoning district.



   (B)   Mobile homes established after the enactment of this chapter
shall be located only in PD-MH Zoning Districts, in compliance with §
151.136(M) of these regulations. Pre-existing mobile homes are
non-conforming, and shall comply with § 151.152(G) or made to conform to §
151.135.



   (C)   Excavation of topsoil in any residential district for removal
and sale is prohibited.



   (D)   Condominium ownership may be used on any style of
construction, subject to zoning district regulations, City of Goose Creek
fire and acoustical standards and the Southern Standard Building Code. Prior
to the approval of any condominium project, the legal declaration
establishing the ownership association shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission for review and approval by the City Attorney, according to the
Horizontal Property Act (S.C. Code §§ 27-31-10 et seq.), and provisions of
this chapter. All the declarations shall require the association to provide
architectural control and exterior building maintenance services.



   (E)   Adult uses, including but not limited to those defined in §
151.028, may be allowed in General Commercial Zoning Districts, subject to
the provisions of § 151.109 above, and the following:



      (1)   Proposed location is not within 1,500 feet from the
property line of a church, public or private school, public or private
recreation area, properties zoned to allow residential uses, or properties
with existing residential structures.



      (2)   Proposed location is not within 1,500 feet of another
adult use, or an establishment that sells alcoholic beverages.



      (3)   For the purposes of this section, distances shall be
measured in a straight line between the nearest portion of the proposed adult
use lot and the nearest property line of a church, school, recreation area,
or property zoned to allow residential use, or property with an existing
residential use.



   (F)   Conditional uses, by type of land use, per zoning district,
are illustrated in Appendix B. (See § 151.171(C).) Determination of uses not
specifically identified as permitted or conditional shall be referred to the
Planning Commission for approval or identification of additional controls.



      (1)   Parking of implements, trailers and/or equipment used
for commercial, industrial, farm or construction purposes, in residential
districts, is limited to one implement, trailer or piece of equipment per
residence, and the implement, trailer and/or equipment can weigh no more than
5,000 pounds;



      (2)   Vehicles with a gross weight in excess of 10,000 pounds,
and used for commercial, industrial, farm or construction purposes are
prohibited from parking in residential districts when not actively involved
in commerce. It is not, however, the intent of this section to prohibit the
parking of the vehicle, by the resident, for use on his or her property on a
temporary basis. For the purposes of this section, gross weight shall have
the same meaning as set forth in S.C. Code §§ 56-3-20(19) and 56-5-360, as
amended, and as set out on vehicle registration information issued by the
Division of Motor Vehicles (DMV) of the South Carolina Department of Highways
and Public Transportation; and



      (3)   The total number of implements, trailers, equipment
and/or vehicles as set out in divisions (F)(1) and (2) above, is limited to
one.



   (G)   Communication towers shall be reviewed as conditional uses
subject to the provisions of § 151.171(C), and the following as outlined in
Appendix B, with the exception that the City of Goose Creek shall be exempt
from these regulations.



      (1)   A minimum of 50 feet setback from any residential
district and use, plus two feet setback per one foot of tower height, as
measured from the base of the tower. In the case of a tower or structure on a
building, the additional setback shall be measured from the base of the
building.



      (2)   For the purposes of this section, distances shall be
measured in a straight line between the nearest portion of the proposed
communication tower lot and the nearest property line of a property zoned to
allow residential use, or property with an existing residential use.



      (3)   The proposed structure shall not endanger the health and
safety of residents, employees or travelers, including, but not limited to,
the likelihood of the failure of the structures.



      (4)   The proposed tower is located in an area where it will
not substantially detract from aesthetics and neighborhood character or
impair the use of neighboring properties.



      (5)   The proposed tower is not located within 1,000 feet of
another tower.



      (6)   The proposed user has attempted to co-locate on existing
towers and structures especially on any publicly owned and/or operated
building, facility or land, and is willing to allow other users to co-locate
on the proposed tower in the future, subject to engineering capabilities of
the tower. At the time of permit application, satisfactory evidence shall be
submitted that alternative towers, buildings or other structures are not
available for use within the applicant's tower site search area that are
structurally capable of supporting the intended antenna or meeting the
applicant's necessary height criteria, or provide a location free of
interference from other communication towers.



      (7)   Towers located on existing buildings and structures are
preferable to the construction of new towers.



      (8)   Towers located in commercial areas shall not exceed a
height of 150 feet and towers located in light industrial areas shall not
exceed a height of 300 feet. Towers shall be constructed for future
co-location opportunity subject to engineering capabilities of that design.



      (9)   To the extent possible, all new towers proposed for
upgrades with new equipment shall employ techniques to hide the towers.



      (10)   All towers which have been abandoned as defined in §
151.152(C) shall be removed within 120 days of the date it is taken out of
service.



      (11)   A site plan, elevation drawing(s), photographs and
construction documents with an engineer's stamp and other appropriate
documentation shall be submitted with the construction permit request for
conditional use which provide the following information:



         (a)   Site plan must include the location of tower(s),
guy anchors (if any), transmission building and other accessory uses, parking
access, fences and adjacent land use. Landscaping and required buffering
shall also be shown;



         (b)   Elevation drawings shall clearly show the design
of the tower and materials to be used; and



         (c)   Photographs shall show the proposed site and the
immediate area. Submittal of other detailed information, such as topography
and aerial view, which supports the request are encouraged at the option of
the applicant.



      (12)   Landscaping and fencing are to be provided as follows:



         (a)   An eight-foot high fence shall be provided around
the tower and any associated building;



         (b)   Around the base of the tower, outside of the
fencing, a buffer screen shall be provided subject to the provisions of §
151.085(A)(1) through (3). Landscaping shall be required in accordance with
§ 151.083;



         (c)   Towers and structures shall be illuminated only to
the extent required by applicable federal or state statute or regulation;



         (d)   No signage is permitted except as is required by
applicable state or federal law, rule or regulation. Signs for the purpose of
identification, warning, emergency function or contact may be placed as
required by standard industry practice;



         (e)   Communication towers and structures located in
Commercial and Light Industrial Districts shall be subject to the review and
approval by the Architectural Review Board; and



         (f)   Communication towers and structures shall be earth
tone colors, except as otherwise required by applicable federal or state
statute or regulation.



   (H)   Tattoo facilities as defined in § 151.028, may be allowed in
the General Commercial, Commercial Industrial, Light Industrial, and General
Industrial Zoning Districts, subject to the provisions of § 151.109 above,
and the following:



      (1)   Proposed location is not within 1,000 feet form the
property line of a church, public or private recreation area, properties
zoned to allow residential uses, or properties with existing residential
structures.



      (2)   For the purposes of this section, the distance must be
computed by following the shortest route of ordinary pedestrian or vehicular
travel along the public thoroughfare from the nearest point of the grounds in
use as part of a church, public or private school, public or private
recreation area, properties zoned to allow residential uses, or properties
with existing residential structures.



      (3)   Must meet all the licensure and certification
requirements as outlined by the South Carolina Department of Health and
Environmental Control (DHEC).



(1985 Code, Art. VI, § 605)  (Ord. 90-04, passed 3-13-1990; Ord. 92-03,
passed 5-5-1992; Ord. 97-002, passed 1-14-1997; Ord. 96-012, passed
10-8-1996; Ord. 99-013, passed 8-10-1999; Ord. 11-009, passed 7-12-2011; Ord.
17-019, passed 8-8-2017)




ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS




§ 151.125  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   To encourage low intensity business and professional
office development in a quiet, uncongested environment which will not
adversely affect adjacent residential areas;



      (2)   To provide for low intensity business and professional
office development that is environmentally and aesthetically compatible with
surrounding residential areas;



      (3)   To provide for new development or redevelopment that is
limited to those hours which are typically associated with daylight business
hours or 7:00 am through 7:00 pm;



      (4)   To discourage new development or redevelopment that
would generate excessive traffic to the site;



   (B)   Permitted uses. A building or premise may be used for the
purposes illustrated in Appendix B.



   (C)   Lot, yard, height and coverage. These requirements are
illustrated in Appendix D.



   (D)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses, as defined in § 151.028 are
permitted as illustrated in Appendix C, Appendix B - Table of Land Uses; and
Appendix D - Zoning Districts, as attached.



(1985 Code, Art. VII) (Ord. 17-017, passed 8-8-2017) 



§ 151.126  R-1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   To encourage the formation and continuation of quiet,
stable, low-density living environments for single-family homes lots, of no
less than 10,000 square feet area;



      (2)   To discourage unwarranted and blighting encroachments by
disallowing uses which would interfere with the above;



      (3)   To discourage all uses which would generate traffic on
minor streets other than that required to serve residences on those streets;
and



      (4)   To encourage the discontinuance of non-conforming uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following are approved uses by right.



      (1)   Residential uses.



         (a)   Customary home occupations (as defined in §
151.028).



         (b)   Detached single-family dwelling.



      (2)   Religious uses.  Places of worship, with no structure
or parking within 50 feet of property lines, and located on major or
collector streets.



      (3)   Educational uses.  Public/private school (not trade or
business) on a minimum five acre site, and no structure or parking within 50
feet of property boundaries.



      (4)   Recreational uses.



         (a)   Country club, tennis club, swimming club, or golf
course, provided no lighting impacts on adjacent uses.



         (b)   Private recreation facility of at least two acres,
with no structure located within 30 feet of property boundaries.



         (c)   Public recreation facility, provided no structure
is located within 30 feet of boundaries, and no overnight storage of
vehicles/equipment.



      (5)   Office, governmental, institutional uses.



         (a)   Public utility substation installed in compliance
with buffer and screening requirements, and fenced to control access.



         (b)   Railroad rights-of-way, excluding all facilities
other than those required for track operations.



   (C)   Lot, yard, height and coverage.  These requirements are
illustrated in Appendix D.



   (D)   Accessory uses.  Accessory uses, as defined in § 151.028 ,
are permitted as illustrated in Appendix C.



   (E)   Temporary uses. Temporary uses as defined in § 151.028 and
with prior approval of the Zoning Administrator.



   (F)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be approved uses by a
conditional use permit.



      (1)   Any publicly-owned facility, building or land.



      (2)   Cemetery (permanent barrier/screening wall required).



      (3)   Public library or museum, provided no structure is
located within 30 feet of property boundaries on a minimum two acre site.



      (4)   Watchman’s or caretaker’s dwelling located on the
premises with the permitted use, and occupied by a company employee.



(1985 Code, Art. VII, § 701)  (Ord. 16-009, passed 6-14-2016)



§ 151.127  R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   To encourage the formation and continuation of quiet,
stable, medium-density living environments for single-family homes on lots of
no less than 8,000 square feet area; and



      (2)   Additionally, those purposes listed in § 151.126(A)(2)
through (4).



   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following are approved uses by right.



      (1)   Residential uses.



         (a)   Customary home occupations (as defined in §
151.028).



         (b)   Detached single-family dwelling.



      (2)   Religious uses.  Places of worship, with no structure
or parking within 50 feet of property lines, and located on major or
collector streets.



      (3)   Educational uses.  Public/private school (not trade or
business) on a minimum five acre site, and no structure or parking within 50
feet of property boundaries.



      (4)   Recreational uses.



         (a)   Country club, tennis club, swimming club, or golf
course, provided no lighting impacts on adjacent uses.



         (b)   Private recreation facility of at least two acres,
with no structure located within 30 feet of property boundaries.



         (c)   Public recreation facility, provided no structure
is located within 30 feet of boundaries, and no overnight storage of
vehicles/equipment.



      (5)   Office, governmental, institutional uses.



         (a)   Public utility substation installed in compliance
with buffer and screening requirements, and fenced to control access.



         (b)   Railroad rights-of-way, excluding all facilities
other than those required for track operations.



   (C)   Lot, yard, height and coverage.  These requirements are
illustrated in Appendix D.



   (D)   Accessory uses.  Accessory uses, as defined in § 151.028,
are permitted as illustrated in Appendix B.



   (E)   Temporary uses. Temporary uses as defined in § 151.028 and
with prior approval of the Zoning Administrator.



   (F)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be approved uses by a
conditional use permit.



      (1)   Any publicly-owned facility, building or land.



      (2)   Cemetery (permanent barrier/screening wall required).



      (3)   Public library or museum, provided no structure is
located within 30 feet of property boundaries on a minimum two acre site.



      (4)   Watchman’s or caretaker’s dwelling located on the
premises with the permitted use, and occupied by a company employee.



(1985 Code, Art. VII, § 702)  (Ord. 16-009, passed 6-14-2016)



§ 151.128  R-3 HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   To provide areas suited for a variety of housing types,
including single-family, duplexes, townhouses, rooming/boarding houses,
garden and high-density apartments, on lots in accordance with density
specifications of Appendix D; and



      (2)   Additionally, those purposes listed in § 151.126(A)(2)
through (4).



   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following are approved uses by right.



      (1)   Residential uses.



         (a)   Customary home occupations (as defined in §
151.028).



         (b)   Detached single-family dwelling.



         (c)   Duplex and two-family dwellings.



         (d)   Nursing home or public/private care home, but not
an establishment administering outpatient or medical treatment for fees.



         (e)   Watchman’s or caretaker’s dwelling located on
the premises with the permitted use, and occupied by a company employee.



      (2)   Religious uses.  Places of worship, with no structure
or parking within 50 feet of property lines, and located on major or
collector streets.



      (3)   Educational uses.



         (a)   Licensed nursery or preschool facility.



         (b)   Public library or museum, provided no structure is
located within 30 feet of property boundaries on a minimum two acre site.



         (c)   Public/private school (not trade or business) on a
minimum five acre site, and no structure or parking within 50 feet of
property boundaries.



      (4)   Recreational uses.



         (a)   Country club, tennis club, swimming club, or golf
course, provided no lighting impacts on adjacent uses.



         (b)   Private recreation facility of at least two acres,
with no structure located within 30 feet of property boundaries.



         (c)   Public recreation facility, provided no structure
is located within 30 feet of boundaries, and no overnight storage of
vehicles/equipment.



      (5)   Office, governmental, institutional uses.



         (a)   Public utility substation installed in compliance
with buffer and screening requirements, and fenced to control access.



         (b)   Railroad rights-of-way, excluding all facilities
other than those required for track operations.



   (C)   Lot, yard, height and coverage.  These requirements are
illustrated in Appendix D.



   (D)   Accessory uses.  Accessory uses, as defined in § 151.028,
are permitted as illustrated in Appendix C.



   (E)   Temporary uses.  Temporary uses as defined in § 151.028 and
with prior approval of the Zoning Administrator.



   (F)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be approved uses by
a conditional use permit.



      (1)   Any publicly-owned facility, building or land.



      (2)   Cemetery (permanent barrier/screening wall required).



      (3)   Emergency medical care facility.



      (4)   Hospital.



      (5)   Multi-family dwellings, apartments, including garden
apartments, townhouses, patio homes, and the like.



(1985 Code, Art. VII, § 703)  (Ord. 16-009, passed 6-14-2016)



§ 151.129  RESTRICTED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   To develop and reserve a quiet, uncongested office-type
environment primarily for business and professional firms (reference
commercial);



      (2)   To discourage encroachment by unrestricted commercial or
wholesale businesses, industries or other uses adversely affecting the
specialized district character;



      (3)   To discourage business uses which require outside
display of merchandise, equipment or materials (particularly miscellaneous
goods, used items or items not packaged or generally presenting a neat
uniform appearance), except as allowed in the zoning permit, or approved by
the Zoning Administrator; and



      (4)   To encourage the discontinuance of nonconforming areas.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following are approved uses by right.



      (1)   Residential uses.



         (a)   Customary home occupations (as defined in §
151.028).



         (b)   Detached single-family dwelling.



         (c)   Duplex and two-family dwellings.



         (d)   Watchman’s or caretaker’s dwelling located on
the premises with the permitted use, and occupied by a company employee.



      (2)   Religious uses.  Places of worship located on major
thoroughfares or collector streets, subject to zone minimum setback standards.



      (3)   Educational uses.



         (a)   Licensed nursery or preschool facility.



         (b)   Public library or museum, provided no structure is
located within 30 feet of property boundaries on a minimum two acre site.



         (c)   Public/private school (not trade or business) on a
minimum five acre site, and no structure or parking within 50 feet of
property boundaries.



      (4)   Recreational uses.



         (a)   Country club, tennis club, swimming club, or golf
course, provided no lighting impacts on adjacent uses.



         (b)   Private recreation facility of at least two acres,
with no structure located within 30 feet of property boundaries.



         (c)   Public recreation facility, provided no structure
is located within 30 feet of boundaries, and no overnight storage of
vehicles/equipment.



         (d)   Semi-public club, lodge, union hall or social
center, provided no residential or commercial activity is conducted on the
premises.



      (5)   Office, governmental, institutional uses.



         (a)   Any publicly-owned facility, building or land.



         (b)   Business office for services specific to a
profession such as an attorney, accountant, advertising agency, financial
consultant, real estate, and the like.



         (c)   Governmental, business, professional or general
purpose office, excluding storage, repair, or rental of equipment on premises.



         (d)   Office for professional or administrative support
services such as word processing, printing, computer graphics, and the like.



         (e)   Professional healthcare offices such as medical,
dental, chiropractic offices, and the like.



         (f)   Public transportation terminal/passenger facility.



         (g)   Public utility substation installed in compliance
with buffer and screening requirements, and fenced to control access.



         (h)   Railroad rights-of-way, excluding all facilities
other than those required for track operations.



      (6)   Commercial uses.



         (a)   Arts, crafts, or dance studio; art gallery.



         (b)   Emergency medical care facility.



         (c)   Enterprise rendering a personal or business
service, or restricted retail activity (as defined in § 151.028) in a
specific product category.



         (d)   Hospital.



         (e)   Nursing home or extended care facility offering
outpatient or medical services for a fee.



         (f)   Radio/television station or studio (excluding
transmission towers).



         (g)   Specialty shops such as a florist, news stand,
gift shop, or boutique.



         (h)   Veterinary clinic/animal hospital without boarding
facilities.



   (C)   Lot, yard, height and coverage.  These requirements are
illustrated in Appendix D.



   (D)   Accessory uses.  Accessory uses, as defined in § 151.028 ,
are permitted as illustrated in Appendix C.



   (E)   Temporary uses. Temporary uses as defined in § 151.028 and
with prior approval of the Zoning Administrator.



   (F)   Conditional uses.  The following uses may be approved uses by
a conditional use permit.



      (1)   Cemetery (permanent barrier/screening wall required).



      (2)   Combination commercial/residential structure not over
four stories, provided no dwellings on first floor and all dwellings have
street access.



      (3)   Hotel or tourist home.



      (4)   Multi-family dwellings, apartments, including garden
apartments, townhouses, patio homes, and the like.



(1985 Code, Art. VII, § 704)  (Ord. 16-009, passed 6-14-2016)



§ 151.130  NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   To develop and reserve restricted commercial area for
the convenience of nearby residential areas;



      (2)   To avoid commercial strip development by limiting
business floor area to 5,000 square feet or less, and any one NC District to
one acre;



      (3)   To discourage business uses which require outside
display of merchandise, equipment or materials (particularly miscellaneous
goods, used items or items not packaged or generally presenting a neat,
uniform appearance), except as allowed in the zoning permit, or approved by
the Zoning Administrator;



      (4)   To avoid traffic congestion associated with commercial
strip developments; and



      (5)   Additionally, the purposes listed in § 151.129(A)(2)
and (3).



   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following are approved uses by right.



      (1)   Residential uses.



         (a)   Customary home occupations (as defined in §
151.028).



         (b)   Detached single-family dwelling.



         (c)   Duplex and two-family dwellings.



         (d)   Group dwelling (as defined in § 151.028).



         (e)   Nursing home or public/private care home, but not
an establishment administering outpatient or medical treatment for fees.



         (f)   Watchman’s or caretaker’s dwelling located on
the premises with the permitted use, and occupied by a company employee.



      (2)   Religious uses.  Places of worship located on major
thoroughfares or collector streets, subject to zone minimum setback standards.



      (3)   Educational uses.



         (a)   Licensed nursery or preschool facility.



         (b)   Public library or museum, provided no structure is
located within 30 feet of property boundaries on a minimum two acre site.



         (c)   Public/private school (not trade or business) on a
minimum five acre site, and no structure or parking within 50 feet of
property boundaries.



      (4)   Recreational uses.



         (a)   Country club, tennis club, swimming club, or golf
course, provided no lighting impacts on adjacent uses.



         (b)   Private recreation facility of at least two acres,
with no structure located within 30 feet of property boundaries.



         (c)   Public recreation facility, provided no structure
is located within 30 feet of boundaries, and no overnight storage of
vehicles/equipment.



         (d)   Semi-public club, lodge, union hall or social
center, provided no residential or commercial activity is conducted on the
premises.



      (5)   Office, governmental, institutional uses.



         (a)   Any publicly-owned facility, building or land.



         (b)   Arts, crafts, or dance studio; art gallery.



         (c)   Business office for services specific to a
profession such as an attorney, accountant, advertising agency, financial
consultant, real estate, and the like.



         (d)   Governmental, business, professional or general
purpose office, excluding storage, repair, or rental of equipment on premises.



         (e)   Office for professional or administrative support
services such as word processing, printing, computer graphics, and the like.



         (f)   Professional healthcare offices such as medical,
dental, chiropractic offices, and the like.



         (g)   Public transportation terminal/passenger facility.



         (h)   Public utility substation installed in compliance
with buffer and screening requirements, and fenced to control access.



         (i)   Railroad rights-of-way, excluding all facilities
other than those required for track operations.



      (6)   Commercial uses.



         (a)   Automotive service station, with pumps/fuel
storage tanks set back at least 20 feet from boundaries, and no major
repairs/body-fender repairs.



         (b)   Emergency medical care facility.



         (c)   Enterprise rendering a personal or business
service, or restricted retail activity (as defined in § 151.028) in a
specific product category.



         (d)   Funeral home or mortuary (excluding crematorium).



         (e)   Gasoline/fuel sales outlet, with or without
accompanying convenience store, with pumps/fuel storage tanks set back at
least 20 feet from boundaries, and no major repairs or body repairs.



         (f)   Other enterprises (grocery, home furnishings,
hardware, banking, meat/fish/poultry shop) having less than 5,000 square feet
of floor area.



         (g)   Nursing home or extended care facility offering
outpatient or medical services for a fee.



         (h)   Pet shop, with all animals housed within the
principal building, and no noise or odor is perceptible beyond the property
boundaries.



         (i)   Specialty shops such as a florist, news stand,
gift shop, or boutique.



         (j)   Radio/television station or studio (excluding
transmission towers).



         (k)   Veterinary clinic/animal hospital without boarding
facilities.



   (C)   Lot, yard, height and coverage.  These requirements are
illustrated in Appendix D.



   (D)   Accessory uses.  Accessory uses, as defined in § 151.028,
are permitted as illustrated in  Appendix C.



   (E)   Temporary uses. Temporary uses as defined in § 151.028 and
with prior approval of the Zoning Administrator.



   (F)   Conditional uses. As defined in § 151.028, the following uses
may be approved uses by a conditional use permit.



      (1)   Multi-family dwellings, apartments, including garden
apartments, townhouses, patio homes and the like.



      (2)   Motel, hotel, or tourist home.



      (3)   Cemetery (permanent barrier/screening wall required).



      (4)   Combination commercial/residential structure not over
four stories, provided no dwellings on first floor, and all dwellings have
street access.



      (5)   Commercial farm, orchard or nursery, with retail and/or
wholesale sales made on the premises.



(1985 Code, Art. VII, § 705)  (Ord. 16-009, passed 6-14-2016)



§ 151.131  GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   To encourage the formation and continuation of an
economically sound, unified business district;



      (2)   To encourage the location of business, financial,
service and professional enterprises in such close proximity as to be
mutually beneficial, and convenient to their respective markets;



      (3)   Additionally, the purposes listed in §§ 151.129(A)(2)
and (3) and 151.130(A)(3); and



      (4)   To discourage business uses which require outside
display of merchandise, equipment or materials, (particularly miscellaneous
goods, used items, items not packaged or generally presenting a neat, uniform
appearance), except as allowed in the zoning permit, or approved by the
Zoning Administrator.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following are approved uses by right.



      (1)   Residential uses.  Watchman’s or caretaker’s
dwelling located on the premises with the permitted use, and occupied by a
company employee.



      (2)   Educational uses.



         (a)   Licensed nursery or preschool facility.



         (b)   Public library or museum, provided no structure is
located within 30 feet of property boundaries on a minimum two acre site.



         (c)   Public/private school, including business, trade,
or vocational school, on a minimum five acre site, and no structure or
parking within 50 feet of property boundaries.



      (3)   Recreational uses.



         (a)   Country club, tennis club, swimming club, or golf
course, provided no lighting impacts on adjacent uses.



         (b)   Private recreation facility of at least two acres,
with no structure located within 30 feet of property boundaries.



         (c)   Public recreation facility, provided no structure
is located within 30 feet of boundaries, and no overnight storage of
vehicles/equipment.



         (d)   Semi-public club, lodge, union hall or social
center, provided no residential or commercial activity is conducted on the
premises.



      (4)   Office, governmental, institutional uses.



         (a)   Business office for services specific to a
profession such as an attorney, accountant, advertising agency, financial
consultant, real estate, and the like.



         (b)   Governmental, business, professional or general
purpose office, excluding storage, repair, or rental of equipment on premises.



         (c)   Professional healthcare offices such as medical,
dental, chiropractic offices, and the like.



         (d)   Office for professional or administrative support
services such as word processing, printing, computer graphics, and the like.



         (e)   Public transportation terminal/passenger facility.



         (f)   Public utility substation installed in compliance
with buffer and screening requirements, and fenced to control access.



         (g)   Railroad rights-of-way, excluding all facilities
other than those required for track operations.



      (5)   Commercial uses.



         (a)   Any public building, facility or land.



         (b)   Arts, crafts, or dance studio; art gallery.



         (c)   Automotive/equipment repair garage offering major
repairs, body and fender repairs, and painting, where all work is contained
within the interior of the business.



         (d)   Automotive service station with pumps/fuel storage
tanks, set back at least 20 feet from boundaries, and no major
repairs/body-fender repairs.



         (e)   Commercial farm, orchard or nursery, with retail
and/or wholesale sales made on the premises.



         (f)   Emergency medical care facility.



         (g)   Commercial laundry/dry cleaning retail store as
well as plant facility.



         (h)   Enterprise rendering a personal or business
service, or restricted retail activity (as defined in § 151.028) in a
specific product category.



         (i)   Funeral home or mortuary, with or without
crematorium.



         (j)   Gasoline/fuel sales outlet, with or without
accompanying convenience store, with pumps/fuel storage tanks set back at
least 20 feet from boundaries, and no major repairs or body repairs.



         (k)   Hospital.



         (l)   Microbrewery.



         (m)   Mini-warehouses, where storage units are fully
enclosed within a single building structure, and access to all units is from
a common entrance into the building.



         (n)   Hotel or tourist home.



         (o)   Other enterprises (grocery, home furnishings,
hardware, banking, meat/fish/poultry shop) having less than 5,000 square feet
of floor area.



         (p)   Pet shop, with all animals housed within the
principal building, and no noise or odor is perceptible beyond the property
boundaries.



         (q)   Pet or animal boarding kennel - pet shop
requirements apply.



         (r)   Radio/television station or studio (excluding
transmission towers).



         (s)   Research or laboratory facility, whereby there are
no potentially hazardous materials onsite at any time.



         (t)   Specialty shops such as a florist, news stand,
gift shop, or boutique.



         (u)   Unrestricted commercial activities such as
super-markets, department stores, variety stores, drug stores, building
supply, restaurants (sit down/drive-in), clubs and bars allowing on premises
consumption.



         (v)   Veterinary clinic/animal hospital without boarding
facilities.



         (w)   Veterinary clinic/animal hospital with boarding
facilities (all animals must be housed in the principal building - see pet
shop).



   (C)   Lot, yard, height and coverage.  These requirements are
illustrated in Appendix D.



   (D)   Accessory uses.  Accessory uses, as defined in § 151.028 ,
are permitted as illustrated in Appendix C.



   (E)   Temporary uses. Temporary uses as defined in § 151.028 and
with prior approval of the Zoning Administrator.



   (F)   Conditional uses. As defined in § 151.028 , the following
uses may be approved uses by a conditional use permit.



      (1)   Combination commercial/residential structure not over
four stories, provided no dwellings on first floor, and all dwellings have
street access.



      (2)   Group dwelling (as defined in § 151.028).



      (3)   Multi-family dwellings, apartments, including garden
apartments, townhouses, patio homes and the like.



      (4)   Nursing home or public/private care home.



      (5)   Places of worship located on major thoroughfares or
collector streets, subject to zone minimum setback standards.



(1985 Code, Art. VII, § 706)  (Ord. 16-009, passed 6-14-2016)



§ 151.132  COMMERCIAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   To develop and reserve areas for commercial industrial
uses that involve moderate-scale and intensity, require a larger than typical
land area for its use, and/or the aesthetics of the property are not
consistent at a larger scale with other less intense commercial uses; and



      (2)   To reserve undeveloped areas suitable for future uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses. The following are approved uses by right.



      (1)   Residential uses.  Watchman’s or caretaker’s
dwelling located on the premises with the permitted use, and occupied by a
company employee.



      (2)   Educational uses.



         (a)   Licensed nursery or preschool facility.



         (b)   Public library or museum, provided no structure is
located within 30 feet of property boundaries on a minimum two acre site.



         (c)   Public/private school, including business, trade
or vocational school, on a minimum five acre site, and no structure or
parking within 50 feet of property boundaries.



      (3)   Recreational uses.



         (a)   Private recreation facility of at least two acres,
with no structure located within 30 feet of property boundaries.



         (b)   Public recreational facility.



         (c)   Semi-public club, lodge, union hall or social
center, provided no residential or commercial activity is conducted on the
premises.



      (4)   Office, governmental, institutional uses.



         (a)   Any publicly-owned and/or operated building,
facility or land.



         (b)   Office for professional or administrative support
services such as word processing, printing, computer graphics, and the like.



         (c)   Public transportation terminal/passenger facility.



         (d)   Public utility substation installed in compliance
with buffer and screening requirements, and fenced to control access.



         (e)   Railroad rights-of-way, excluding all facilities
other than those required for track operations.



      (5)   Commercial uses.



         (a)   Automotive, boat, mobile home, and recreational
vehicles sales, service, and repair.



         (b)   Automotive/equipment repair garage offering major
repairs, body and fender repairs, and painting.



         (c)   Boarding kennel - pet shop requirements apply.



         (d)   Commercial farm, orchard, or nursery, with retail
and/or wholesale sales.



         (e)   Emergency medical care facility.



         (f)   Enterprise rendering a personal or business
service, or restricted retail store of a specific product.



         (g)   Funeral home or mortuary, with or without
crematorium.



         (h)   Gasoline/fuel sales outlet, with or without
accompanying convenience store, with pumps/fuel storage tanks set back at
least 20 feet from boundaries, and no major repairs or body repairs.



         (i)   Laundry/dry cleaner for processing items delivered
to the premises by retail customers; plant facilities.



         (j)   Microbrewery.



         (k)   Other enterprise (grocery, home furnishings,
hardware, banking) having less than 5,000 square feet of floor area.



         (l)   Pet shop, with all animals housed within the
principal building, and no noise or odor is perceptible beyond the property
boundaries.



         (m)   Printing facility.



         (n)   Research or laboratory facility, whereby there are
no potentially hazardous materials onsite at any time.



         (o)   Unrestricted commercial activities such as grocery
stores, department stores, variety stores, drug stores, building supply,
restaurants, clubs and bars allowing on-premises consumption.



         (p)   Veterinary clinic/animal hospital, with or without
boarding facilities (pet shop requirements apply).



      (6)   Commercial industrial uses.



         (a)   Automotive, truck, boat, RV, and/or equipment
repair garage offering major repairs, body and fender repairs, and painting,
where repairs are made outside the business structure and/or where damaged
vehicles or equipment are stored outside.



         (b)   Automotive towing/storage.



         (c)   Commercial laundry/dry cleaning plant facility.



         (d)   Heavy equipment, machinery, heavy truck sales,
service, and repair.



         (e)   Radio/television station or studio, with
transmission tower on premises.



         (f)   Storage of recreational vehicles.



         (g)   Warehousing, mini-warehouses.



   (B)   Lot, yard, height and coverage. These requirements are
illustrated in Appendix D.



   (C)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses, as defined in § 151.028, are
permitted as illustrated in Appendix C.



   (D)   Temporary uses. Temporary uses as defined in § 151.028 and
with prior approval of the Zoning Administrator.



   (E)   Conditional uses. As defined in § 151.028, the following uses
may be approved uses by a conditional use permit.



      (1)   Cemetery (permanent barrier/screening wall required).



      (2)   Governmental, business, professional, or general purpose
office, excluding storage, repair, or rental of equipment on premises.



      (3)   Places of worship located on major thoroughfares or
collector streets, subject to zone minimum setback standards.



(Ord. 16-009, passed 6-14-2016)



§ 151.133  LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   To develop and reserve areas for light industrial uses
that involve commerce, manufacturing, warehousing, assembly, or processing of
a nonnuisance nature, and that can be conducted wholly within a structure and
do not produce smoke, odors, or excessive noise; and



      (2)   To reserve undeveloped areas suitable for future uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following are approved uses by right.



      (1)   Residential uses.  Watchman’s or caretaker’s
dwelling located on the premises with the permitted use, and occupied by a
company employee.



      (2)   Educational uses.  Public/private school, including
business, trade or vocational school, on a minimum five acre site, and no
structure or parking within 50 feet of property boundaries.



      (3)   Recreational uses.



         (a)   Public recreational facility.



         (b)   Semi-public club, lodge, union hall or social
center, provided no residential or commercial activity is conducted on
premises.



      (4)   Office, governmental, institutional uses.



         (a)   Any publicly-owned and/or operated building,
facility or land.



         (b)   Public transportation terminal or passenger
facility.



         (c)   Public utility substation installed in compliance
with buffer and screening requirements, and fenced to control access.



         (d)   Railroad rights-of-way, excluding all facilities
other than those required for track operations.



      (5)   Commercial uses.



         (a)   Commercial laundry/dry cleaning plant facility.



         (b)   Emergency medical care facility.



         (c)   Gasoline/fuel sales outlet, with or without
accompanying convenience store, with pumps/fuel storage tanks set back at
least 20 feet from boundaries, and no major repairs or body repairs.



         (d)   Mini-warehouses, where interior units are fully
enclosed within a single building structure, and access to all units is from
a common entrance into the building.



         (e)   Research or laboratory facility, whereby there are
no potentially hazardous materials onsite at any time.



      (6)   Commercial industrial uses.



         (a)   Radio/television station or studio, with
transmission tower on the premises.



         (b)   Storage of recreational vehicles.



      (7)   Light industrial uses.



         (a)   Assembly of products or materials.



         (b)   Distribution center.



         (c)   Materials handling.



         (d)   Parcel services.



         (e)   Production or manufacturing facility, whereby
there is no exterior indication of manufacturing.



         (f)   Research facility.



         (g)   Warehousing/distribution.



   (C)   Lot, yard, height and coverage.  These requirements are
illustrated in Appendix D.



   (D)   Accessory uses.  Accessory uses, as defined in § 151.028,
are permitted as illustrated in Appendix C.



   (E)   Temporary uses. Temporary uses as defined in § 151.028 and
with prior approval of the Zoning Administrator.



   (F)   Conditional uses. As defined in § 151.028, the following uses
may be approved uses by a conditional use permit.



      (1)   Cemetery (permanent barrier/screening wall required).



      (2)   Commercial farm, orchard or nursery, with retail and/or
wholesale sales made on the premises.



      (3)   Communication towers.



      (4)   Country club, tennis club, swimming club, or golf
course, provided no lighting impacts adjacent uses.



      (5)   Places of worship located on major thoroughfares or
collector streets, subject to zone minimum setback standards.



      (6)   Radio/television station or studio, with transmission
tower on premises.



(1985 Code, Art. VII, § 707)  (Ord. 16-009, passed 6-14-2016)



§ 151.134  GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   To develop and reserve areas for general industrial uses
that involve industrial and manufacturing uses of a larger and more intensive
scale, and that may generate substantially more impact on the surrounding
properties, such as unenclosed storage, emissions, and noise; and



      (2)   To reserve undeveloped areas suitable for future uses.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following are approved uses by right.



      (1)   Residential uses.  Watchman’s or caretaker's dwelling
located on the premises with the permitted use, and occupied by a company
employee.



      (2)   Office, governmental, institutional uses.



         (a)   Any publicly-owned and/or operated building,
facility or land.



         (b)   Public transportation terminal/passenger facility.



         (c)   Public utility substation installed in compliance
with buffer and screening requirements, and fenced to control access.



         (d)   Railroad rights-of-way, excluding all facilities
other than those required for track operations.



      (3)   Commercial uses.



         (a)   Automotive/equipment repair garage offering major
repairs, body and fender repairs, and painting.



         (b)   Emergency medical care facility.



         (c)   Gasoline/fuel sales outlet, with or without
accompanying convenience store, with pumps/fuel storage tanks set back at
least 20 feet from boundaries, and no major repairs or body repairs.



         (d)   Research or laboratory facility, whereby there are
no potentially hazardous materials onsite at any time.



      (4)   Commercial industrial uses.



         (a)   Automotive, truck, boat, RV, and/or equipment
repair garage offering major repairs, body and fender repairs, and painting,
where repairs are made outside the business structure, and/or where damaged
vehicles or equipment are stored outside.



         (b)   Automotive towing/storage.



         (c)   Commercial laundry/dry cleaning plant facility.



         (d)   Heavy equipment, machinery, heavy truck sales,
service, and repair.



         (e)   Mini-warehouses.



         (f)   Storage of recreational vehicles.



      (5)   Light industrial uses.



         (a)   Assembly of products or materials.



         (b)   Distribution center.



         (c)   Parcel services.



         (d)   Production or manufacturing facility, whereby
there is no exterior indication of manufacturing.



         (e)   Research facility.



         (f)   Materials handling.



         (g)   Warehousing/distribution.



      (6)   General industrial uses.



         (a)   Cold storage plant.



         (b)   Concrete production plant.



         (c)   Freight container storage yard.



         (d)   Fuel storage facility.



         (e)   Light and heavy manufacturing.



         (f)   Natural resource production (excavation of mineral
deposits).



         (g)   Research or storage facilities, with potentially
hazardous or flammable materials.



         (h)   Sanitary landfills.



         (i)   Scrap yards, scrap service.



         (j)   Stockpiling of sand, gravel or other materials.



         (k)   Transportation terminal for heavy trucks,
commercial freight transfer and distribution center.



         (l)   Waste disposal/recycling centers.



   (C)   Lot, yard, height and coverage.  These requirements are
illustrated in Appendix D.



   (D)   Accessory uses. Accessory uses, as defined in § 151.028, are
permitted as illustrated in Appendix C.



   (E)   Temporary uses. Temporary uses as defined in § 151.028 and
with prior approval of the Zoning Administrator.



   (F)   Conditional uses. As defined in § 151.028, the following uses
may be approved uses by a conditional use permit.



      (1)   Communication tower.



      (2)   Radio/television station or studio, with transmission
tower on premises.



(Ord. 16-009, passed 6-14-2016)



§ 151.135  CONSERVATION/OPEN SPACE DISTRICT.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   To preserve specific areas within Goose Creek for
recreation associated uses, and prohibiting undesirable development; and



      (2)   To establish specific areas as separation buffers
between uses, as deemed necessary by the Commission.



   (B)   Permitted uses.  Areas zoned Conservation/Open Space (CO) as
a result of annexation may continue in use as established at the time of
annexation (to include rural residential homes sites, family farms, the
keeping and non-commercial raising of domestic or farm animals/fowl) until
the time as the property use is changed or significantly intensified in use,
proposed for subdivision into additional tracts, lots or parcels or sold for
redevelopment. (See § 151.107.)



   (C)   Lot, yard, height and coverage.  These requirements are
illustrated in Appendix D.



   (D)   Accessory uses.  Accessory uses, as defined in § 151.028,
are permitted as illustrated in Appendix C.



   (E)   Temporary uses. Temporary uses as defined in § 151.028 and
with prior approval of the Zoning Administrator.



   (F)   Conditional uses.  As defined in § 151.028, these uses may
be permitted as illustrated in Appendix B.



(1985 Code, Art. VII, § 708)  (Ord. 86-12, passed 3-11-1986; Ord. 16-009,
passed 6-14-2016)



§ 151.136  PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Purposes.



      (1)   To offer developers the benefits of efficiency, economy
and flexibility by encouraging unified development of relatively large sites.
(See PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS.)



      (2)   To derive for the city the advantages of on-site
compatibility of uses, improved appearance, optimum utilities provision, and
better traffic access and circulation planning.



      (3)   To establish review and approval procedures for Planned
Developments (PD) and Planned Developments-Mobile Home (PD-MH).



   (B)   Permitted usage, area, height and other requirements.  To be
determined by the review procedures set forth below, to prevail over
conflicting requirements elsewhere in this chapter, excepting those relative
to fire protection and hazard prevention.



(1985 Code, Art. VII, § 709)  (Ord. 89-10, passed 9-12-1989; Ord. 16-009,
passed 6-14-2016)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.137  MULTI-FAMILY MINIMUM LOT REQUIREMENTS.



   In addition to pertinent requirements elsewhere in this chapter,
multi-family construction shall allow minimum land area per dwelling unit,
according to the following table:

 


Type

 

Number Of Stories






 

One

 

Two

 

Three

 

Four




Efficiency

 

2,700

 

2,000

 

1,800

 

1,550




One bedroom

 

3,000

 

2,250

 

2,050

 

1,800




Two bedroom

 

3,400

 

2,700

 

2,450

 

2,100




Three bedroom

 

3,950

 

3,250

 

2,950

 

2,500




Four or more bedroom

 

4,500

 

3,650

 

3,300

 

2,800




 



(1985 Code, Art. VII, § 710)




NON-CONFORMING LOTS, STRUCTURES AND USES




§ 151.150  PURPOSE.



   The eventual elimination, in an expeditious manner, of existing uses
and structures not conforming to the provisions of this chapter, is
recognized as being as much a subject of this chapter's intent (see §
151.027) as is the prevention of new uses or structures that would violate
this chapter. The intent is also to effect the elimination of non-conforming
uses or structures in a manner that avoids unreasonable invasion of
established property rights.



(1985 Code, Art. VIII, § 801)



§ 151.151  NON-CONFORMING LOTS.



   (A)   Continuance of non-conforming lots may be allowed if property
boundaries are unchanged and proposed structures are in conformity with the
requirements of the respective zoning district.



   (B)   Discontinuance of non-conforming lots shall be effected if the
lot is combined (with another lot), subdivided or re-subdivided, for any
purpose, to be made conforming. Full compliance as a conforming lot shall
thereafter be required.



(1985 Code, Art. VIII, § 802)



§ 151.152  NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES AND USES.



   Buildings or uses legally existing on the effective date of this
chapter, not conforming to the provisions thereof, are declared
non-conforming and detrimental to the purposes of this chapter.



   (A)   Continuance.  Continuance of existing uses which are
non-conforming may be continued except as specified below, unless the use or
structure was established in violation of the Zoning Ordinance previously in
effect and has not since been brought into conformance.



   (B)   Maintenance.  Repairs, alterations and maintenance of a
non-structural nature may be made to a non-conforming structure as authorized
by the Administrator to maintain its sound condition.



   (C)   Abandonment of use.



      (1)   Definition.  When discontinued temporarily or
permanently, with or without intent to abandon, a use shall be deemed to have
been abandoned.



      (2)   Period of abandonment for a building, trailer, mobile
home or structure.  Shall be 30 days, and any subsequent use to be
established in the structure shall comply with this chapter.



      (3)   Period of abandonment for a use of land.  Shall be 30
days, and any subsequent use of the land shall comply with this chapter.



   (D)   Restoration of damaged structures.



      (1)   A non-conforming building damaged more than 50% of its
fair market value by fire, flood, wind, explosion, earthquake, riot, war or
other calamity, shall not be restored and used as before the occurrence,
except where a building legally established as of the effective date of this
chapter and otherwise conforming to the use and minimum yard requirements of
this chapter may be restored and used as before the occurrence.  In all
cases the restored building must conform to the use and minimum yard
requirements of this chapter, unless a variance was granted authorizing a
deviation from the requirements of this chapter.



      (2)   The percentage of damage shall be determined by dividing
the cost of restoring to the condition immediately prior to the occurrence by
the market value of the structure (excluding land cost) immediately prior to
the occurrence.



      (3)   The building may be restored if damaged less than 50% of
its replacement cost, provided restoration is begun within six months, and
completed within one year of the date of the destructive occurrence.



      (4)   The above prohibition and limitation on restoration may
be modified by the Commission for duplex or multi-family dwellings in a
residential zoning district, or to buildings non-conforming only on the basis
of yard or height requirements.



   (E)   Expansion of non-conforming uses and structures.



      (1)   A non-conforming use shall not be expanded or extended
beyond the floor area or lot area that it occupied on the effective date of
this chapter or the effective date of any amendment to this chapter rendering
the use nonconforming.



      (2)   A non-conforming structure shall not be enlarged,
extended, or expanded in any manner or undergo any structural alteration
unless to make it a conforming structure, except as set forth in division (3)
below.



      (3)   A single-family detached dwelling legally established as
of the effective date of this chapter, which is non-conforming due to the
minimum yard requirements set forth in Appendix D for the district in which
it is located may be expanded or altered provided that the expansion or
alteration itself conforms to the requirements set forth in Appendix D.



   (F)   Construction approved prior to ordinance.  If a building
permit has been issued, and construction proceeded to complete the ground
story, including the second tier of beams, within six months of permit date,
such that the entire building shall be complete within one year of the
effective date of this chapter, the building shall be deemed non-conforming,
with no change from original plans required, except that it shall otherwise
comply with these regulations.



   (G)   Cessation.  Non-Conforming uses of land shall be
discontinued. All non-conforming signs shall comply with the following:



      (1)   No non-conforming sign may be altered so as to extend
its useful life, expanded or relocated, except in compliance with this
chapter. A non-conforming sign shall not be modified or repaired in any way
but may be maintained only by painting or refinishing the sign face or sign
structure so as to keep the appearance of the sign as approved when the
permit was issued; and



      (2)   Any modification or repair to a non-conforming sign
shall render the prior permit void and shall result in the classification of
such a sign as an illegal sign.



         (a)   Hedges and structures not conforming to §
151.082(E) shall be removed or altered to comply within six months;



         (b)   Auto wrecking, salvage and junk yards, auto sales
and storage yards for building materials, contractor's equipment and other
open uses of land shall comply or relocate with 36 months;



         (c)   A non-conforming building in a residential
district may be continued for a period of reasonable length to allow
amortization of the investment, as determined by the Asset Cost Recovery
System regulations of the Internal Revenue Service:



            1.   Construction prior to 1981, amortization
period to be the owner's depreciation schedule, as filed with the IRS, not to
exceed 30 years; and



            2.   Construction in or after 1981, 15 years or
owner's IRS amortization schedule, whichever is greater.



         (d)   All uses non-conforming by reasons of
noncompliance with performance standards of §§ 151.080 through 151.087,
shall comply therewith within six months;



         (e)   In cases of non-conformance due to insufficient
automobile parking, buildings may not be altered, nor may additional
facilities be provided within, until parking accommodations satisfy the
requirements of § 151.086; and



         (f)   Notice shall be sent from the Administrator by
certified mail to all non-conforming uses, stating wherein they do not
conform to this chapter, and stating the date by which they must comply or
cease to exist, the date to be measured from the effective date of this
chapter, and observed whether the notice is sent by the Administrator, or
received by the affected owner.



(1985 Code, Art. VIII, § 803)  (Ord. 05-008, passed 7-12-2005; Ord. 08-009,
passed 4-15-2008)



§ 151.153  DISTRICT CHANGE.



   Should the boundaries of a zoning district be changed so as to transfer
property from one district to another of a different classification, land or
uses may thereby become non-conforming and subject to the above regulations.



(1985 Code, Art. VIII, § 804)




ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS




§ 151.170  ORGANIZATION.



   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall organize itself as follows.



   (A)   Creation.  There is hereby created a Zoning Board of Appeals
(hereinafter referred to as the “ZBA”) to be composed of seven members
appointed by the Mayor and City Council (hereinafter referred to as “the
Council”), City of Goose Creek. The Council will consider for appointment
to the ZBA only those persons who reside in the city, and have demonstrated
their civic interest, general knowledge of the city, independent judgment and
availability to prepare for and attend meetings. It is the intent of the
Council that members shall, by reason of diversity in their individual
occupations, constitute a ZBA which is broadly representative of the
Community.



   (B)   Terms of office.  The members of the ZBA shall be identified
by place numbers one through seven. The four odd-numbered places shall expire
on December 31, of each odd-numbered year, with the three even-numbered
places to expire on December 31, of each even-numbered year. Vacancies shall
be filled for unexpired terms. ZBA members may be appointed to succeed
themselves. All terms shall be for three years, except those initially
appointed to the ZBA whose terms expire on December 31, of the first odd or
even numbered year as stated above. Newly appointed members shall be
installed at the first regularly scheduled ZBA meeting after their
appointment. No member shall be the holder of an elected public office in the
city while serving on the ZBA.



   (C)   Vacancy.  Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired terms.
ZBA members may be appointed to succeed themselves. A vacancy in a term of
office shall occur whenever the Council finds that a member has resigned, not
maintained required qualifications, has not attended properly called meetings
without just cause or has been found guilty of malfeasance or misconduct in
office.



(1985 Code, Art. IX, § 901)  (Ord. 99-006, passed 4-13-1999)



§ 151.171  DUTIES AND POWERS.



   (A)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error
in an order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning
Administrator in the enforcement of this chapter.



   (B)   To hear and decide appeals for variance from the requirements
of this chapter when strict application of the provisions of the ordinance
would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance may be granted in an
individual case of unnecessary hardship if the ZBA makes and explains in
writing the following findings, and that all of the following factors shall
be met. The following are provisions of S.C. Code, 1994 § 6-29-800, as
amended:



      (1)   There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions
pertaining to the particular piece of property;



      (2)   These conditions do not generally apply to other
property in the vicinity;



      (3)   Because of these conditions, the application of the
ordinance to the particular piece of property would effectively prohibit or
unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property;



      (4)   The authorization of a variance shall not be of
substantial detriment to adjacent property or to the public good, and the
character of the district shall not be harmed by the granting of the variance;



      (5)   The ZBA may not grant a variance the effect of which
would be to allow the establishment of a use not otherwise permitted in a
zoning district, to extend physically a non-conforming use of land, or to
change the zoning district boundaries shown on the official zoning map
approved by City Council and on file with the Planning Director and City
Clerk. The fact that property may be utilized more profitably, should a
variance be granted, may not be considered grounds for a variance;



      (6)   In granting a variance, the ZBA may attach to it the
conditions regarding the location, character, or other features of the
proposed building, structure, or use as the ZBA may consider advisable to
protect established property values in the surrounding area, or to promote
the public health, safety or general welfare; and



      (7)   The ZBA shall not grant use variances. A use variance
involves the establishment of a use not otherwise permitted in a zoning
district, or extends physically a non-conforming land use or changes the
zoning district boundaries shown on the official zoning map approved by City
Council and on file with the Planning Director and City Clerk.



   (C)   To permit conditional uses subject to the terms and conditions
for the uses as set forth below. (See CONDITIONAL USE.) Conditional uses may
be allowed after determination by the ZBA of additional controls required,
and after the holding of a public hearing. A listed conditional use (Appendix
B) is eligible for location within the subject zoning district, if all of the
following conditions can be clearly demonstrated to exist:



      (1)   Setbacks, buffers, fences or planting strips protect
adjacent properties from adverse influence of the proposed use, such as
noise, vibration, dust, glare, odor, traffic congestion and similar factors;



      (2)   Vehicular traffic flow would not increase and pedestrian
movement would not be diminished or endangered;



      (3)   Off-street parking and loading, and ingress/egress
points of proposed uses will be adequate as to location, capacity and design;



      (4)   Property values, general character and welfare of nearby
areas will not be deteriorated;



      (5)   The proposed use shall be in accordance with the purpose
and intent of the city's Comprehensive Plan, this chapter and other rules and
regulations;



      (6)   The proposed use shall be compatible with the existing
neighborhood character and be consistent with the character and purpose of
the applicable zoning district;



      (7)   The proposed use shall not adversely affect surrounding
land use, as measured in terms of its physical size, intensity of use, visual
impact and proximity to other structures;



      (8)   The proposed use complies with all applicable
development standards of the city;



      (9)   The proposed use is not detrimental to the public
health, safety or general welfare of the city and its citizens;



      (10)   The proposed use shall not constitute a nuisance or
hazard because of the number of persons who will attend or use the facility,
of the vehicular movement, of noise or fumes or of the type of physical
activity;



      (11)   The proposed use shall not create or aggravate hazards
to vehicular or pedestrian traffic on the roads and sidewalks, both off-site
and on-site;



      (12)   The proposed use shall not create glare from vehicular
and stationary lights and the extent to which the lights will be visible from
the adjacent zoning districts;



      (13)   The proposed use shall not destroy, create a loss or
cause damage to natural, scenic or historic features of significant
importance;



      (14)   In the consideration of a conditional use, the ZBA
shall not grant permission based on the circumstances of the applicant, or on
unnecessary hardship;



      (15)   The ZBA reserves the right to revoke any conditional
use permit that it has issued if it determines that the applicant or operator
has failed to maintain and conduct the use in accordance with the conditions
imposed on the conditional use. The ZBA shall give the applicant written
notice of its intent to revoke the conditional use permit, and, if within ten
calendar days of receipt of the notice the applicant submits a request for a
hearing to the Secretary, the ZBA shall schedule a public hearing and provide
the applicant with the opportunity to be heard prior to deciding whether to
revoke the permit;



      (16)   The provisions for revocation of conditional use
permits shall not be deemed to preclude any other legal remedy with respect
to violation of the provision of this chapter or other rules and regulations
of the city; and



      (17)   In approving a conditional use, the ZBA may impose the
conditions and restrictions as in its opinion will accomplish the intent of
this chapter.



   (D)   In exercising the above powers, the ZBA may, in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or
may modify the order, requirements, decision or determination, and to that
end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken,
and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. The ZBA, in the execution
of the duties for which appointed, may subpoena witnesses and in case of
contempt may certify the fact to the circuit court having jurisdiction.



(1985 Code, Art. IX, § 902)  (Ord. 99-006, passed 4-13-1999; Ord. 99-013,
passed 8-10-1999)



§ 151.172  ANNUAL REPORT.



   The ZBA shall submit an annual report to Council every year,
summarizing its activities and achievements. The report shall include the
identity of ZBA members and their respective meeting attendance record.



(1985 Code, Art. IX, § 903)  (Ord. 96-011, passed 10-8-1996; Ord. 99-006,
passed 4-13-1999)



§ 151.173  ORGANIZATION, MEETINGS AND RULES OF PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Organization.



      (1)   Rules.  The rules of procedures are adopted pursuant to
S.C. Code § 6-29-790.



      (2)   Officers.  The officers of the ZBA shall be a
Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson elected for a one year term before the end
of each calendar year. The ZBA shall appoint a member of the staff of the
City as Secretary (non-voting member) of the ZBA.



      (3)   Chairperson.  The Chairperson shall be a voting member
of the ZBA and shall have the following duties:



         (a)   Call meetings of the ZBA;



         (b)   Preside at meetings and hearings, and swear in
witnesses;



         (c)   Act as spokesperson for the ZBA;



         (d)   Sign documents for the ZBA;



         (e)   Have orders of the ZBA served on parties, and in
case of contempt may certify the fact to the Circuit Court having
jurisdiction; and



         (f)   Perform other duties approved by the ZBA.



      (4)   Vice-Chairperson.  The Vice-Chairperson shall exercise
the duties of the Chairperson in the absence, disability or disqualification
of the Chairperson. In the absence of the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson,
the acting Chairperson shall be elected by the members present.



      (5)   Secretary.  The duties of the Secretary shall be as
follows:



         (a)   Provide and publish notice of appeals and meetings;



         (b)   Assist the Chairperson in preparation of agenda;



         (c)   Keep recordings and minutes of meetings and
hearings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or
failing to vote, indicating that fact;



         (d)   See that property involved in appeals and
variances or special exceptions is properly posted;



         (e)   Keep records of ZBA examinations and other
official actions;



         (f)   Maintain ZBA records as public records;



         (g)   Serve ZBA decisions on parties;



         (h)   Attend to ZBA correspondences; and



         (i)   Perform other duties normally carried out by a
Secretary.



   (B)   Meetings.



      (1)   Time and place.  All scheduled meetings shall be open
to the public, and conducted in accordance with state law. Parties in
interest may appear personally or by agent. ZBA meetings shall be held at
6:30 p.m. at the Marguerite Brown Municipal Center, 519 North Goose Creek
Boulevard, unless otherwise announced. Special meetings may be held on the
call of the Chairperson upon 24 hours notice, at the other times as the ZBA
may determine, posted and delivered to all members and the local news media,
and designate the time and place of its meetings.



      (2)   Agenda.  A written agenda shall be furnished by the
Secretary to each member of the ZBA and to the news media, and shall be
posted at least five days prior to each meeting and at least 24 hours prior
to a special meeting. Items may be removed from the agenda or postponed at a
meeting by a majority vote.



      (3)   Quorum and compensation.  A majority of the members,
four, of the ZBA shall constitute a quorum. A quorum shall be present before
any business is conducted other than rescheduling the meeting. The members
shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the ZBA and shall
serve without compensation, except for reimbursement for authorized expenses
attendant to the performance of their duties.



      (4)   Rules of order.  Robert's Rules of Order shall govern
the conduct of meetings except as otherwise provided by these rules of
procedures.



      (5)   Conflict of interests.  Any member of the ZBA who shall
have a direct or indirect interest in any property which is the subject
matter of or affected by a decision of the ZBA shall be disqualified from
participating in the discussion, decision or proceedings of the ZBA in
connection therewith.



      (6)   Motions.  Motions may be made by any member other than
the presiding official. A motion to approve any matter before the ZBA shall
require a majority vote of the members present. Tie votes shall constitute a
failure of the motion.



   (C)   Appeals procedures.



      (1)   Interpretation request.  A request for interpretation
of regulations, an appeal for variance from development controls or a request
for conditional use approval may be taken by an aggrieved person or by an
officer, department or board and commission of the city affected by a
decision of the Zoning Administrator.



      (2)   Form of appeal.  Appeals from administrative decisions,
applications for variances and applications for conditional uses shall be
filed with the Secretary. The ZBA may require additional information deemed
necessary. The failure to submit adequate information may be grounds for
dismissal. An applicant filed by an agent shall be accompanied by written
designation of the agent signed by the applicant or party in interest. A
non-refundable filing fee as set forth by City Council and registered with
the City Clerk shall accompany an appeal. An incomplete appeal or application
shall be deemed only to give notice of intent to appeal or apply to the ZBA,
and shall not be reviewed or scheduled for hearings until brought to
completion.



      (3)   Time for appeal.  An appeal from an administrative
decision shall be filed within 15 days after actual notice of the decision by
delivery of the approved appeal form to the Secretary of the ZBA, who shall
notify the official appealed form. The ZBA shall maintain for review all
papers constituting the record upon which the action appeal form was taken.



      (4)   Calendar.  Appeals and applications shall be marked
with the date of receipt and placed on the hearing calendar in the order in
which received. Appeals shall be heard in the order on the calendar unless
otherwise set by the ZBA for good cause shown.



      (5)   Withdrawal of appeal.  An appeal or application may be
withdrawn by written notice delivered to the Secretary prior to action by the
ZBA, but no appeal shall be withdrawn after posting of hearing notice and
prior to ZBA action thereon without formal consent of the ZBA. An appeal from
an administrative decision which is withdrawn may not be re-filed after the
15 day time for appeal has expired. Withdrawn applications for variances and
conditional uses may be re-filed after six months, and shall be placed on the
calendar according to the date re-filed.



      (6)   Continuances.  The hearing of an appeal or application
may be continued one time by the ZBA for good causes shown.



      (7)   Public hearing on appeals, conditional uses and proposed
amendment.  Notice of public hearing shall be given in a newspaper of
general circulation not less than 15 days before the hearing is held, with
the required sign conspicuously posted on or adjacent to the property
affected, with at least one sign being visible from each public thoroughfare
that abuts the property, as well as, due notice to the parties in interest.
The notice shall contain a description of each matter to be heard, and
property affected. (See § 151.047(D).)



      (8)   Stay of proceedings.  An appeal shall stay all
proceedings of the action appealed from unless the ZBA concurs by reason of
facts that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such
case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order which may
be granted by the ZBA or by a court of record on application, on notice to
the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown.



      (9)   Exercise of power.  In exercising the powers of the
ZBA, the ZBA may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse
or affirm, wholly, or in part, or may modify the order, requirement, decision
or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer
from whom the appeal is taken, and may issue or direct the issuance of a
permit. The ZBA, in the execution of the duties for which appointed, may
subpoena witnesses, and in case of contempt, may certify the fact to the
circuit court having jurisdiction.



   (D)   Hearing procedure.



      (1)   General.  The ZBA shall fix a reasonable time for the
hearing of an appeal or an approval, give public notice thereof, and decide
the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing, any party may appear in
person or by agent or by attorney. The ZBA may postpone or proceed to dispose
of a matter on the records before it in the absence of an appearance on
behalf of the applicant. Evidence supporting the grant or denial of an appeal
shall be submitted only to the ZBA in a public meeting.



      (2)   Witnesses.  Parties in interest may present testimony
under oath. Witnesses may be compelled to attend by subpoena requested at
least ten days prior to a hearing and signed by the Chairperson. The ZBA may
call its own witnesses when deemed appropriate.



      (3)   Cross-examination.  No party shall have the right to
cross-examine witnesses; however, the opportunity to examine opposing
witnesses may be freely extended when conducted in an orderly manner.
Intimidation of witnesses shall not be allowed.



      (4)   Evidence.  Relevant documents, photographs, maps,
drawings and the like, shall be received in the record without authentication
in the form of legible copies. Relevant testimony which is not cumulative or
hearsay shall be received. The Chairperson shall rule on all evidentiary
matters. Evidence shall be placed in the record with an objection noted.



      (5)   Conduct of hearing.  The normal order of hearing,
subject to modification by the Chairperson, shall be:



         (a)   Statement of matter to be heard (Chairperson or
Secretary);



         (b)   Presentation by applicant (five minute limit);



         (c)   Presentation by official appealed (five minute
limit);



         (d)   Presentation by opponents (five minute limit);



         (e)   Rebuttal by applicant (three minute limit);



         (f)   Unsworn public comment when appropriate;



         (g)   The ZBA may question participants at any point in
the hearing; and



         (h)   Matters in which additional time is granted may be
moved to the end of the agenda.



      (6)   Disqualification.



         (a)   A member shall disqualify himself or herself from
voting whenever he or she has a personal or monetary interest in the property
under appeal, or will be directly affected by the decision of the ZBA.



         (b)   A member shall also disqualify himself or herself
from voting whenever any applicant, or his or her agent, has sought to
influence the member's vote on the appeal, other than in the public hearing.



      (7)   Disposition.  The ZBA may deliberate and make final
disposition of a matter by majority vote of members present at the hearing
and qualified to vote; provided that not less than a quorum are qualified to
vote. The vote may be taken at the same or a subsequent meeting. A member may
not vote on a matter which the member has not heard. Deliberations shall be
conducted and voting shall be in public. In case of a tie vote, the
application is considered denied.



      (8)   Form of order.  An order shall be issued disposing of a
matter by granting or denying relief with the conditions as may be deemed
necessary, or affirming, modifying or reversing an administrative decision. A
matter may be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction or prosecution. Findings of
fact and conclusions of law shall be separately stated in an order.



      (9)   Service or order.  The Secretary shall deliver a copy
of an order to each party in interest by certified mail immediately upon
execution of the order by the Chairperson.



      (10)   Rehearing.  The ZBA may grant a rehearing of an
application which has been dismissed or denied upon written request filed
with the Secretary within 15 days after delivery of the order accompanied by
new evidence, which could not reasonably have been presented at the hearing,
or evidence of a clerical error or mutual mistake of fact affecting the
outcome.



   (E)   Records.



      (1)   Minutes.  The Secretary shall record all minutes and
hearings of the ZBA on tape which shall be preserved until final action is
taken on all matters presented. The Secretary shall prepare minutes of each
meeting for approval by the ZBA at the next regular meeting. Minutes shall be
maintained as public records.



      (2)   Orders and documents.  The Secretary shall assist in
the preparation and service of all orders of the ZBA in appropriate form.
Copies of all notices, correspondences, documentary evidences, orders and
forms shall be maintained as public records.



   (F)   Amendment.  These rules may be amended at any regular meeting
of the ZBA, by majority vote of the members of the ZBA present, at least
seven days after the written amendment is delivered to all members and
submitted as recommendation to the Council for approval. (See division (C)(7)
above.)



(1985 Code, Art. IX, § 904)  (Ord. 99-006, passed 4-13-1999; Ord. 13-008,
passed 9-10-2013)



§ 151.174  DECISIONS OF THE ZBA.



   (A)   Decisions and voting.



      (1)   Every decision of the ZBA shall be based upon findings
of fact and every finding of fact shall be supported in the record of
proceedings. All final decisions and orders of the ZBA must be in writing and
be permanently filed in the office of the ZBA as public record. All findings
of fact and conclusions of law must be separately stated in final decisions
or orders of the ZBA which must be delivered to parties of interest by
certified mail. The enumerated conditions required to exist on any matter
upon which the ZBA is authorized to pass under these regulations shall be
construed as limitations on power of the ZBA to act.



      (2)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to empower
the ZBA to change the terms of these regulations, or to effect changes in the
zoning districts. The powers of the ZBA shall be so applied that the terms of
these regulations will be strictly enforced.



      (3)   The majority vote of the ZBA members present shall be
necessary to approve any application upon which it is required to pass under
these regulations or to effect any variance in the regulations.



   (B)   Approval of request.



      (1)   In approving any request, the ZBA may designate the
conditions in connection therewith in order to secure substantially the
objectives of the regulation or provision to which the request is granted,
and to provide adequately for the maintenance of the integrity and character
of the zoning district in which the permit is granted.



      (2)   When necessary, the ZBA may require guarantees, in the
form as it deems proper, to ensure that conditions designated in connection
therewith are being or will be complied with. Where any condition under which
a request has been granted appears to have been violated, the ZBA may hold a
public hearing thereon to determine whether or not the permit therefore
granted shall be terminated.



      (3)   Upon approval of an application for the appeal, the
applicant shall apply for occupancy or construction permits within 60 days
after the ZBA's decision, unless a greater time is requested in the
application and is authorized by the ZBA. Any approval may be granted one
emergency extension of 60 days on written request filed with the ZBA before
expiration of the original approval. Failure of the applicant to apply for
occupancy or construction permits within the authorized time period shall
void the right to secure the permits except upon the filing of a new
application or appeal.



   (C)   Denial of request.  No appeal or application that has been
denied shall be further considered by the ZBA unless:



      (1)   The new plans materially change the nature of the
request; or



      (2)   The permitted development of other nearby property in
the same zone has been substantially altered or changed by a ruling of the
ZBA so as to support an allegation of changed condition.



   (D)   Appeal of ZBA action.  Any person or persons, any taxpayer or
any officer, department, commission or board of the city, jointly or
separately, aggrieved by any decision of the ZBA, may present to a court of
record, a petition, duly verified, setting forth that the decision is
illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. The
petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the decision of
the ZBA is mailed.



   (E)   Planning session.  The ZBA may be convened as a committee of
the whole in the same manner as prescribed for calling a special meeting for
the purpose of holding a planning session, provided that no official business
shall be conducted thereat and no quorum shall be required.



(1985 Code, Art. IX, § 905)  (Ord. 99-006, passed 4-13-1999)




ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD




§ 151.190  ORGANIZATION.



   The Architectural Review Board shall organize itself as follows:



   (A)   Creation.  There is hereby created an Architectural Review
Board (hereinafter referred to as the “ARB”) to be composed of seven
members appointed by the Mayor and City Council (hereinafter referred to as
“the Council”), City of Goose Creek. The Council will consider for
appointment to the ARB only those persons who reside in the city and have
demonstrated their civic interest, general knowledge of the city, independent
judgment and availability to prepare for and attend meetings. Members shall
also have a demonstrated interest in, and/or competence and knowledge of,
architecture, landscape architecture and urban design. It is the intent of
City Council that members shall, by reason of diversity in their individual
occupations, constitute an ARB which is broadly representative of the
Community.



   (B)   Terms of office.  The members of the ARB shall be identified
by place numbers one through seven. The four odd-numbered places shall expire
on December 31, of each odd-numbered year, with the three even-numbered to
expire on December 31, of each even-numbered year. Vacancies shall be filled
for unexpired terms. ARB members may be appointed to succeed themselves. All
terms shall be for two years, except those initially appointed to the ARB
whose terms expire on December 31, of the first odd or even numbered year as
stated above. Newly appointed members shall be installed at the first
regularly scheduled ARB meeting after their appointment. No member shall be
the holder of an elected public office in the city while serving on the ARB.



   (C)   Vacancy.  A vacancy in a term of office shall occur whenever
Council finds that a member has resigned, not maintained required
qualifications, has not attended properly called meetings without just cause
or has been found guilty of malfeasance or misconduct in office.



   (D)   Intent and purposes.  The intent and purposes of the ARB are
as follows:



      (1)   To protect and provide for the unique, special and
desired character of the Commercial and Light Industrial Districts and uses
inside the City of Goose Creek, in terms of positive visual and aesthetic
appearances of these districts and uses including their respective roadways;



      (2)   The above intent and purpose can be achieved through
positive site design, superior architectural standards, attractive street
scape improvements, adequate provision of landscape elements and harmonious
combinations of signage along both sides of the roadways and street scales of
the City of Goose Creek;



      (3)   To discourage piecemeal development and create unity
along the Commercial and Light Industrial Districts and uses of the city;



      (4)   To foster civic beauty;



      (5)   To encourage designs which produce a desirable
relationship between individual buildings, the circulation system and
adjacent areas and to permit a flexible, high quality response of development
to a variety of land uses and activities;



      (6)   To assure respect for the character, integrity and
quality of the built and natural environments of the city; and



      (7)   It is not the intent of the city to stifle innovative
architecture.



   (E)   Duties and powers.  All new developments proposed within the
Commercial and Light Industrial Districts and uses of the city shall be
subject to the procedures, standards and guidelines specified in the
following sections, in addition to those standards pertaining to the
particular zoning district in which the development occurs. This will be
accomplished through evaluation of proposed developments by the ARB which
shall review the character, and appearance of the proposed developments in a
positive manner. It is the purpose of the review to determine, in a
cooperative fashion with the developer (hereinafter referred to as the
“applicant”), whether the proposed plan meets the guidelines and other
standards as specified.



      (1)   Criteria for modifications; changes to be reviewed by
the ARB.  If any of the criteria below applies, ARB approval is required:



         (a)   Modifications and/or changes in excess of 10% of
the property value of a parcel of property shall be reviewed by the ARB, but
this shall be 50% for structures that predate the existence of the
Architectural Review Design Ordinance adopted April 20, 1993;



         (b)   Substantial architectural change in the
structure(s);



         (c)   All color changes;



         (d)   All changes in signs; and



         (e)   Change in appearance of structure(s).



      (2)   Annual report.  The ARB shall submit an annual report
to Council each year, summarizing its activities and achievements. The report
shall include the identity of ARB members and their respective meeting
attendance record.



   (F)   Organization and rules of procedures.



      (1)   Rules.  The rules of procedures are adopted pursuant to
S.C. Code § 6-29-790.



      (2)   Officers.  The officers of the ARB shall be a
Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson elected for one-year term before the end
of each calendar year. The ARB shall appoint a member of the staff of the
city as Secretary (non-voting member) of the ARB.



      (3)   Chairperson.  The Chairperson shall be a voting member
of the ARB and shall have the following duties:



         (a)   Call meetings of the ARB;



         (b)   Presides at meetings and hearings, and swear in
witnesses;



         (c)   Act as spokesperson for the ARB;



         (d)   Sign documents for the ARB;



         (e)   Have order of the ARB served on parties, and in
case of contempt, may certify the fact to the circuit court having
jurisdiction; and



         (f)   Perform other duties approved by the ARB.



      (4)   Vice-Chairperson.  The Vice-Chairperson shall exercise
the duties of the Chairperson in the absence, disability or disqualification
of the Chairperson. In the absence of the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson,
the acting Chairperson shall be elected by the members present.



      (5)   Secretary.  The duties of the Secretary shall be as
follows:



         (a)   Provide and publish notice of appeals and meetings;



         (b)   Assist the Chairperson in preparation of agenda;



         (c)   Keep recordings and minutes of meetings and
hearings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or
failing to vote, indicating that fact;



         (d)   Keep records of ARB examinations and other
official actions;



         (e)   Maintain ARB records as public records;



         (f)   Attend to ARB correspondences; and



         (g)   Perform other duties normally carried out by a
Secretary.



      (6)   Meetings.



         (a)   Time and place.  All regularly scheduled meetings
shall be open to the public, and conducted in accordance with state law.
Parties in interest may appear personally or by agent. Regular meetings shall
be held each month on the third Monday, at 6:30 p.m. at the Marguerite Brown
Municipal Center, 519 North Goose Creek Boulevard, unless otherwise
announced. Special meetings may be held on the call of the Chairperson upon
24 hours notice, at other times as the ARB may determine, posted and
delivered to all members and the local news media, and designate the time and
place of its meetings. Deadlines for ARB meetings occur at least 14 days
prior to meeting dates. An annual schedule of regular meetings shall be
adopted, published and posted at City Hall in December of each year.



         (b)   Agenda.  A written agenda shall be furnished by
the Secretary to each member of the ARB and to the news media, and shall be
posted at least five days prior to each regular meeting. Items may be removed
from the agenda or postponed at a meeting by a majority vote.



         (c)   Quorum and compensation.  A majority of the
members, four, of the ARB shall constitute a quorum. A quorum shall be
present before any business is conducted other than rescheduling the meeting.
The members shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the ARB
and shall serve without compensation, except for reimbursement for authorized
expenses attendant to the performance of their duties.



         (d)   Rules of order.  Robert's Rules of Order shall
govern the conduct of meetings except as otherwise provided by these rules of
procedures.



         (e)   Conflict of interests.  Any member of the ARB who
shall have a direct or indirect interest in any property which is the subject
matter of or affected by, a decision of the ARB shall be disqualified from
participating in the discussion, decision or proceedings of the ARB in
connection therewith.



         (f)   Motions.  Motions may be made by any member other
than the presiding official. A motion to approve any matter before the ARB
shall require a majority vote of the members present. Tie votes shall
constitute a failure of the motion.



      (7)   Appeals procedures.



         (a)   Form of appeal.  The ARB shall hold public
hearings regarding appeals from administrative decisions of the city, and
appeals of the Zoning Administrator or other appropriate administrative
official when there is an alleged error in any order, requirement,
determination or decision by the officials pertaining to matters related to
the Architectural Review Design requirements and standards. The appeals shall
be filed on forms approved by the ARB and provided to applicants by the
Secretary. The ARB may require additional information deemed necessary. The
failure to submit adequate information may be grounds for dismissal. An
application filed by agent shall be accompanied by written designation of the
agent signed by the applicant or party in interest. A non-refundable filing
fee as set forth by City Council and registered with the City Clerk shall
accompany an appeal. An incomplete appeal or application shall be deemed only
to give notice of intent to appeal or apply to the ARB, and shall not be
reviewed or scheduled for hearings until brought to completion.



         (b)   Time for appeal.  An appeal must be filed within
15 days after the decision has been rendered, by filing with the ARB a notice
of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The ARB shall maintain for review
all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken.



         (c)   Calendar.  Appeals and applications shall be
marked with the date of receipt and placed on the hearing calendar in the
order in which received. Appeals shall be heard in the order on the calendar
unless otherwise set by the ARB for good cause shown.



         (d)   Withdrawn of appeal.  An appeal or application
may be withdrawn by written notice delivered to the Secretary prior to action
by the ARB, but no appeal shall be withdrawn after posting of hearing notice
and prior to ARB action thereon without formal consent of the ARB. An appeal
from an administrative decision which is withdrawn may not be filed after the
15-day time for appeal has expired. Withdrawn applications may be re-filed
after six months and shall be placed on the calendar according to the date
re-filed.



         (e)   Continuances.  The hearing of an appeal or
application may be continued one time by the ARB for good cause shown.



         (f)   Notice of public hearing on appeals and proposed
amendments.  Notice of public hearing shall be given in the official paper
of the city not less than 15 days before the hearing is held and signs three
feet by four feet shall be conspicuously posted on or adjacent to the
property affected, with at least one sign being visible from each public
thoroughfare that abuts the property, as well as, due notice to the parties
in interest. The notice shall contain a description of each matter to be
heard and identify the applicant and property affected.



         (g)   Stay of proceedings.  An appeal shall stay all
proceedings of the action appealed from unless the ARB concurs by reason of
facts that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such
case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order which may
be granted by the ARB or by a court of record on application, on notice to
the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown.



         (h)   Exercise of power.  In exercising the powers of
the ARB, the ARB may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter,
reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirements,
decision or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the
officer from whom the appeal is taken, and may issue or direct the issuance
of a permit. The ARB, in the execution of the duties for which appointed, may
subpoena witnesses and in case of contempt, may certify the fact to the
circuit court having jurisdiction.



      (8)   Hearing procedure.



         (a)   General.  The ARB shall fix a reasonable time for
the hearing of an appeal, give public notice thereof and decide the same
within a reasonable time. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or
by agent or by attorney. The ARB may postpone or proceed to dispose of a
matter on the records before it in the absence of an appearance on behalf of
an applicant. Evidence supporting the grant or denial of an appeal shall be
submitted only to the ARB in a public meeting.



         (b)   Witnesses.  Parties in interest may present
testimony under oath. Witnesses may be compelled to attend by subpoena
requested at least ten days prior to a hearing and signed by the Chairperson.
The ARB may call its own witnesses when deemed appropriate.



         (c)   Cross-examination.  No party shall have the right
to cross-examine witnesses; however, the opportunity to examine opposing
witnesses may be freely extended when conducted in an orderly manner.
Intimidation of witnesses shall not be allowed.



         (d)   Evidence.  Relevant documents, photographs, maps,
drawings and the like, shall be received in the record without authentication
in the form of legible copies. Relevant testimony which is not cumulative or
hearsay shall be received. The Chairperson shall rule on all evidentiary
matters. Evidence shall be placed in the record with an objection noted. The
normal order of hearing, subject to modification by the Chairperson, shall be:



            1.   Statement of matter to be heard (Chairperson
or Secretary);



            2.   Presentation by applicant (five minute limit);



            3.   Presentation by official appealed (five
minute limit);



            4.   Presentation by opponents (five minutes
limit);



            5.   Rebuttal by applicant (three minute limit);



            6.   Unsworn public comment when appropriate;



            7.   The ARB may question participants at any
point in the hearing; and



            8.   Matters in which additional time is granted
may be moved to the end of the agenda.



         (e)   Disqualification from voting.  A member shall
disqualify himself or herself from voting whenever he or she has a personal
or monetary interest in the property or business under appeal, or will be
directly affected by the decision of the ARB. A member shall also disqualify
himself or herself from voting whenever any applicant, or his or her agent,
has sought to influence the member's vote on the appeal, other than in the
public hearing.



         (f)   Disposition.  The ARB may deliberate and make
final disposition of a matter by majority vote of members present at the
hearing and qualified to vote; provided that not less than a quorum are
qualified to vote. The vote may be taken at the same or a subsequent meeting.
A member may not vote on a matter which the member has not heard.
Deliberations shall be conducted and voting shall be in public. In case of a
tie vote, the application is considered denied.



         (g)   Form or order.  An order shall be issued
disposing of a matter by granting or denying relief with the conditions as
may be deemed necessary; or affirming, modifying or reversing an
administrative decision. A matter may be dismissed for lack of jurisdiction
or prosecution. Findings of fact and conclusions of law shall be separately
stated in an order.



         (h)   Service of order.  The Secretary shall deliver a
copy of an order to each party in interest by certified mail immediately upon
execution of the order by the Chairperson.



         (i)   Rehearing.  The ARB may grant a rehearing of an
application which has been dismissed or denied upon written request filed
with the Secretary within 15 days after delivery of the order accompanied by
new evidence which could not reasonably have been presented at the hearing,
or evidence of a clerical error or mutual mistake of fact affecting the
outcome.



         (j)   Records.



            1.   Minutes.  The Secretary shall record all
minutes and hearings of the ARB on tape which shall be preserved until final
action is taken on all matters presented. The Secretary shall prepare minutes
of each meeting for approval by the ARB at the next regular meeting. Minutes
shall be maintained as public records.



            2.   Orders and documents.  The Secretary shall
assist in the preparation and service of all orders of the ARB in appropriate
form. Copies of all notices, correspondences, documentary evidences, orders
and forms shall be maintained as public records.



         (k)   Amendment.  These rules may be amended at any
regular meeting of the ARB by majority vote of the members of the ARB present
at the public hearing when the matter was considered. Results of the proposed
amendments shall be submitted to City Council for review and approval. (See
division (E)(8)(f) above.)



         (l)   Appeal of Board action.  Any person or persons,
any taxpayer or any officer, department, board or commission of the city,
jointly or separately, aggrieved by any decision of the ARB, may present to a
court of record, a petition, duly verified, setting forth that the decision
is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality.
The petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the
decision of the ARB is mailed.



         (m)   Expiration and extension of ARB approvals. 
Approvals issued by the ARB, regardless of the scope of work, shall expire
one year from the date of approval. Approved projects not yet under
construction, i.e., vertical construction or installation has not commenced,
must resubmit for approval of all site and landscaping plans, elevations,
materials, and colors. An extension of the approval may be granted by the
Zoning Administrator when deemed appropriate.



      (9)   Planning session.  The ARB may be convened as a
committee of the whole in the same manner as prescribed for calling a special
meeting for the purpose of holding a planning session, provided that no
official business shall be conducted thereat and no quorum shall be required.



(1985 Code, Art. X, § 1001)  (Ord. 93-001, passed 4-20-1993; Ord. 97-006,
passed 5-13-1997; Ord. 99-004, passed 4-13-1999; Ord. 13-006, passed
9-10-2013; Ord. 17-002, passed 2-14-2017)  Penalty, see § 151.999



§ 151.191  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Every proposal submitted for ARB consideration shall be in the
form required by the city, to include filing fees when specified. Any
additional information may be required at the discretion of the ARB.



   (B)   All applications shall include schematic drawings and designs
conforming to the application requirements and all other information required
to determine compliance with this chapter. Application permit, and inspection
procedures for specific types of construction are detailed in the respective
Procedures Manual, available from city staff.



(1985 Code, Art. X, § 1002)  (Ord. 93-001, passed 4-20-1993; Ord. 97-006,
passed 5-13-1997)



§ 151.192  EMERGENCY USES.



   City staff may be authorized to issue emergency permits for situations
that require immediate attention in order to prevent further damages. In such
situations, permanent permits shall be reviewed by the ARB, and appropriate
actions shall be taken by the ARB at its next meeting.



(1985 Code, Art. X, § 1003)  (Ord. 93-001, passed 4-20-1993; Ord. 97-006,
passed 5-13-1997)



§ 151.193  PRE-DESIGN CONFERENCE.



   The applicant is recommended to attend a pre-design conference with
city staff prior to submitting an application to the ARB. The applicant shall
submit his or her proposal in accordance with application requirements, when
applicable. (See procedures manual for architectural design standards.) All
service providers and other appropriate agencies may be invited to attend the
pre-design conference. After the pre-design conference has been held, the
proposal will be submitted to the ARB for review.



(1985 Code, Art. X, § 1004)  (Ord. 93-001, passed 4-20-1993; Ord. 97-006,
passed 5-13-1997)



§ 151.194  ARB MEETING.



   ARB meeting and consideration requires submission of schematic designs
and drawings, including all requirements as outlined in application
requirements. Material specifications and typical construction details shall
accompany this submittal. Three sets of blueprints are required. The use of
illustrative site plans and three-dimensional site models are encouraged. All
drawing models are encouraged. Drawings and designs submitted to the ARB
shall meet the requirements of the Architectural Registration Code of Laws of
South Carolina, when applicable. City staff has the authority to remove any
incomplete applications prior to the agenda being mailed to the ARB.



(1985 Code, Art. X, § 1005)  (Ord. 93-001, passed 4-20-1993; Ord. 97-006,
passed 5-13-1997)



§ 151.195  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Schematic design drawings.  The applicant is required to
submit schematic design drawings showing the following information for new
development:



      (1)   The proposed site plan shall include the following:



      (2)   The name(s) of engineers, architects and the like;



      (3)   The boundaries and dimensions of the proposed site or
lot;



      (4)   Locations and dimensions of the principal and any
accessory buildings with distances from property boundaries indicated;



      (5)   Location, number and size of all proposed parking
spaces, including disabled parking, if appropriate;



      (6)   Location of adjacent streets with center lines
indicated, location of proposed curb cuts, driveways and access ways;



      (7)   Location of all setbacks, easements and rights-of-way,
both existing and proposed;



      (8)   Location of areas to be landscaped and buffer screens as
required;



      (9)   Demolition of existing site features if applicable;



      (10)   Location of proposed site features such as driveways,
walls, gates, location and size of mechanical equipment and the like;



      (11)   Boundaries of flood hazard areas;



      (12)   Site plans shall include drainage plan, landscape plan,
site lighting plan, road plan, parking plan, utilities plans, soil report (if
required); and



      (13)   The numbers of proposed site plans shall be adequate
for all applicable reviewing agencies, and shall be determined by city staff.



   (B)   Photographs.  Photographs shall include a general view of the
street showing the building site and adjacent properties (street scales and
buildings).



   (C)   Building plans.  Building plans shall depict the arrangement
of all floor plans, roof plans, building elevations and building sections.
First floor plan shall show the relationship between the first floor and the
site.



   (D)   Building elevations and typical building section.  Building
elevations and typical building section shall show design of all elevations,
vertical dimensions, existing grade, proposed grade, finish floor elevations,
roof slopes, mechanical vents and equipment, location and type of outdoor
lighting fixtures, design and location of signage and proposed material
selections including walls, roofs, chimney flues, gutters and downspouts,
porches and railings.



   (E)   Materials specification outline.  Materials specification
outline shall show samples, brochures, colors and/or photographs of all
exterior materials, finishes and fixtures.



   (F)   Contextual model.  Contextual model shall show at the new
building in existing environment if required by the ARB.



   (G)   Typical construction details.  Typical construction details
shall show footprints, general configurations and typical wall sections.



(1985 Code, Art. X, § 1006)  (Ord. 93-001, passed 4-20-1993; Ord. 97-006,
passed 5-13-1997)



§ 151.196  PURVIEW OF ARB AREAS DEFINED.



   (A)   The ARB shall have purview over all uses other than
residential (single-family, duplex, and two-family dwellings, multi-family
dwellings, apartments including garden apartments, townhouses, patio homes
and the like).  In mixed-use developments where any combination of
residential, commercial, educational, and religious uses occupy a single
structure, such uses and structures shall be subject to ARB review and
approval.



   (B)   The ARB's review of commercial and light industrial road
corridors shall be directed toward the views of the roads and the views from
the roads. The ARB recognizes that the failure to address land-use and
development patterns adjacent to roadways has often resulted in visual blight
and premature functional obsolescence of road facilities. In reviewing design
plans, the ARB shall distinguish between two characteristics of a roadway:



      (1)   The fairly uniform linear boundaries of a road
(extending from building facade to building facade); and



      (2)   Its larger, more irregularly shaped “zone of
influence” (extending into the building's perimeter, rear yard areas and
beyond).



(1985 Code, Art. X, § 1007)  (Ord. 93-001, passed 4-20-1993; Ord. 97-006,
passed 5-13-1997; Ord. 08-010, passed 4-15-2008)



§ 151.197  ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW DESIGN GUIDELINES.



   Goose Creek is a suburban community that is committed to enhancing its
small town character by integrating varied and architecturally interesting
commercial development within its extensive green spaces.



   Design standards and guidelines.  Commercial structures shall
incorporate the following basic elements and characteristics. These
characteristics are general in nature; however, it is not the intent to
exclude other elements that are compatible with the general characteristics
described herein.



   (A)   Site design.



      (1)   Site considerations.  The siting of the building and
its accessory elements shall be carefully planned from both a placement and
an architectural perspective.



         (a)   Site improvements shall integrate the
architectural forms and the open spaces around them so to enhance the quality
of the environment.



         (b)   Where it is reasonably practical, proposed site
improvements (including all structures, features and amenities) shall not
impede scenic views and special vistas.



         (c)   Areas whose physical site conditions make them
unsuitable for development shall be set aside as conservation areas or as
open space.



         (d)   Projects that contain other attributes that
improve the functional and visual enjoyment of the properties of the city are
strongly encouraged.



         (e)   Wooded sites shall be developed with careful
consideration for the site’s natural characteristics.



         (f)   When portions of the woods must be developed,
wooded perimeters or the most desirable natural site features shall be
protected to retain the visual character of the site.



         (g)   Isolated pockets of existing trees shall be
protected, and used to enhance the site’s visual impact.



   (B)   Architectural theme.  The following architectural theme is
preferred:



      (1)   Proposed structures shall contribute to the image of the
city as a unique place of visual character, integrity and quality;



      (2)   New developments shall incorporate the existing natural
setting into their overall design concept;



      (3)   In a schematic design, adjacent structures, site design
and site densities of the adjacent areas should be incorporated in the design
process. If adjacent buildings are of different architectural styles, scales,
height, spacing, bulk, proportion, detail, material and color, site and
building compatibility of the proposed development may be achieved through
materials, plant variations, screens and sight breaks; and



      (4)   The architectural design, color and materials of a
proposed structure shall create variation and interest in the built
environment by using a mix of building materials, colors and architectural
features.



   (C)   Architectural interest.



      (1)   Care shall be given to incorporate a mix of quality
design elements and materials which will provide architectural interest to
the structure and any accessory structures.



      (2)   Building facades shall incorporate facade variations a
minimum of every 30 feet, or for buildings larger than 20,000 square feet, a
minimum of every 50 feet, incorporating such architectural features as:



         (a)   Storefront bays; wall offsets; columns; pilasters;



         (b)   Changes in materials, colors;



         (c)   Changes in roofline;



         (d)   Changes in plane no less than 12 inches in width
and four inches in depth or an equivalent element that subdivides the facade;



         (e)   Recessed windows that are distinguished from the
shaft of the building through the use of arches, pediments, mullions and
other treatments are encouraged; and



         (f)   Enhanced shadow lines around openings by recessing
window frames two inches minimum from face of building.



      (3)   Architectural details that enrich the building’s
character such as brick molding, quoins, corbels, racking, band courses,
soldier bricks, water table, and the like shall be incorporated in the design
of the building facade.



      (4)   Colors shall be harmonious, and only compatible accents
shall be used. Color combinations of paints or stains shall be complimentary
to the proposed structure(s), or provide an improved palette than any
existing structure(s) and the adjacent environment. Color and texture for
architectural finishes shall be selected to provide visual unity. Unpainted,
bright metal, reflective, bright or garish colors, or garish contrasting
surfaces are prohibited.



   (D)   Building design.



      (1)   Scale and proportion. The height, width and general
proportions of a building shall conform with or be better than other
buildings in the area. The scale and massing of a structure shall be a
primary consideration. The scale of the project shall not overwhelm any
adjacent buildings. All features and details shall be in proportion with the
buildings.



      (2)   Building walls shall be subdivided and proportioned
using a variety of architectural features to prevent long monotonous facade
walls.



      (3)   The building design shall incorporate a definite base,
body and cap along the facade.



      (4)   Rear elevations of buildings that are exposed to parking
lots and provide an alternate “front-door” should be aesthetically
similar to the primary elevation. All sides of the building should exhibit
design continuity.



      (5)   Continuous foundation walls are required on all
structure(s), preferably of stone-faced, exposed aggregate concrete, vinyl,
stucco or brick.



      (6)   Building materials suggest the quality of the
environment and promotes a comfortable feeling. Inexpensive building
materials create a temporary feeling to the city’s inhabitants. Building
materials selected should be durable, attractive, low-maintenance and have
natural color. A defined palette of materials will unify the streetscape and
encourage the perception of performance.



      (7)   Building additions shall be designed to reflect existing
buildings in scale, materials, window treatment and color. A change in scale
may require a transitional design element between the addition and the
existing building.



      (8)   The following materials are recommended:



         (a)   Natural materials: wood, brick, terra cotta, stone
(cast or cut);



         (b)   Decorative concrete block (CMU), textured with
integral color;



         (c)   Stucco (cement plaster); decorative;



         (d)   Fiber cement siding; and



         (e)   Exterior insulation and finishing system (EIFS)
when used above storefront height.



      (9)   The following materials are prohibited:



         (a)   Vinyl, metal, or aluminum siding;



         (b)   Exposed concrete masonry units;



         (c)   Reflective materials that cause glare;



         (d)   Materials that artificially simulate natural
materials;



         (e)   Diagonal siding; and



         (f)   Exaggerated swirled stucco.



      (10)   Typically, franchise architecture is generic design for
buildings used in multiple locations without consideration for a specific
site or climate. It is the intent of these guidelines to create buildings
that are sensitive to the community and its environment. While franchise
merchants are not discouraged, prototypical design must be carefully modified
to represent the character of the community.



      (11)   Rooftop mounted mechanical equipment must be screened
from view at all sides in a manner that is architecturally compatible with
the building. Mechanical equipment on the ground shall be screened with a
fence or plant materials or housed in a structure that is in harmony with the
surroundings. Utility meters should be screened from public view to the
greatest extent possible.



      (12)   The use of security bars, roll down grilles, and other
such security features establishes a negative environment and will be
reviewed on a case-by-case basis and alternate options may be required. When
allowed, they must not be visible during opening hours.



   (E)   Site elements.



      (1)   Fences and walls shall be minimized along public streets
and shall be designed to be compatible with the surrounding landscape and
architectural concept. Any fencing located forward of the building front must
be decorative and constructed of vinyl, iron, stone, or masonry products.



      (2)   Service/storage areas shall be oriented away from public
right-of-way, and screened, when practical.



      (3)   Outdoor storage and/or display of equipment and material
is strongly discouraged, except on a temporary basis. This section shall not
apply to businesses that have a majority of their merchandise stored and
displayed in the open environment (examples include, but are not limited to,
automobiles, lumber, truck/car rentals); however, for those businesses where
there is approved outdoor display, the site shall be planned appropriately in
terms of visibility and placement of entrances, parking, and screening.



      (4)   Parked vehicles used as storage for any purpose shall
not be permitted for commercial and light industrial uses.



      (5)   Refuse areas shall not be the visual focal point of a
parking area and shall not be located within the front yard setback or street
frontages of corner lots. All exterior trash receptacles shall be sufficient
in size to accommodate the trash generated. All trash containers shall be
screened from view on all four sides, and shall remain closed except when in
use. The screening materials shall be architecturally compatible with its
corresponding building. Refuse areas shall be landscaped and, if necessary,
screened appropriately. Trash areas shall be located for convenience of trash
collection and away from major streets.



      (6)   Loading areas shall be clear from pedestrian and
vehicular traffic.



(1985 Code, Art. X, § 1008)  (Ord. 93-001, passed 4-20-1993; Ord. 97-006,
passed 5-13-1997; Ord. 15-008, passed 8-11-2015; Ord. 15-016, passed
12-8-2015) Penalty, see § 151.999




LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS




§ 151.210  INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT.



   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, the
provisions shall be held to be minimum requirements necessary to uphold the
purposes stated in § 151.027. This chapter is not intended to interfere
with, abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between
parties; provided, however, where this chapter imposes a greater restriction
upon the use of buildings or premises or upon height of buildings, or
requires more open space than required by other resolutions, ordinances or by
easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall
govern. When the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive
standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of the statute
shall govern.



(1985 Code, Art. XI, § 1101)



§ 151.211  VIOLATION.



   If any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
repaired or converted, or any building, sign, structure or land is used in
violation of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator is authorized and
directed to institute any appropriate action to put an end to the violation.



(1985 Code, Art. XI, § 1102)



§ 151.999  PENALTY.



   It shall be unlawful to construct, reconstruct, alter, change the use
of or occupy any land, building, sign or other structure without first
obtaining the appropriate permit from the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning
Administrator shall not issue any permit unless in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and of any ordinance or resolution adopted
pursuant to it. A violation of any ordinance or resolution adopted pursuant
to the provisions of this act, is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor under
the laws of the state and, upon conviction thereof, an offender shall be
liable to a fine of not more than $500, or imprisoned not exceeding 30 days.
In case any building, sign or structure is or is proposed to be constructed,
reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, sign,
structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of this chapter,
the Zoning Administrator or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who
would be especially damaged by the violation, may, in addition to other
remedies, institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate proceedings to
prevent the unlawful construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion,
maintenance or use, or to correct or abate the violation, or to prevent the
occupancy of the building, structure or land. Each day the unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.



(1985 Code, Art. XI, § 1103)  (Ord. 93-005A, passed 8-30-1993)



APPENDIX A:  TABLE OF PARKING AND LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS



 


Table of Parking Space Requirements






 

Required Spaces

 

Additional Requirements





Residential
 
 
 
 


Single-family dwelling
 
2 spaces
 
 


Duplex/two-family dwelling
 
4 spaces
 
 


Multi-family dwelling
 
2 spaces per unit
 
+12% of total for overflow parking


Mobile home in mobile home park
 
2 spaces
 
+ 1 space per employee


Mobile home park
 
2 spaces per lot/space
 
+ 1 space per employee


Rooming/boarding house
 
1 space per sleeping room
 
+ 1 space per 2 employees


Group dwelling
 
1 space per 2 bedrooms
 
 


Nursing home/sanitarium
 
1 space per 5 patient beds
 
+ 1 space per each 2 employees on largest shift


Religious
 
 
 
 


Churches and places of worship
 
1 space per 5 fixed seats in the main assembly hall
 
Or, 1 space per classroom, whichever is greater


Educational
 
 
 
 


Public/private school, trade or business school, or college
 
greater of: 1 space per 4 seats in assembly hall, or 5 spaces per classroom
 
+ 1 space per employee


Library, museum, art gallery, arts, crafts, or dance studio
 
10 spaces
 
+ 1 space per employee


Nursery or pre-school/day-care
 
1 space per classroom (5 space minimum)
 
+ 1 space per employee


Places of public assembly
 
1 space per 100 sq. ft. in main assembly hall
 
 


Recreational
 
 
 
 


Country club, tennis club, swim club, golf course
 
1 space per 5 members
 
+ 1 space per each 2 employee


Private recreation facility
 
1 space per 5 members
 
+ 1 space per employee


Club, fraternity, sorority, lodge or union hall
 
1 space per active member
 
 


Places of public assembly
 
1 space per 100 square feet in main assembly hall
 
 


**Recreation and community center
 
minimum of 1 space per 200 square feet of floor area
 
 


Office
 
 
 
 


Public or private office building
 
1 space per 300 square feet of floor area (4 spaces minimum)*
 
 


Advertising agency, realty office, insurance office
 
1 space per 300 square feet of floor area (4 spaces minimum)*
 
 


Radio/television station or studio
 
1 space per 500 square feet of floor area (4 spaces minimum)*
 
+1 space per employee


Commercial
 
 
 
 


Bank, savings and loan assoc. or similar lending institutions
 
1 space per 200 square feet of floor area *
 
 


Service or repair establishment, not otherwise mentioned
 
1 space per 250 square feet of floor area excluding storage *
 
 


Retail business not otherwise mentioned
 
1 space per 200 square feet of floor area excluding storage (3 space min.)*
 
+ 1 space per employee


Theatre, night club, and similar places of assembly
 
1 space per each 4 seating accommodations
 
+ 1 space per each 3 employees on largest shift


Automotive repair
 
1 space per employee
 
+ 1 space per each service bay; 10 space minimum***


Motel, hotel, tourist home
 
1 space per sleeping room or suite
 
+ 1 space per each 3 employees


Furniture, appliance, equipment, automotive, boat sales and the like
 
1 space per 300 square feet retail floor area (3 min.)
 
Except that auto sales and service have 10 space min.


Bowling alley or center
 
5 spaces per lane
 
 


Funeral home or mortuary
 
1 space per 50 sq. ft. of floor area minus work & storage areas *
 
 


Planned shopping center
 
5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of leaseable area *
 
 


Sit down restaurant
 
1 space per each 4 seats
 
+ 1 space per employee on the largest shift


Drive-in restaurant
 
1 space per 35 sq. ft. of bldg. area *
 
+ 1 space per employee on largest shift


Take-out restaurant
 
1 space per 100 sq. ft. of bldg. area *
 
+ 1 space per employee on the largest shift


Hospital or extended care medical facility
 
1 space per every 5 patient beds
 
+ 1 space per each 2 regular employees on the largest shift


Common carrier transportation and/or passenger terminal
 
1 space per 100 sq. ft. of waiting room (10 space min.)
 
+ 1 space per employee on the largest shift


Other uses not otherwise specifically mentioned
 
Established by the Zoning Administrator
 
Established by the Zoning Administrator


Manufacturing, processing, bulk warehousing, brick/block/coal yard, lumber
mill
 
1 space for each 2 employees on the largest shift (5 spaces minimum)
 
+ 1 space for each vehicle operating from the premises


Transportation terminal for heavy vehicles, commercial freight distribution
and transfer
 
1 space for each employee (5 spaces minimum)
 
+ 1 space for each vehicle operating from the premises


*** NOTE: Amended as of March 14, 2017. Ordinance Number 17-005


** NOTE: Amended as of February 14, 1995. Ordinance Number 95-01


* NOTE: Amended as of March 14, 1995, Ordinance No. 95-02




 



 


Table of Off-Street Loading Space Requirements




Type of Uses

 

Total Floor Area (Sq. Ft.)

 

Spaces Required





Commercial, retail and personal Service establishments
 

0 - 1,999

 

None




2,000 - 24,999

 

1




For each additional 25,000

 

1 additional



Wholesale, manufacturing, governmental, and institutional (including places
of public assembly), hospital, educational institution, recreational
facility, business service, terminal or similar business uses
 

0 - 24,999

 

None




25,000 - 49,999

 

1




50,000 - 99,999

 

2




100,000 - 249,999

 

3




250,000 - 999,999

 

4




1,000,000 or more

 

5



Funeral home or mortuary
 

0 - 2,499

 

None




2,500 - 3,999

 

1




4,000 - 5,999

 

2




For each additional 10,000

 

1 additional



Offices and office buildings
 

0 - 4,999

 

None




5,000 - 9,999

 

1




10,000 - 20,000

 

1 additional




For each additional 50,000

 

1 additional





 



(1985 Code, Annex A)  (Ord. 95-01, passed 2-14-1995; Ord. 95-02, passed
3-14-1995; Ord. 15-008, passed 8-11-2015; Ord. 17-005, passed 3-14-2017)



APPENDIX B:  TABLE OF LAND USES



 

Table of Land Uses



+ - Permitted*

 

x - Prohibited




? - Conditional**

 

( ) - Notes






 

R-1

 

R-2

 

R-3

 

BPO

 

RC

 

NC

 

GC

 

CI

 

LI

 

GI

 

CO

 

PD

 

PD/MH





Residential***


Accessory uses (§ 151.108 and App. C and D)
 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

(1)

 

(1)



Any publicly-owned facility or building or land, provided no vehicles are
stored overnight except at police/fire stations and substations
 

?

 

?

 

?

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

(1)

 

(1)



Customary home occupations (as defined in § 151.028)
 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Detached single-family dwelling
 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

(1)

 

(1)



Duplex and two-family dwellings
 

x

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Group dwelling (as defined in § 151.028)
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

?

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Multi-family dwellings, apartments including garden apartments, townhouses,
patio homes and the like
 

x

 

x

 

?

 

x

 

?

 

?

 

?

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Nursing home or public/private care home, but not an establishment
administering outpatient or medical treatment for fees
 

x

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

?

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Temporary uses (§ 151.066) Zoning Administrator approval required
 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+



Watchman’s or caretaker’s dwelling located on the premises with the
permitted use, and occupied by a company employee
 

?

 

?

 

+

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

?

 

(1)

 

(1)



Religious***


Accessory uses (§ 151.108 and App. C and D)
 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

(1)

 

(1)



Cemetery (permanent barrier/screening wall required)
 

?

 

?

 

?

 

x

 

?

 

?

 

?

 

?

 

?

 

x

 

?

 

(1)

 

(1)



Places of worship located on major thoroughfares or collector streets,
subject to zone minimum setback standards
 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

?

 

?

 

?

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Places of worship, with no structure or parking within 50 feet of property
lines, and located on major or collector streets
 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

N/A

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Temporary uses (§ 151.066)
Zoning Administrator approval required
 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+



Educational***


Accessory uses (§ 151.108 and App. C and D)
 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

(1)

 

(1)



Business, trade, or vocational school
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Licensed nursery or preschool facility
 

x

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Public library or museum, provided no structure is located within 30 feet of
property boundaries on a minimum 2 acre site
 

?

 

?

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

?

 

(1)

 

(1)



Public/private school (not trade or business) on a minimum 5 acre site, and
no structure or parking within 50 feet of property boundaries
 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Temporary uses (§ 151.066)
Zoning Administrator approval required
 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+



Recreational***   


Accessory uses (§ 151.108 and App. C and D)
 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

(1)

 

(1)



Any publicly-owned building, facility or land, provided no vehicles are
stored overnight except at police/fire stations and substations
 

?

 

?

 

?

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

(1)

 

(1)



Country club, tennis club, swimming club, or golf course, provided no
lighting impacts on adjacent uses
 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

?

 

x

 

x

 

?

 

(1)

 

(1)



Private recreation facility of at least 2 acres, with no structure located
within 30 feet of property boundaries
 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

?

 

(1)

 

(1)



Public recreation facility, provided no structure is located within 30 feet
of boundaries, and no overnight storage of vehicles/equipment
 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Semi-public club, lodge, union hall or social center, provided no residential
or commercial activity is conducted on premises
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Office, Governmental, Institutional***


Accessory uses (§ 151.108 and App. C and D)
 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

(1)

 

(1)



Any publicly-owned building, facility or land, provided no vehicles are
stored overnight except at police/fire station and substation
 

?

 

?

 

?

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

(1)

 

(1)



Business office for services specific to a profession such as an attorney,
accountant, advertising, insurance, real estate, and the like
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Governmental, business, professional, or general purpose office, excluding
storage, repair, or rental of equipment on premises
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

?

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Office for professional or administrative support services such as word
processing, printing, computer graphics, and the like
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Professional healthcare offices such as medical, dental, chiropractic
offices, and the like
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Public transportation terminal/passenger facility
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

x



Public utility substation installed in compliance with buffer and screening
requirements, and fenced to control access
 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

(1)

 

(1)



Railroad rights-of-way, excluding all facilities other than those required
for track operations
 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

(1)

 

(1)



Commercial***


Accessory uses (§ 151.108 and App. C and D)
 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

(1)

 

(1)



Arts, crafts, or dance studio; art gallery
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Automobile, boat, mobile home, and recreational vehicle sales, service, and
repair
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Automotive/equipmen t repair garage offering major repairs, body and fender
repairs and painting
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Combination commercial/residential structure not over 4 stories, provided no
dwellings on first floor, and all dwellings have street access
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

?





 

?

 

?

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Commercial farm, orchard or nursery, with retail and/or wholesale sales made
on the premises
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

?

 

+

 

+

 

?

 

x

 

?

 

(1)

 

(1)



Emergency medical care facility
 

x

 

x

 

?



(4)

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Enterprise rendering a personal or business service, or restricted retail
activity (as defined in § 151.028) in a specific product category
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(5)

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Funeral home or mortuary (excluding crematorium)
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Funeral home or mortuary with crematorium
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Gasoline/fuel sales outlet, with or without sales of accessories, sundries,
notions, and snacks, with pumps set back a minimum of 20 feet from all
property boundaries
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Hospital
 

x

 

x

 

?

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Hotel or tourist home
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

?

 

?

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x



Laundry/dry cleaner for processing items delivered to the premises by retail
customers only
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Microbrewery
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

?

 

x



Mini-warehouses, where storage units are fully enclosed within a single
building structure, and access to all units is from a common entrance into
the building (Ref. § 151.131)
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Nursing home or extended care facility offering outpatient or medical
services for a fee
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

?

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Other enterprises (grocery, home furnishings, hardware, banking,
meat/fish/poultry shop) having less than 5,000 sq. ft. of floor area
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(6)

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Pet shop, with all animals housed within the principal building, and no noise
or odor is perceptible beyond the property boundaries
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Pet or animal boarding kennel - pet shop requirements apply
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Printing shop
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

?

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Radio/television station or studio (excluding transmission towers)
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Research or laboratory facility, whereby there are no potentially hazardous
materials onsite at any time
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Specialty shops such as a florist, news stand, gift shop, boutique, and the
like
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Unrestricted commercial activities such as super-markets, department stores,
variety stores, drug stores, building supply, restaurants (sit
down/drive-in), clubs/bars allowing on premises consumption
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Tattoo facilities (§ 151.028)
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

?

 

x



Temporary uses (§ 151.066)
Zoning Administrator approval required
 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+



Veterinary clinic/animal hospital without boarding facilities
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Veterinary clinic/animal hospital with boarding facilities (all animals must
be housed in the principal building - see pet shop)
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Commercial Industrial***


Accessory uses (§ 151.108 and App. C and D)
 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

(1)

 

(1)



Automotive, truck, boat, RV and/or equipment repair garage offering major
repairs, body and fender repairs, and painting, where work is being performed
outside and/or the number of vehicles exceeding the number of bays are being
stored outside
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Automotive towing/storage
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Commercial laundry/dry cleaning plant
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Heavy equipment, machinery, heavy truck sales, service, and repair
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Radio/television station or studio, with transmission tower on premises
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

?

 

?

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Storage of recreational vehicles
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Warehousing, mini-warehouses, with units having access from exterior of unit
(Ref. § 151.131)
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Light Industrial ***


Accessory uses (§ 151.108 and App. C and D)
 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

(1)

 

(1)



Any publicly-owned and/or operated building, facility or land
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

?

 

?

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

(1)

 

(1)



Assembly of products or materials
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Communication towers, including cell phone, television, and radio
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

?

 

?

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Distribution center
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Light industrial uses (manufacturing, open yard storage of materials and/or
display of equipment, bulk warehousing)
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Materials handling
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Parcel services
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Production or manufacturing facility, whereby there is no exterior indication
of manufacturing
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Radio/television transmission towers
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

?

 

?

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Research or storage facilities, with potentially hazardous or flammable
materials
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Warehousing/distribution
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



General Industrial***


Cold storage plant
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Communication towers
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

?

 

?

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Concrete production plants
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Freight container storage yard
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Fuel storage facilities
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Light and heavy manufacturing
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Natural resource production (excavation of mineral deposits)
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Research or storage facilities, with potentially hazardous or flammable
materials
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Sanitary landfills
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Scrap yards, scrap service
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Stockpiling of sand, gravel, or other materials
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Temporary uses (§ 151.066)
Zoning Administrator approval required
 

+

 

+

 

+

 

x

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+



Transportation terminal for heavy trucks, commercial freight transfer and
distribution center
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

?

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



Waste disposal/recycling centers
 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

+

 

x

 

(1)

 

(1)



**Conditional uses are subject to Zoning Board of Appeals approval (§
151.171).


Notes:


(1) Commission subject to the approval of City Council (§ 151.136).


(2) Restricted nature of the zone.


(3) Street access.


(4) Urgent care medical facilities must be on major thoroughfares.


(5) Sale of beer, wine, or alcoholic liquors prohibited.


(6) On premises consumption of beer, wine, and alcoholic liquors prohibited.




 



(1985 Code, Annex B)  (Ord. 11-009, passed 7-12-2011; Am. Ord. 12-004,
passed 6-12-2012; Ord. 16-009, passed 6-14-2016; Am. Ord. 17-017, passed
7-11-2017; Am. Ord. 17-019, passed 2-28-2018)



APPENDIX C:  TABLE OF ACCESSORY USES



 


Table of Accessory Uses




Accessory Land Use

 

Res.

 

Relig.

 

Educ.

 

Recre.

 

Off.

 

Comm.

 

Li.  Indus.





Children's playhouse and play equipment
 

(2)

 

+

 

+

 

+

 



 



 





Completely enclosed building for storage of supplies, stock, or merchandise
 



 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 





Gasoline or fuel oil storage tank, specific set-back requirements apply
 

(1)

 

(1)

 

(1)

 

+

 

(1)

 

+

 

+



Laundromat in multi-family development for the exclusive use of tenants
 

+

 



 



 



 

+

 

+

 





Manufacturing or repair facility in compliance with section § 151.108
 



 



 



 



 



 

+

 

+



Non-commercial flower, ornamental shrub or vegetable garden, greenhouse, or
slat house not over 8 feet high
 

(2)

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 



 





Non-commercial parking for owners, tenants, guests, members, customers,
clients, and employees. (limited to one commercially licensed vehicle per
family in residential uses)
 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+



Natural or human-made disaster shelter
 

(2)

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+



Parsonage, pastorium, or parish house
 

+

 

+

 



 



 



 



 





Religious education building/classrooms
 



 

+

 

+

 



 



 



 





Private swimming pool, bath house, tennis court, and private recreational
facility for tenants of principal buildings
 

(2)

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+

 

+



Private kennel for no more than 6 dogs and/or cats (4)
 

(2)

 



 



 



 



 



 





Refuse containers (dumpsters) in multi-family, commercial, light industrial,
or recreational appl.
 

(3)

 

(3)

 

(3)

 

(3)

 

(3)

 

(3)

 

(3)



Shed or tool room for grounds maintenance tools and equipment; satellite dish
antenna
 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)

 

(2)



Notes:


(1) Fuel oil storage for on-site heating systems.


(2) Accessory buildings/uses are subject to § 151.108.


(3) Site location, screening, and landscaping shall be approved by the
Administrator (Ref. §§ 151.085 and 151.108)


(4) Reference amended Ord. 94-005, September 13, 1994, Ch. 90, Animals and
Fowl.




 



(1985 Code, Annex C)



APPENDIX D:  ZONING DISTRICTS



 


Zoning Districts
Lot Standards Matrix



Zoning Districts
 

Area

 

Width

 

Depth

 

Front

 

Minimum Yard Side Minimum/ Total (5)

 

Rear (5)

 

Height Ft/ Stories

 

O/O Coverage

 

Accessory Buildings/Uses





R-1 Low-Density Residential
 

10,000

 

70

 

100

 

30

 

10/25

 

25

 

35/2. 5

 

40% 
(1) (2)

 

§ 151.108 and App. C



R-2 Medium-Density Residential
 

8,000

 

60

 

100

 

25

 

8/20

 

20

 

35/2. 5

 

40%
(1) (2)

 

§ 151.108 and App. C



R-3 High-Density Residential
 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 

§ 151.108 and App. C



Single- Family
 

6,500

 

60

 

80

 

20

 

7/15

 

20

 

35/2. 5

 

40%
(1) (2)

 





Duplex
 

8,000

 

65

 

80

 

20

 

7/15

 

20

 

35/2. 5

 

40%
(1) (2)

 





Multi-family
 

§151.137

 

70

 

80

 

30 (3)

 

15/35 (3)

 

25 (3)

 

50/4. 0

 

40%
(1) (2)

 





BPO Business and Professional Office
 

5,000

 

50

 

70

 

20 (3)

 

7/15 (3)

 

20 (3)

 

35/2.5

 

40%
(1) (2)

 

§ 151.108 and App. C



RC Restricted Commercial
 

5,000

 

50

 

70

 

20 (3)

 

7/15 (3)

 

20 (3)

 

40/3. 0

 

40%
(1) (2)

 

§ 151.108 and App. C



NC
Neighborhood Commercial
 

15,000 (4)

 

65

 

70

 

25 (3)

 

8/20 (3)

 

20 (3)

 

35/2. 5

 

40% (1)

 

§ 151.108 and App. C



GC General Commercial
 

10,000

 

70

 

100

 

20 (3)

 

10/20 (3)

 

20 (3)

 

50/4. 0

 

40%
(1) (2)

 

§ 151.108 and App. C



CI Commercial Industrial
 

10,000

 

70

 

100

 

40

 

10/20

 

30

 

40/4. 0

 

40%

 

§ 151.108 and App. C



LI Light Industrial
 

2 Acres

 

200

 

200

 

50 (3)

 

20/40 (3)

 

30 (3)

 

50/4. 0

 

50%

 

§ 151.108 and App. C



GI General Industrial
 

5 acres

 

200

 

200

 

50

 

20/40 (5)



2nd Street 30 (5)

 

40 (5)

 

70/5

 

50%

 

§ 151.108 and App. C



CO Conservation- Open Space
 

Variable

 

Variable

 

Variab le

 

Site dependent

 



 

35/2.5

 

30%

 

§ 151.108 and App. C



PD Planned District
 

3 Acres

 
Requirements for planned districts are site- and situation-dependent, and are
specified by the Zoning Administrator and the Planning and Zoning Commission,
as appropriate, and must be approved by City Council as an amendment to the
zoning ordinance (see the appropriate procedures manual for more information).


PD-MH Planned District Mobile Home
 

5 Acres



Notes:


(1) Percentage of lot coverage by both principal and accessory uses/buildings.


(2) If enclosed parking is provided, coverage may be 50%.


(3) All minimum yard dimensions shall be increased by 2 feet for each story
above the second.


(4) Maximum area in NC zone is 1 acre, maximum unit floor area is 5,000
square feet.


(5) Setback requirement subject to meeting land use buffer requirement, if
applicable.




 



(1985 Code, Annex D)  (Ord. 16-010, passed 7-12-2016; Am. Ord. 17-017,
passed 8-8-2017)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2018 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 152: SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES



Section



   152.01   Definitions



   152.02   Purpose and scope



   152.03   Permitted use; application process and fees



   152.04   Action on permit application



   152.05   Requirements for small wireless facilities in covered areas



   152.06   Effect of permit



   152.07   Removal, relocation or modification of a small wireless
facility in the ROW



   152.08   Attachment to city-owned utility poles in the covered areas



§ 152.01  DEFINITIONS.



   The following definitions shall apply to this chapter as written unless
context indicates or requires a different meaning:



   ANTENNA. Communication equipment that transmits or receives
electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of Wireless
Services.



   APPLICABLE CODES. Uniform building, energy, electrical, plumbing,
mechanical, gas, ind fire codes in S.C. Code Title 6, Chapter 9, local
amendments to those codes authorized by state law, and local codes or
ordinances which impose requirements defined in § 152.05 including objective
design and concealment standards to regulate location, context, material,
color, stealth and concealment standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory
basis.



   APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application to a city and is a
wireless services provider or a wireless infrastructure provider.



   APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant for a permit to:



      (1)   Collocate small wireless facilities; or



      (2)   Construct, install, maintain, operate, replace or modify
a utility pole or wireless support structure.



   CABLE, COMMUNICATIONS, FIBER OR ELECTRIC EASEMENT. An easement, granted
to a cable or video service provider, a communications service provider
(including without limitation a telephone utility), a fiber optics cable
services provider, or an electric services provider created or authorized by
state law to provide such services, that runs parallel to and abuts or within
a rights-of-way and is occupied by existing utility poles or wireless support
structures carrying electric distribution lines, wires, cable, conduit, fiber
optic cable for telecommunications, cable or electric service or supporting
municipal street lights, or security lights. The term cable, communications,
fiber or electric easement excludes easements for service drops or lines
connecting the customer's premises to the cable, communications, fiber or
electrical provider.



   CITY-OWNED POLE.



      (1)   A utility pole owned or operated by the city in covered
areas, including a utility pole that provides lighting or traffic control
functions, or other law enforcement unctions, including light poles, traffic
signals, and structures for signage; and



      (2)   A pole or similar structure owned or operated by the
city in a covered area that supports only wireless facilities. The term does
not include a utility pole owned or operated by and accounted for as an asset
of a municipal electric utility.



   COLLOCATE. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace one
or more wireless facilities on, under, within, or adjacent to an existing
wireless support structure or utility pole located in covered areas within
the jurisdiction of the city.



   COLLOCATION. A corresponding meaning.



   COVERED AREAS. The surface of, and the space above and below, any
public RIGHTS-OF-WAY, ROW, CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY, PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY, and/or
CABLE, COMMUNICATIONS, FIBER OR ELECTRIC EASEMENT as those terms are defined
herein.



   DAY. Calendar day unless the last day for the city or an applicant to
take action under his ordinance ends on a weekend, holiday, or time when all
but city emergency services are closed due to weather or some unforeseen
situation.



   DECORATIVE POLE. A utility pole specially designed and placed for
aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than
specially designed informational or directional signage or a temporary
holiday or special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be
placed according to nondiscriminatory municipal practices.



   DESIGN DISTRICT. An area that is zoned, or otherwise designated by
municipal ordinance, and for which the city maintains and enforces unique
design and aesthetic standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis.



   FEE. A one-time charge.



   HISTORIC DISTRICT. An area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a
historic district under municipal, state or federal law and for which the
city maintains and enforces unique design and aesthetic standards on a
uniform and nondiscriminatory basis.



   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that meets the
following qualifications:



      (1)   Is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15
inches in width, and 12 inches in height; and



      (2)   Any exterior antenna is no longer than 11 inches.



   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization, including
the city.



   RATE. A recurring charge.



   RIGHTS-OF- WAY or ROW or CITY RIGHTS-OF-WAY or PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
That area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, sidewalk,
alley dedicated to, managed or controlled by the city, county or the State of
South Carolina, but not including a Federal interstate highway, in the city.



   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications:



      (1)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more
than six cubic feet in volume, or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of not more than six cubic feet; and



      (2)   All other wireless equipment associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume. The following
types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation
of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications
demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer
switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power
and other services.



   TRANSMISSION POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or
in part to carry electric transmission (as opposed to distribution) lines.



   UNDERGROUND DISTRICT. An area that is designated by ordinances, zoning
regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or
private restrictions, that prohibit installing above ground structures in a
covered area and for which the city maintains and enforces standards on a
uniform and nondiscriminatory basis.



   UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in
part for the purpose of carrying electric distribution lines or cables or
wires for telecommunications, cable or electric service, or for lighting,
traffic control devices, traffic control or directional signage, or a similar
function regardless of ownership, including city-owned poles. Such term shall
not include structures supporting only wireless facilities, nor shall it
include wireless support structures.



   WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
services between user equipment and a communications network, including:



      (1)   Equipment associated with wireless communications;



      (2)   Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic
cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment,
regardless of technological configuration. The term includes small wireless
facilities. The term does not include the structure or improvements on,
under, or within which the equipment is collocated, wireline backhaul
facilities, coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support
structures or utility poles or coaxial or fiber optic cable that otherwise
not immediately adjacent to, or directly associated with, an antenna.



   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any person including a person
authorized to provide telecommunications service in the state, that builds,
installs or maintains utility poles, wireless communication transmission
equipment, wireless facilities or wireless support structures.



   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided using licensed or unlicensed
spectrum, including the use of wi-fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
delivered to the public using wireless facilities.



   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.



   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a
monopole or, other existing or proposed structure designed to support or
capable of supporting wireless facilities. Such term shall not include a
utility pole.



(Ord. 18-014, passed 7-10-2018)



§ 152.02  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide policies and
procedures for the placement of small wireless facilities in covered areas
within the jurisdiction of the city.



   (B)   It is the intent of this chapter to establish uniform
standards including, but not limited to:



      (1)   Prevention of interference with the use of streets,
sidewalks, alleys, parkways, traffic light poles or other light poles, and
other public ways and places;



      (2)   Prevention of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;



      (3)   Prevention of interference with other facilities and
operations of facilities lawfully located in covered areas or public property;



      (4)   Preservation of the character of neighborhoods where
facilities are installed;



      (5)   Preservation of the character of historic structures, or
historic neighborhoods, including but not limited to such structures or
neighborhoods listed on the National Register of Historic Places or locally
designated Historic Districts; and



      (6)   Facilitation of the rapid deployment of small wireless
facilities to provide the citizens with the benefits of advanced wireless
services.



(Ord. 18-014, passed 7-10-2018)



§ 152.03  PERMITTED USE; APPLICATION PROCESS AND FEES.



   (A)   Permitted use and consent. Collocation of a small wireless
facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or a new
or modified utility pole or wireless support structure installed in a covered
area shall be a permitted use, except in supplemental review districts where
such facilities are a conditional use, subject to administrative review,
conditions and other requirements in § 152.05. In accord with Article VIII,
Section 15 of the State Constitution and related municipal code and ordinance
provisions, the city consents to the use of public rights-of-way by permit
holders acting in compliance with this chapter.



   (B)   Permit required. No person shall place a small wireless
facility in a covered area without first filing a small wireless facility
application and obtaining a permit, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.



   (C)   Permit applications. All small wireless facility applications
filed pursuant to this chapter shall be on a form, paper or electronic, as
required by the city. The applicant may designate portions of its application
materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential
information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page
of such materials accordingly, and the city shall endeavor to protect
materials so designated from public disclosure to the fullest extent
permitted by state law.



   (D)   Application requirements. The small wireless facility permit
application shall be made by the applicant, or its duly authorized
representative as noted in a notarized statement from a person with the
applicant with authority to make such an authorization, and shall contain the
billowing:



      (1)   The applicant's name, address, telephone number and
e-mail address;



      (2)   Facility owner's name, address, telephone number and
email address, if different from applicant;



      (3)   Intended facility use: owner operated, or owner leased
capacity;



      (4)   The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and e-mail
addresses of all consultants, if any, acting on behalf of the applicant with
respect to the filing of the application;



      (5)   A general description of the proposed scope of work of
the small wireless facility to include the support structure dimensions and
appearance. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to
the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis
on those matters, including but not limited to sub-surface utilities, likely
to be affected or impacted by the work proposed and shall include one or more
pictures or renderings showing the nature of how the proposed work will look
when complete. Showing an example of the type of installation superimposed on
a picture of the location would be acceptable;



      (6)   Identification of any consultant that is acting on
behalf of the applicant and that is authorized to speak with the city, or a
designee of the city, on the area of consultation for the applicant even if
the applicant cannot be available;



      (7)   Verification from an appropriate representative of the
applicant that the small wireless facility shall comply with all applicable
codes;



      (8)   Verification of payment of the annual municipal consent
or administrative fee for telecommunications companies to use public
rights-of-ways pursuant to S.C. § 58-9-2230;



      (9)   Verification of local business license, if applicable;



      (10)   Evidence the applicant is duly authorized to do
business in South Carolina;



      (11)   Evidence the applicant has received any necessary
certificate of public convenience and necessity or other required authority
from the South Carolina Public Service Commission or the Federal
Communications Commission or evidence that it is not required;



      (12)   A copy of an approved South Carolina Department of
Transportation encroachment permit and all documents required by SCDOT as
part of the encroachment permit application, if the proposed location is
within a SCDOT right-of-way; and



      (13)   A statement that the applicant has a lease, attachment
agreement or other authorization from the owner of the utility pole or
structure proposed for collocation.



      (14)   As to any new wireless support structure, the applicant
shall include information as to why collocation on a utility pole or nearby
wireless support structure within 500 feet of the proposed location is not
feasible.



      (15)   Certification of mailing via regular first-class U.S.
Mail either a complete copy of the application or the at least divisions (1)
to (5) showing contact information, location of proposed site, description of
proposed work, photo or rendering of proposed work to all persons or entities
owning real property within 50 yards of a proposed location. The information
shall be provided with a cover page to include words to the effect: “The
enclosed application is being made to the City of Goose Creek. You may
contact the City of Goose Creek with questions about the application
process.” The certificate of mailing should show the names and addresses of
persons and entities to whom the information is mailed. Notification is not
required to the owner of a public road owned by the state, county or city.



   (E)   Routine maintenance and replacement. An application shall not
be required for:



      (1)   Routine maintenance;



      (2)   The replacement of a small wireless facility with
another small wireless facility that is substantially similar or smaller in
size, weight, and height; or



      (3)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or
replacement of micro wireless facilities that are strung on cables between
existing utility poles and/or wireless support structures in compliance with
the national electrical safety code by a wireless services provider or a
wireless infrastructure provider that is authorized to occupy the public
rights-of-way and that is remitting a consent, franchise, or administrative
Fee pursuant to S.C. Code Ann. § 58-9-2230.



   (F)   Information updates. Any amendment to information contained in
a permit application shall be submitted in writing to the city within ten
business days after the change necessitating the amendment.



   (G)   Consolidated application. An applicant seeking to collocate
multiple small wireless facilities may, at the applicant's discretion, file a
consolidated application and receive a single permit for up to 20 small
wireless facilities. Provided, however, the city's denial of any site or
sites within a single application shall not affect other sites submitted in
the same application. The city shall grant a permit for any and all sites in
a single application that it does not deny subject to the requirements of
this section.



   (H)   Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by law, and except
as to telecommunication companies exempted pursuant to S.C. Code §
58-9-2230, all Applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be
accompanied by a Fee of $100 for each small wireless facility, except that
the fee for small wireless facilities addressed in a consolidated application
shall be $100 each for the first five small wireless facilities and $50 for
each additional small wireless facility up to a maximum of 20 small wireless
facilities. For clarity, any applicant that pays either a franchise, consent
fee, or administrative Fee pursuant to the requirements of S.C. Code §
58-9-2230 shall not be required to pay any building permit fee, zoning permit
fee, encroachment fee, degradation fee, or any other fee assessed on a
telecommunications provider for its occupation of or work within the ROW.



   (I)   Interference with public safety equipment. A small wireless
facility shall be operated and maintained in a manner that does not interfere
with public safety (police, traffic control, fire and emergency services)
equipment.



(Ord. 18-014, passed 7-10-2018)



§ 152.04  ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   Review of small wireless facility applications. The city shall
review the application for a small wireless facility permit for conformity
with applicable requirements of this chapter, and shall issue a permit on
nondiscriminatory terms and conditions subject to the following requirements:



      (1)   Within ten days of receiving an application, the city
must determine and notify the applicant whether the application is complete;
or if an application is incomplete, the city must specifically identify the
missing information.



      (2)   Make its final decision to approve or deny the
application within 60 days of submission of a completed application.



      (3)   Notify the applicant in writing of its final decision,
and if the application is denied, specify the basis for a denial, including
citations to federal, state or local code provisions and/or statutes on which
the denial was based.



      (4)   Notwithstanding an initial denial, the applicant may
cure the deficiencies identified by the city and resubmit the application
within 30 days of the denial, and the city shall approve or deny the revised
application within 30 days of receipt of it. The subsequent review by the
city shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the original denial.



   (B)   Review deadline. If the city fails to act on an application
within the 60 day review period (or within the 30 day review period for an
amended application), the applicant may provide notice that the time period
for acting has lapsed and the application is then deemed approved.



   (C)   Review of eligible facilities requests. Notwithstanding any
other provisions of this chapter, the city shall approve and may not deny
Applications that constitute eligible facilities requests for modification of
an eligible support structure that does not substantially change the physical
dimensions of such structure as provided in 47 CFR 1.40001, within 60 days
according to the procedures established under 47 CFR 1.40001(c).



   (D)   Compensation. Subject to the limitations set forth in §
152.03(H), every permit shall include as a condition the applicant's
agreement to pay such lawful franchise fees, business license taxes,
administrative fees and consent fees as are permitted under applicable South
Carolina and Federal law. The applicant shall also pay all applicable ad
valorem taxes, service fees, sales taxes, or other taxes and fees as may now
or hereafter be lawfully imposed on other businesses within the city.



(Ord. 18-014, passed 7-10-2018)



§ 152.05  REQUIREMENTS FOR SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES IN COVERED AREAS.



   (A)   Administrative review. The city shall perform an
administrative review of permit applications including the location or
installation of new, modified, or replacement utility poles and/or wireless
support structures and the attachment of wireless facilities and equipment on
utility poles or wireless support structures. Review factors, in addition to
location, shall include the size, shape, color, texture, and materials of the
structures and attachments.



      (1)   The city may require a proposed wireless facility be
designed to not be significantly more readily apparent or plainly visible (to
a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities) from covered areas than
existing utility structures, poles and equipment located within 500 linear
feet on the same covered area as the subject utility pole or wireless support
structure.



      (2)   Where small wireless facilities are determined to be
appropriate, the use of reasonable stealth and concealment treatments, low
profile equipment and control boxes, and screening may be required to avoid
significant negative impacts on the character and visual aesthetics of the
area. This includes the right of the city to make approval conditional upon
the applicant on modest changes in concealment or exact location including
moving the small wireless facility to the property line. However, such
requirements may be waived by the city upon a showing that the particular
location of a small wireless facility does not warrant stealth or concealment
treatments or imposes an excessive expense. The waiver shall be granted or
denied within 45 days after the date of the request.



      (3)   The city may deny an application for a new wireless
support structure where collocation on existing nearby wireless support
structure or utility pole is feasible. If the city denies an application on
this ground, the applicant may present additional evidence within 45 days of
the denial by way of a reconsideration of the application without a new
application fee. The reconsideration must clearly be marked
"reconsideration." the city will act within 45 days of such new information.



      (4)   Supplemental review districts identified in § 152.05(C)
and listed in Appendix A may be subject to a higher level of review.



   (B)   Maximum size of permitted use.



      (1)   The height of an antenna of a collocated small wireless
facility shall be limited to the greater of ten feet above:



         (a)   The height of an existing or modified utility pole
or wireless support structure; or



         (b)   The height of a new utility pole or wireless
support structure as provided in division (2) below.



      (2)   The height of a new or modified utility pole, or
wireless support structure is limited to the greater of:



         (a)   The tallest utility pole, excluding transmission
poles, or wireless support structure located in the same covered area,
measured from grade, in place within 500 linear feet on the same covered area
as the subject utility pole or wireless support structure as of the effective
date of this chapter; or



         (b)   In the absence of any such utility pole or
wireless support structure, either:



            1.   Forty feet in any area zoned exclusively for
single family residential use, unless a waiver is granted for good cause
shown; or



            2.   Fifty feet in any other area.



      (3)   Collocation is not allowed on a decorative pole less
than 20 feet in height.



   (C)   Supplemental review districts. Collocated small wireless
facilitates and new or codified utility poles or wireless support structures
located in supplemental review districts shall be a conditional use and
subject to the design and aesthetic requirements and review processes for
structures specified in this ordinance establishing the supplemental review
district(s) in addition to the requirement of this ordinance, provided that
the city will work in good faith with the applicant to accommodate the
installation of collocated small wireless facilities and new or modified
utility poles or wireless support structures in supplemental review districts
to the fullest extent practicable. The city reserves its right to maintain
and implement the following types of supplemental review districts.



      (1)   Underground districts. A wireless services provider or a
wireless infrastructure provider shall comply with nondiscriminatory
requirements that prohibit electric utilities, telecommunications or cable
providers from installing above-ground structures in the covered area in
these districts. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use or
replacement of existing utility poles or wireless support structures in
underground districts for the collocation of small wireless facilities
subject to administrative review by the zoning administrator, appropriate
design and concealment and a finding that such use does not increase the
height by more than three feet.



      (2)   Historic and design districts. As a condition for
approval of new small wireless facilities or new wireless support structure
in a historic district or a design district, the city may require that a
wireless services provider or a wireless infrastructure provider comply with
the design and aesthetic standards of the historic district or design
district to minimize the impact to the aesthetics in a historic district or
on a design district's decorative poles. If design and concealment treatments
are determined on review by the city to be insufficient to mitigate harm to
the historic district or design district, the application may be denied. This
section may not be construed to limit a municipality's authority to enforce
historic preservation zoning regulations consistent with the preservation of
local zoning authority under 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7), the requirements
for facility modifications under 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a), or the
National-Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (54 U.S.C. Section 300101 et
seq.), and the regulations adopted to implement those laws.



   (D)   Appeals, special exceptions and variance requirements. Appeals
of administrative decisions and requests for special exceptions and variances
from the provisions of this chapter, when strict application would result in
an unnecessary hardship or in the inability to deploy needed small wireless
facilities, shall be heard and decided by the Board of Zoning Appeals or
equivalent board for architectural, design or historical district reviews. An
applicant seeking a special exception to construct a new decorative pole,
utility pole or other wireless support structure to collocate a small
wireless facility in an underground district shall demonstrate, including
certification through in engineer, that it has diligently attempted to locate
the proposed decorative pole, utility pole, wireless support structure, or
small wireless facility outside of the underground district and that
placement of the decorative pole, utility pole, wireless support structure,
or small wireless facility within the underground district is necessary to
provide the needed wireless coverage or capacity, and one or more of the
following conditions exist supporting a special exception:



      (1)   No existing utility pole or wireless support structure
is located within the location search radius or to the extent a utility pole
or wireless support structure is located within the search radius, such
utility pole or wireless support structure:



         (a)   Is not available for collocation under
commercially reasonable rates, terms, and conditions;



         (b)   Cannot accommodate the collocation of the small
wireless facility and meet the technical requirements necessary to deliver
adequate wireless service coverage or capacity; or



         (c)   Would require modifications exceeding the three
feet height limitation imposed in § 152.05(C)(1).



      (2)   The only available option to deliver adequate wireless
service coverage or capacity in the search radius requires modifications to
an existing utility pole or wireless support structure exceeding the three
feet height limitation imposed in § 152.05(C)(1) or the installation of a
new utility pole or wireless support structure for collocation of a small
wireless facility; or



      (3)   The applicant has demonstrated other circumstances that,
in the reasonable discretion of the Board, etc., warrant a special exception
or variance. The applicant shall abide by the design, stealth and concealment
treatments imposed as conditions of he special exception.



   (E)   Existing supplemental review districts. Supplemental review
districts approved by the city as of the effective date of this chapter are
listed in Appendix A. The code provisions authorizing the district,
applicable design guidelines or manual, review authority and appeal
jurisdiction are specified in Appendix A. Nothing in this chapter shall
prohibit or otherwise limit the city from establishing additional
supplemental review districts, provided however, that facilities and
structures for which a permit was approved or deemed approved pursuant to
this chapter prior to the establishment of the additional supplemental review
district remain subject to the provisions of this chapter, including routine
maintenance and replacement of those facilities and structures as set out in
§ 152.03(E)(1) and (2) of this chapter, and not to any provisions otherwise
applicable to the additional supplemental review district. If a wireless
services provider or a wireless infrastructure provider voluntarily replaces
such facilities in a manner that does not comply with § 152.03(E)(2) of this
chapter, or if a wireless services provider or a wireless infrastructure
provider voluntarily allocates such facilities, such replacement or
relocation is subject to the then-existing provisions and requirements of the
additional supplemental review district.



   (F)   Repair of damage. A wireless services provider or a wireless
infrastructure provider shall repair all damage to a city right-of-way
directly caused by the activities of the wireless services provider or the
wireless infrastructure provider, while occupying, installing, repairing, or
maintaining wireless facilities, wireless support structures, city utility
poles, or utility poles and to return the right-of-way to its functional
equivalence before the damage. If the wireless services provider or the
wireless infrastructure provider fails to make the repairs required by the
city within 45 days after written notice, unless the city and the wireless
services provider or the wireless infrastructure provider agree in writing to
a longer time period, the city may undertake those repairs and charge the
applicable party the reasonable and documented cost of the repairs. The city
may maintain an action to recover the costs of the repairs.



(Ord. 18-014, passed 7-10-2018)



§ 152.06  EFFECT OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Authority granted. No property right or other interest
created. A permit from the city authorizes an applicant to undertake only
certain activities in accordance with the ordinance and does not create a
property right or grant any authority whatsoever to the applicant to impinge
upon the rights of others who may already have an interest in the covered
area, the permit is subject to revocation if it is determined at any time
that the work was not constructed consistent with the application or if the
application contained materially false or misleading information including
any false certifications of notification of property owners within 50 yards
of the proposed site.



   (B)   Duration. Unless construction has actually begun and is
diligently pursued to completion at that point, no permit for construction
issued under this chapter shall be valid for a period longer than 12 months
unless both city and applicant agree to a reasonable extension and all
required fees are paid for the term regardless of construction. The inability
of the applicant to obtain electrical power or backhaul transport services to
serve the wireless facility such that it is operational within the 12 months
due to the action or inaction of third-party utility providers shall not
result in the invalidity of the permit.



(Ord. 18-014, passed 7-10-2018)



§ 152.07  REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF A SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY
IN THE ROW.



   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the city,
a wireless services provider or a wireless infrastructure provider shall, at
its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect,
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any wireless facilities or
wireless support structures within the rights-of-way whenever the city, in
its reasonable discretion, has determined that such removal, relocation,
change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair,
maintenance, or installation of any city improvement in or upon, or the
operations of the city in or upon, the rights-of-way.



   (B)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The city
retains the right to cut or move any wireless facility or wireless support
structure located within its rights-of-way as the city,i n its reasonable
discretion, may determine to be necessary, appropriate, or useful in response
to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the city
shall notify the wireless services provider or the wireless infrastructure
provider and provide opportunity to move its own wireless facilities or
wireless support structure prior to the city cutting or removing a wireless
facility or wireless support structure and the city shall notify the wireless
services provider or the wireless infrastructure provider after cutting or
removing a wireless facility.



   (C)   Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a wireless
facility or wireless support structure within the city rights-of-way, the
wireless services provider or the wireless infrastructure provider shall
notify the city within 90 days of such abandonment. Following receipt of such
notice the city may direct the wireless services provider or the wireless
infrastructure provider to remove all or any portion of the wireless facility
or wireless support structure if the city, in its sole discretion, determines
that such removal will be in the best interests of the public health, safety,
and welfare.



   (D)   Abandonment by inaction. At any point when a wireless services
provider or a wireless infrastructure provider fails to pay any required fee,
or annual payment to the city, and fails o respond within 60 days to a
written inquiry from the city as to whether the wireless services provider or
the wireless infrastructure provider intends to continue to operate a
wireless facility or wireless support structure, for whatever reason, the
wireless facility shall be deemed abandoned and he city may, at its sole
option, remove all or any portion of the wireless facility or wireless
support structure, or take other action as authorized by law, including
recovery of actual costs incurred in moving the wireless facility or wireless
support structure.



(Ord. 18-014, passed 7-10-2018)



§ 152.08  ATTACHMENT TO CITY-OWNED UTILITY POLES IN THE COVERED AREAS.



   (A)   Annual rate. The rate to place a small wireless facility on a
city-owned pole in covered areas shall be $50 dollars per year per wooden
pole or $200 per year for all other city-owned poles. This rate is in
addition to reimbursement to the city 'or any expenses for make-ready work.
The city reserves the right to require a pole attachment agreement to further
define the terms and conditions of attachments to city-owned poles. The rates
specified in this section shall not apply to poles owned, or operated and
accounted for as an asset of, a municipal electric utility.



   (B)   Cease payment. A wireless services provider or a wireless
infrastructure provider is authorized to remove its facilities at any time
from a city-owned pole in covered areas and cease paying the annual rate to
the city as of the next due date for payment following the removal.



   (C)   Make-ready. For city-owned utility poles in covered areas, the
applicant shall reimburse the city for expenses for any reasonable make-ready
work. The city shall provide a good faith estimate for any make-ready work
necessary to enable the pole to support the requested small wireless
facility, including pole replacement if necessary, within 60 days after
receipt of a completed request. Make-ready work including any pole
replacement shall be completed within 60 days of written acceptance of the
good faith estimate by the wireless services provider or the wireless
infrastructure provider.



   (D)   Municipal utilities excluded. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to affect the authority of a municipal electric utility to deny,
limit, restrict, or determine the rates, fees, terms, and conditions for the
use of or attachment to a utility pole owned, or operated and accounted for
as an asset of, a municipal electric utility.



(Ord. 18-014, passed 7-10-2018)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   AGREEMENTS



      II.   SALARIES



      III.   ZONING



TABLE I: AGREEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


02-004
 
5-14-2002
 
Authorizing the city to enter into a development agreement


 
 



 



TABLE II: SALARIES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


87-01
 
1-15-1987
 
Modifying the salaries of the Mayor and City Council members


 
 



 



TABLE III: ZONING



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




85-02
 
4-9-1985
 
Annexation A: Table of Parking and Loading Space Requirements; required
spaces (1985 Code, § -)


85-02
 
4-9-1985
 
Annexation B: Table of Land Uses (1985 Code, § -)


85-02
 
4-9-1985
 
Annexation C: Table of Accessory Uses (1985 Code, § -)


85-02
 
4-9-1985
 
Annexation D: City of Goose Creek Zoning Districts (1985 Code, § -)


85-04
 
5-14-1985
 
Amending zoning map


95-001
 
-14-1995
 
Amending Annexation A; adding a category for parking requirements for
recreation and community centers


95-014
 
12-12-1995
 
Amending Annexation B: adding provisions


96-002
 
2-13-1996
 
Amending Annexation B: light industrial table


97-002
 
1-14-1997
 
Amending Annexation A: amending provisions


99-011
 
6-8-1999
 
Amending Annexation B: adding commercial activities


 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to South Carolina Code





References to 1985 Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO SOUTH CAROLINA CODE



 

S.C. Cite
 
Code Section




4-9-30
 
50.002


4-9-40
 
50.002


Title 5
 
151.081


5-7-30
 
10.99, 31.037, 35.03, 50.002, 94.01, 137.22


5-7-60
 
50.002


5-7-80
 
137.22


5-7-100
 
31.043


5-7-110
 
33.026


5-7-130
 
31.074


5-7-160
 
31.065


5-7-170
 
31.005


5-7-240
 
31.042


5-7-260
 
31.036, 31.080


5-7-270
 
31.036, 31.081, 31.083


5-7-300
 
110.020


5-9-40
 
31.038


5-11-20
 
10.03


5-15-61
 
37.07


5-25-20 et seq.
 
33.055


5-25-110
 
33.056


5-25-120 et seq.
 
91.27


5-31-20
 
51.07


5-31-1110
 
51.07


5-31-1130
 
51.08


5-31-1140 et seq.
 
51.06


Title 6
 
151.081


6-1-720
 
110.130


6-1-730
 
110.130, 112.05


Title 6, Ch. 9
 
152.01


Title 6, Art. 9, Ch. 1
 
151.087


Title 6, Ch. 29
 
151.001


6-29-320 et seq.
 
151.001


6-29-360
 
151.001, 151.008


6-29-510
 
151.002


6-29-510(E)
 
151.008


6-29-760(A)
 
151.001


6-29-790
 
151.173, 151.190


6-29-800
 
151.171


12-6-3622
 
112.05


12-21-2720(A)(1)
 
110.020


12-21-2720(A)(2)
 
110.020


12-21-2720(A)(3)
 
110.020


12-21-2728
 
110.020


12-37-250
 
34.02


12-56-10 et seq.
 
34.05


12-67-100 et seq.
 
112.05


14-25-15
 
36.01


14-25-25
 
36.02, 36.03


14-25-35
 
36.06


14-25-45
 
36.08, 36.09, 36.32


14-25-55
 
36.07


14-25-65
 
10.99, 36.08, 36.10


14-25-85
 
36.27


14-25-95
 
36.33


14-25-105
 
36.35


14-25-125
 
36.55


14-25-165
 
36.56


14-25-185
 
36.58


16-3-610
 
132.01


16-5-50
 
130.02, 130.03


16-7-110
 
132.11


16-7-120
 
132.12


16-9-410
 
130.10


16-9-420
 
130.10


16-11-510 et seq.
 
131.019


16-11-520 et seq.
 
131.015


16-11-610
 
131.081


16-11-650
 
131.064


16-11-680
 
131.082


16-11-740
 
131.057


16-13-180
 
131.062


16-13-230 et seq.
 
131.002


16-13-340
 
131.080


16-15-130
 
133.01


16-15-305 et seq.
 
133.06


16-17-220
 
131.059


16-17-420
 
132.05


16-17-430
 
133.03


16-17-490
 
133.05


16-17-530
 
132.02 – 133.04


16-17-570
 
130.08


16-17-690
 
133.02


16-17-720
 
130.01


16-19-10 et seq.
 
133.07


16-23-410
 
135.04


16-23-460
 
135.03


19-3-10
 
10.13


Title 20, Ch. 7
 
151.028


23-35-10
 
91.48, 91.49


23-35-20
 
91.53


23-35-30
 
91.52


23-35-60
 
91.50


23-35-110
 
91.54


24-13-410
 
130.10


25-1-450
 
35.03


27-31-10 et seq.
 
151.028, 151.108


30-4-10 et seq.
 
31.060, 31.061, 110.060


30-4-70(a)(1)
 
151.001


38-45-10
 
110.020


38-45-60
 
110.020


38-57-10 et seq.
 
33.064


38-57-10 – 38-57-210
 
33.062


38-57-210
 
33.066


Title 44, Ch. 53, Article 3
 
134.01


44-53-370
 
134.02


47-1-10
 
90.01


47-3-10
 
90.01


47-3-40
 
90.09


47-3-50
 
90.04


47-3-410
 
90.01


47-5-20
 
90.01


47-5-60
 
90.07


48-1-280
 
137.22


48-18-70
 
50.051


56-3-20(19)
 
151.108


Title 56, Ch. 5
 
70.01


56-5-360
 
151.108


56-5-730
 
70.02


56-5-800
 
70.15


56-5-940
 
70.16


56-5-1610 et seq.
 
71.12


56-5-1960
 
130.06


56-5-2140
 
70.29


56-5-2360
 
130.06


56-5-2510
 
71.06


56-5-3850
 
130.06


56-5-4410
 
70.28


56-5-5310
 
70.20


56-5-5810 et seq.
 
71.12


56-7-80
 
30.04


58-9-2200
 
110.020


58-9-2230
 
152.03


58-17-190
 
130.14


Title 61, except 61-6-4720
 
111.02


61-4-10
 
111.08


61-4-1750
 
111.67


61-6-20
 
111.01


61-6-100 et seq.
 
111.05


61-6-190
 
111.04


61-6-920
 
111.65


61-6-950
 
111.66


61-6-1610
 
111.25


61-6-1800
 
111.68


61-6-4070
 
111.45, 111.46


61-6-4075
 
111.48


61-6-4085
 
111.47


61-6-4160
 
111.05


61-6-4220
 
111.03


61-6-4230
 
111.02


61-6-4300 et seq.
 
111.06


61-6-4310
 
111.29


61-6-4500
 
111.02


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1985 CODE



 

1985 Code
 
2008 Code




-
 
TSO, Table III


Annex A
 
Ch. 151, App. A


Annex B
 
Ch. 151, App. B


Annex C
 
Ch. 151, App. C


Annex D
 
Ch. 151, App. D


Art. I, § 101
 
151.001


Art. I, § 102
 
151.002


Art. I, § 103
 
151.003


Art. I, § 104
 
151.004


Art. I, § 105
 
151.005


Art. I, § 106
 
151.006


Art. I, § 107
 
151.007


Art. I, § 108
 
151.008


Art. I, § 109
 
151.009


Art. II, § 201
 
151.025


Art. II, § 202
 
151.026


Art. II, § 203
 
151.027


Art. II, § 204
 
151.028


Art. III, § 301
 
151.045


Art. III, § 302
 
151.046


Art. III, § 303
 
151.047


Art. IV, § 401
 
151.060


Art. IV, § 402
 
151.061


Art. IV, § 403
 
151.062


Art. IV, § 404
 
151.063


Art. IV, § 405
 
151.064


Art. IV, § 406
 
151.065


Art. IV, § 407
 
151.066


Art. V, § 501
 
151.080


Art. V, § 502
 
151.081


Art. V, § 503
 
151.082


Art. V, § 504
 
151.083


Art. V, § 505
 
151.083


Art. V, § 506
 
151.085


Art. V, § 507
 
151.086


Art. V, § 508
 
151.087


Art. VI, § 601
 
151.105


Art. VI, § 602
 
151.106


Art. VI, § 603
 
151.107


Art. VI, § 604
 
151.108


Art. VI, § 605
 
151.108


Art. VII
 
151.125


Art. VII, § 701
 
151.126


Art. VII, § 702
 
151.127


Art. VII, § 703
 
151.128


Art. VII, § 704
 
151.129


Art. VII, § 705
 
151.130


Art. VII, § 706
 
151.131


Art. VII, § 707
 
151.133


Art. VII, § 708
 
151.135


Art. VII, § 709
 
151.136


Art. VII, § 710
 
151.137


Art. VIII, § 801
 
151.150


Art. VIII, § 802
 
151.151


Art. VIII, § 803
 
151.152


Art. VIII, § 804
 
151.152


Art. IX, § 901
 
151.170


Art. IX, § 902
 
151.171


Art. IX, § 903
 
151.172


Art. IX, § 904
 
151.173


Art. IX, § 905
 
151.174


Art. X, § 1001
 
151.190


Art. X, § 1002
 
151.191


Art. X, § 1003
 
151.192


Art. X, § 1004
 
151.193


Art. X, § 1005
 
151.194


Art. X, § 1006
 
151.195


Art. X, § 1007
 
151.196


Art. X, § 1008
 
151.197


Art. XI, § 1101
 
151.210


Art. XI, § 1102
 
151.210


Art. XI, § 1103
 
151.999


1-2
 
10.03


1-5
 
10.13


1-6
 
10.99


1-7
 
10.14


1-8
 
10.15


1-11
 
10.16


2-1
 
30.01


2-2
 
30.02


2-3
 
30.03


2-20
 
31.001


2-21
 
31.001


2-22
 
31.003


2-23
 
31.004


2-24
 
31.005


2-30
 
31.020


2-31
 
31.021


2-32
 
31.022


2-33
 
31.022


2-40
 
31.035


2-41
 
31.036


2-42
 
31.037


2-43
 
31.038


2-44
 
31.039


2-45
 
31.040


2-46
 
31.041


2-47
 
31.042


2-48
 
31.043


2-49
 
31.043


2-50
 
31.045


2-60
 
31.060


2-61
 
31.061


2-62
 
31.061


2-63
 
31.063


2-64
 
31.064


2-65
 
31.065


2-66
 
31.066


2-67
 
31.067


2-68
 
31.068


2-69
 
31.069


2-70
 
31.070


2-71
 
31.071


2-72
 
31.072


2-73
 
31.073


2-74
 
31.074


2-75
 
31.075


2-76
 
31.076


2-77
 
31.077


2-78
 
31.078


2-79
 
31.079


2-80
 
31.080


2-81
 
31.081


2-82
 
31.081


2-83
 
31.083


2-84
 
31.083


2-85
 
31.085


2-86
 
31.086


2-87
 
31.087


2-88
 
31.088


2-100
 
32.01


2-101
 
32.02


2-102
 
32.03


2-103
 
32.04


2-110
 
32.20


2-111
 
32.21


2-112
 
32.22


2-113
 
32.23


2-114
 
32.24


2-115
 
32.25


2-116
 
32.26


2-117
 
32.26


2-130
 
32.45


2-131
 
32.46


2-132
 
32.47


2-133
 
32.48


2-134
 
32.49


2-135
 
32.50


2-136
 
32.51


2-137
 
32.52


2-138
 
32.53


2-150
 
33.001


2-151
 
33.001


2-152
 
33.003


2-153
 
33.004


2-154
 
33.005


2-155
 
33.006


2-170
 
33.020


2-171
 
33.021


2-172
 
33.022


2-173
 
33.023


2-174
 
33.024


2-175
 
33.025


2-176
 
33.026


2-177
 
33.027


2-178
 
33.028


2-179
 
33.029


2-180
 
33.030


2-181
 
33.031


2-182
 
33.032


2-183
 
33.033


2-184
 
33.034


2-185
 
33.035


2-186
 
33.036


2-187
 
33.037


2-188
 
33.038


2-189
 
33.039


2-200
 
33.055


2-201
 
33.056


2-202
 
33.057


2-203
 
33.058


2-204
 
33.059


2-205
 
33.060


2-206
 
33.061


2-207
 
33.062


2-208
 
33.062


2-209
 
33.064


2-210
 
33.065


2-211
 
33.066


2-212
 
33.066


2-220
 
33.080


2-221
 
33.081


2-222
 
33.082


2-223
 
33.082


2-224
 
33.084


2-225
 
33.085


3-1
 
111.01


3-2
 
111.02


3-3
 
111.03


3-4
 
111.04


3-5
 
111.05


3-6
 
111.06


3-7
 
111.07


3-8
 
111.08


3-9
 
111.25


3-10
 
111.26


3-11
 
111.27


3-12
 
111.28


3-13
 
111.29


3-14
 
111.45


3-15
 
111.46


3-16
 
111.47


3-17
 
111.48


3-18
 
111.65


3-19
 
111.66


3-20
 
111.67


3-21
 
111.68


3-22
 
111.69


4-1
 
90.01


4-2
 
90.02


4-3
 
90.03


4-4
 
90.04


4-5
 
90.05


4-6
 
90.06


4-7
 
90.07


4-8
 
90.08


4-9
 
90.09


4-10
 
90.10


4-11
 
90.11


4-12
 
90.12


4-13
 
90.13


4-14
 
90.14


5-1
 
150.01


5-2
 
150.02


5-3
 
150.03


5-4
 
150.04


5-5
 
150.05


5-6
 
150.06


5-7
 
150.07


5-8
 
150.25


5-9
 
150.25


5-10
 
150.25


5-11
 
150.25


5-12
 
150.25


5-13
 
150.25


5-14
 
150.25


5-15
 
150.25


5-16
 
150.40


5-17
 
150.41


5-18
 
150.42


5-19
 
150.43


5-20
 
150.44


5-21
 
150.45


5-22
 
150.99


6-1
 
35.01


6-2
 
35.02


6-3
 
35.03


6-4
 
35.04


6-5
 
35.05


6-6
 
35.06


6-7
 
35.07


6-8
 
35.08


6-9
 
35.09


7-1
 
36.01


7-2
 
36.02


7-3
 
36.03


7-4
 
36.04


7-5
 
36.05


7-6
 
36.06


7-7
 
36.07


7-8
 
36.08


7-9
 
36.09


7-10
 
36.10


7-20
 
36.25


7-21
 
36.26


7-22
 
36.27


7-24
 
36.28


7-25
 
36.29


7-26
 
36.30


7-27
 
36.31


7-28
 
36.32


7-29
 
36.33


7-30
 
36.33


7-31
 
36.35


7-32
 
36.36


7-33
 
36.37


7-40
 
36.55


7-42
 
36.56


7-43
 
36.57


7-44
 
36.58


9-1
 
34.01


9-2
 
34.02


9-3
 
34.03


9-4
 
34.03


9-20
 
34.20


9-21
 
34.21


9-22
 
34.22


9-23
 
34.23


9-24
 
34.24


9-25
 
34.25


9-26
 
34.26


9-27
 
34.27


9-28
 
34.28


9-29
 
34.29


9-30
 
34.30


9-31
 
34.31


9-32
 
34.32


9-33
 
34.33


9-34
 
34.34


10-1
 
91.01


10-2
 
91.02


10-3
 
91.03


10-4
 
91.04


10-5
 
91.05


10-6
 
91.06


10-7
 
91.07


10-8
 
91.08


10-20
 
91.25


10-21
 
91.26


10-22
 
91.27


10-23
 
91.27


10-24
 
91.29


10-25
 
91.30


10-26
 
91.31


10-30
 
91.45


10-31
 
91.46


10-32
 
91.47


10-33
 
91.48


10-34
 
91.49


10-35
 
91.50


10-36
 
91.51


10-37
 
91.52


10-38
 
91.53


10-39
 
91.54


11-9
 
93.175


11-10
 
93.176


11-20
 
93.190


11-21
 
93.191


11-22
 
93.192


11-23
 
93.193


11-24
 
93.194


11-25
 
93.195


12-20
 
51.01


12-21
 
51.02


12-22
 
51.03


12-23
 
51.04


12-24
 
51.05


12-25
 
51.06


12-26
 
51.07


12-27
 
51.08


12-28
 
51.09


12-29
 
51.10


12-30
 
51.25


12-31
 
51.26


12-32
 
51.40


12-33
 
51.41


12-34
 
51.42


12-35
 
51.43


12-36
 
51.44


12-37
 
51.45


12-38
 
51.46


12-39
 
51.47


12-40
 
51.47


12-41
 
51.49


12-50
 
52.01


12-51
 
52.02


12-52
 
52.03


12-53
 
52.04


12-54
 
52.05


12-55
 
52.06


13-1
 
110.001


13-2
 
110.002


13-3
 
110.003


13-4
 
110.004


13-5
 
110.005


13-6
 
110.006


13-7
 
110.007


13-8
 
110.008


13-9
 
110.009


13-10
 
110.010


13-11
 
110.011


13-12
 
110.012


13-13
 
110.013


13-15
 
110.015


13-16
 
110.016


13-17
 
110.017


13-18
 
110.018


13-19
 
110.019


13-20
 
110.999


13-22
 
110.020


13-23
 
110.021


13-24
 
110.022


13-25
 
110.035 – 110.045


13-26
 
110.046


13-37
 
110.999


13-40
 
110.080


13-41
 
110.081


13-42
 
110.082


13-43
 
110.083


13-44
 
110.084


13-45
 
110.085


13-46
 
110.086


14-1
 
130.01


14-2
 
130.02


14-3
 
130.03


14-5
 
130.04


14-6
 
130.05


14-7
 
130.06


14-8
 
130.07


14-9
 
130.08


14-10
 
130.09


14-11
 
130.10


14-12
 
130.10


14-13
 
130.12


14-14
 
130.13


14-20
 
130.15


14-21
 
131.002


14-22
 
131.015


14-23
 
131.016


14-24
 
131.017


14-25
 
131.018


14-26
 
131.019


14-27
 
131.020


14-28
 
131.035


14-29
 
131.036


14-30
 
131.037


14-31
 
131.038


14-32
 
131.055


14-33
 
131.056


14-34
 
131.057


14-35
 
131.058


14-36
 
131.059


14-37
 
131.060


14-38
 
131.061


14-39
 
131.062


14-40
 
131.063


14-41
 
131.064


14-42
 
131.080


14-43
 
131.081


14-44
 
131.082


14-50
 
132.01


14-51
 
132.02


14-52
 
132.03


14-54
 
132.05


14-55
 
132.06


14-56
 
132.07


14-57
 
132.08


14-58
 
132.09


14-59
 
132.10


14-61
 
132.11


14-63
 
132.12


14-70
 
133.01


14-75
 
133.02


14-76
 
133.03


14-77
 
133.04


14-78
 
133.05


14-79
 
133.06


14-80
 
133.07


14-81
 
133.07


14-90
 
134.01


14-91
 
134.02


14-92
 
134.03


14-93
 
134.04


14-94
 
134.05


14-95
 
134.05


14-96
 
134.07


14-100
 
135.01


14-101
 
135.02


14-102
 
135.03


14-103
 
135.04


14-104
 
135.05


14-110
 
136.01


14-111
 
136.02


14-112
 
136.03


14-113
 
136.04


14-120
 
137.01


14-121
 
137.02


14-122
 
137.03


14-123
 
137.04


14-130
 
137.20


14-131
 
137.21


14-132
 
137.22


14-133
 
137.23


14-134
 
137.24


Ch. 15
 
38.01


16-1
 
92.01


16-2
 
92.02


16-4
 
92.03


16-5
 
92.04


16-6
 
92.05


16-7
 
92.06


16-8
 
92.07


16-9
 
92.08


16-10
 
92.09


16-11
 
92.10, 92.99


16-20
 
92.25


16-21
 
92.26


16-22
 
92.27


16-23
 
92.27


16-24
 
92.29


16-25
 
92.30


16-26
 
92.31


16-27
 
92.32


16-28
 
92.33


16-29
 
92.34


16-30
 
92.35


16-31
 
92.36


16-32
 
92.37


16-33
 
92.99


16-34
 
92.99


16-35
 
92.38, 92.99


17-1
 
70.01


17-2
 
70.02


17-3
 
70.15


17-4
 
70.16


17-5
 
70.17


17-6
 
70.18


17-7
 
70.19


17-8
 
70.20


17-9
 
70.21


17-10
 
70.22


17-11
 
70.23


17-12
 
70.24


17-13
 
70.25


17-14
 
70.26


17-15
 
70.27


17-16
 
70.28


17-17
 
70.29


17-18
 
70.30


17-19
 
70.31


17-20
 
70.45


17-21
 
70.46


17-22
 
70.47


17-23
 
70.48


17-24
 
70.65


17-30
 
70.65


17-31
 
71.02


17-32
 
71.03


17-33
 
71.04


17-34
 
71.04


17-35
 
71.06


17-36
 
71.07


17-37
 
71.08


17-38
 
71.09


17-39
 
71.10


17-40
 
71.11


17-41
 
71.12


17-42
 
71.13


17-43
 
71.14


17-44
 
71.15


17-50
 
72.01


17-51
 
72.02


17-52
 
72.03


17-53
 
72.04


17-54
 
72.05


17-60
 
72.20


17-61
 
72.21


17-62
 
72.22


17-63
 
72.23


17-64
 
72.24


17-65
 
72.25


17-66
 
72.26


17-67
 
72.27


17-68
 
72.28


17-69
 
72.29


17-70
 
72.30


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




-
 
- -
 
151.082


85-02
 
4-9-1985
 
TSO, Table III


85-04
 
5-14-1985
 
TSO, Table III


86-12
 
3-11-1986
 
151.135


86-21
 
8-12-1986
 
34.01


87-01
 
1-15-1987
 
TSO, Table II


87-06
 
2-10-1987
 
151.028, 151.082


87-13
 
10-14-1987
 
151.028


87-15
 
11-24-1987
 
151.082


88-01
 
1-12-1988
 
151.082, 151.088


88-02
 
3-8-1988
 
151.028


88-06
 
7-12-1988
 
92.10, 92.99


88-11
 
11-29-1988
 
150.26


88-12
 
12-13-1988
 
151.087


89-02
 
3-14-1989
 
151.082, 151.083


89-07
 
7-11-1989
 
135.01


89-10
 
9-12-1989
 
151.028, 151.136


90-04
 
3-13-1990
 
151.108


90-16
 
9-11-1990
 
71.17, 151.086


91-02
 
1-8-1991
 
151.108


91-08
 
9-10-1991
 
151.028, 151.081


92-03
 
5-5-1992
 
151.108


92-09
 
11-10-1992
 
30.04


93-001
 
4-20-1993
 
151.190 – 151.197


93-002
 
4-20-1993
 
91.09


93-004
 
7-1-1993
 
72.01, 132.13


93-005A
 
8-30-1993
 
10.99, 151.999


91-09
 
9-10-1993
 
151.080


94-004
 
4-28-1994
 
151.082


94-005
 
9-13-1994
 
90.01 – 90.05, 90.07 – 90.13


94-006
 
10-11-1994
 
33.080, 33.082


95-009
 
1-13-1995
 
151.082


95-001
 
-14-1995
 
TSO, Table III


95-01
 
2-14-1995
 
Ch. 151, App. A


95-002
 
3-14-1995
 
151.028, 151.087, 151.108


95-02
 
3-14-1995
 
151.108, Ch. 151, App. A


95-003
 
3-14-1995
 
151.028


95-010
 
8-8-1995
 
151.083


95-014
 
12-12-1985
 
TSO, Table III


96-002
 
2-13-1996
 
151.028, TSO, Table III


96-009
 
9-10-1996
 
151.028, 151.086


96-011
 
10-8-1996
 
151.172


96-012
 
10-8-1996
 
151.108


96-013
 
11-26-1996
 
151.081


97-002
 
1-14-1997
 
151.109,  TSO, Table III


97-003
 
2-11-1997
 
151.082


97-006
 
5-13-1997
 
151.190 – 151.197


98-003
 
7-14-1998
 
90.14


99-004
 
4-13-1999
 
151.190


99-005
 
4-13-1999
 
151.001 – 151.009, 151.045, 151.047, 151.060 – 151.066


99-006
 
4-13-1999
 
151.170 – 151.174


99-011
 
6-8-1999
 
TSO, Table III


99-013
 
8-10-1999
 
151.028, 151.108, 151.171


01-003
 
3-13-2001
 
70.46


01-004
 
4-10-2001
 
132.14


01-005
 
8-14-2001
 
150.25


02-004
 
5-14-2002
 
TSO, Table I


03-006
 
6-3-2003
 
150.25


04-004
 
4-13-2004
 
93.001 – 93.011, 93.025, 93.026, 93.040 – 93.042, 93.055 – 93.058,
93.075, 93.077 – 93.086, 93.100 – 93.103, 93.120 – 93.127, 93.129,
93.145 – 93.147, 93.999


04-008
 
7-20-2004
 
151.108


05-008
 
7-12-2005
 
151.083, 151.152


05-018
 
11-8-2005
 
151.083


06-007
 
3-14-2006
 
151.081


06-019
 
8-24-2006
 
135.01


06-020
 
10-10-2006
 
34.05


07-017
 
11-13-2007
 
50.001 – 50.003, 50.005 – 50.008, 50.010, 50.011, 50.030 – 50.032,
50.050 – 50.059, 50.075 – 50.077, 50.090, 50.091, 50.105, 50.106, 50.108
– 50.110, 50.125 – 50.130, 50.999


07-018
 
11-13-2007
 
110.001 – 110.013, 110.015 – 110.020, 110.022, 110.035, 110.038 –
110.045, 110.080 – 110.086, 110.999


08-002
 
1-8-2008
 
91.55


08-003
 
1-8-2008
 
71.16


08-004
 
2-12-2008
 
151.080


08-006
 
4-15-2008
 
151.028


08-007
 
4-15-2008
 
151.082


08-009
 
4-15-2008
 
151.152


08-010
 
4-15-2008
 
151.196


09-005
 
8-11-2009
 
Adopting Ordinance


09-006
 
10-13-2009
 
37.01 – 37.14


09-010
 
12-8-2009
 
110.014


10-001
 
1-12-2010
 
132.04


10-004
 
12-14-2010
 
150.25


11-001
 
1-11-2011
 
111.08


11-005
 
4-12-2011
 
110.999


11-009   
 
7-12-2011
 
151.109; Ch. 151, App. B


12-002
 
4-10-2012
 
110.100


12-004
 
6-12-2012
 
Ch. 151, App. B


12-011   
 
12-11-2012
 
110.010, 110.020 - 110.022


13-001   
 
1-8-2013
 
94.01 - 94.16, 94.99


13-002
 
4-9-2013
 
93.177


13-003   
 
6-11-2013
 
110.010, 110.020 - 110.022


13-004   
 
6-11-2013
 
110.082


13-006
 
9-10-2013
 
151.028, 151.082, 151.108, 151.173, 151.190


13-007
 
9-20-2013
 
151.085


13-009
 
10-8-2013
 
110.110


13-012
 
11-12-2013
 
Repealing 151.238


14-007
 
12-9-2014
 
93.160 - 93.162


15-008
 
8-11-2015
 
151.082, 151.083, 151.197; Ch. 151, App. A; repealing 151.239


15-016
 
12-8-2015
 
151.082, 151.197; repealing 151.234


16-004
 
2-9-2016
 
33.100 – 33.102


16-006
 
3-8-2016
 
151.082


16-009
 
6-14-2016
 
151.126 – 151.136; Ch. 151, App. B


16-010
 
7-12-2016
 
151.085; Ch. 151, App. D; repealing 151.230 – 151.233, 151.235 – 151.237


17-002
 
2-14-2017
 
151.190


17-003
 
3-14-2017
 
151.028


17-004
 
3-14-2017
 
151.081


17-005
 
3-14-2017
 
Ch. 151, App. A


17-012
 
5-9-2017
 
151.084


17-013
 
5-9-2017
 
151.108


17-015
 
6-13-2017
 
110.001 - 110.022, 110.035 - 110.044, 110.055 - 110.066, 110.080, 110.081,
110.095 - 110.101, 110.115, 110.130, 110.999


17-016
 
6-13-2017
 
93.001 - 93.011, 93.025, 93.026, 93.055 - 93.058, 93.075 - 93.086, 93.100 -
93.103, 93.145 - 93.147, 93.160 - 93.162, 93.175 - 93.177, 93.190 - 93.195,
93.999, 95.001 - 95.008, 95.020, 95.021, 95.035 - 95.043


17-017
 
7-11-2017
 
151.125, Ch. 151, App. B


17-018
 
8-8-2017
 
112.01 - 112.08


17-019
 
8-8-2017
 
151.028, 151.109, Ch. 151, App. B, D


17-021
 
10-10-2017
 
90.01, 90.16


17-022
 
10-10-2017
 
151.108


17-025
 
11-14-2017
 
151.082


18-013
 
7-10-2018
 
37.03, 37.05, 37.07


18-014
 
7-10-2018
 
152.01 - 152.08


18-015
 
7-10-2018
 
151.087


18-018
 
8-14-2018
 
151.028, 151.084


 
 
 
 
 




 


