CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF HANAHAN, SOUTH CAROLINA 
____________ 
Published in 2008 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: September 9, 2015 
Effective: September 9, 2015 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
HANAHAN, SOUTH CAROLINA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
The Honorable Minnie N. Blackwell 
Mayor 
____________ 
Levy W. Berry 
Mayor Pro-Tem 
____________ 
Timothy A. Baker 
Jeffery C. Chandler 
C. Kevin Cox 
James M. Dyson 
Mark Stokes 
City Council 
____________ 
S. Hal Mason 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Paul Trouché 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Deborah E. Lewis 
Clerk of Council 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
HANAHAN, SOUTH CAROLINA 
____________ 
The Honorable Christie Rainwater 
Mayor 
____________ 
Jeffrey C. Chandler 
Mayor Pro-Tem 
____________ 
James M. Dyson 
Kevin Hedgpeth 
Joel E. Hodges 
Thomas D. Owens 
Michael J. Sally 
City Council 
____________ 
Mike Cochran 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Stafford J. McQuillin, III 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Emily S. Huff 
Clerk of Council 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Hanahan, South Carolina. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1983 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1983 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been provided catchlines to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation that represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Daniel F. Walker, Code Attorney, and Beth Tattershall, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Deborah E. Lewis, Clerk of Council, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Hanahan, South Carolina. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Hanahan, South Carolina. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Hanahan, South Carolina. 2008. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 11-2008 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF HANAHAN, SOUTH CAROLINA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances of the City of Hanahan, South Carolina," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 38, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before March 13, 2007, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not greater than $500.00, nor imprisonment longer than 30 days, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after March 13, 2007, which amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon its second reading and approval. 
Enacted this the 9th day of September, 2008.  
CODE OF ORDINANCES  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Hanahan, South Carolina," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-41)  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless the construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council: 
City. The term "city" means the City of Hanahan, in the County of Berkeley and State of South Carolina, except as otherwise provided. 
City council or council. The term "city council" or "council" means the mayor and council of the City of Hanahan in council assembled. 
Clerk. The term "clerk" means clerk-treasurer. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances of the City of Hanahan, South Carolina. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done, a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had. The day on which the notice is given, or the act is done, shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which the proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
Corporate limits, corporation limits or city limits. The term "corporate limits," "corporation limits" or "city limits" means the legal boundary of the City of Hanahan. 
County. The term "county" means the County of Berkeley in the State of South Carolina. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving the authority to a majority of the persons or officers. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
May. The term "may" is permissive, and never means mandatory. 
Mayor. The term "mayor" means the mayor of the City of Hanahan. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Name of officer. Whenever the name of an officer is given, it shall be construed as though the words "of the City of Hanahan" were added. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one person or thing. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," when applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of the building or land. 
Person. The term "person" extends and is applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property as herein described. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. The term "premises" means place. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where the person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Seal. The term "seal" means the city or corporate seal. 
Shall. The term "shall" always means mandatory and never means permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" means the State of South Carolina. 
Statute references. Whenever reference is made, for example, to S.C. Code 1976, § 44-1-160, it shall be construed to refer to the Code of Laws of South Carolina 1976, § 44-1-160, as amended, or whatever section is to be cited. 
Street. The term "street" embraces streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," when applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of the building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" includes any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-42)  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of the sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of the sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-43)  
Sec. 1-4. - History notes. 
This history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of the matter contained in the section.  
Sec. 1-5. - References and editor's notes. 
References and editor's notes following certain Code sections are provided as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling or meant to have any legal effect whatsoever.  
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-44)  
Sec. 1-7. - Certain ordinances, rights, etc., not affected by Code. 
(a)  Any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of the ordinance adopting this Code is not affected by the adoption of this Code. 
(b)  Ordinances and resolutions as noted below, in effect as of the date of adoption of this Code, continue to remain in effect until later repealed or amended: 
(1)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city; 
(2)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict with the provisions of the Code; 
(3)  Any ordinance or resolution fixing salaries of officers or employees of the city, unless superseded; 
(4)  Any appropriation ordinance or resolution; 
(5)  Any right of franchise granted by the council to any person; 
(6)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, closing, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the municipality; 
(7)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing the street grades of any streets in the city; 
(8)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(9)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the municipality, or providing regulations and requirements concerning subdivisions; 
(10)  Any ordinance annexing property to the city; 
(11)  Any zoning ordinance or amendments thereto, and any ordinance establishing a board of zoning appeals, board of architectural review, or planning commission, including joint commissions; 
(12)  Any ordinance, in effect at the time this Code was adopted, concerning floodplain management and drainage; 
(13)  Any ordinance or resolution regulating the erection, alteration, repair, demolition, moving or removal of buildings or other structures; 
(14)  Ordinances or resolutions prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not inconsistent with this Code; 
(15)  Any ordinance or resolution fixing utility rates and charges; 
(16)  Any ordinance of agreement with another political subdivision; 
(17)  Any ordinance concerning issuance of tax anticipation notes or other debt; 
(18)  Any ordinance regulating adult entertainment or sexually oriented businesses; 
(19)  Any ordinance regarding a board of trustees of firemen's insurance and inspection fund, or concerning membership in the state firemen's association and duties accompanying said membership; 
(20)  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect; 
and all such ordinances and resolutions are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances and resolutions are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(c)  The repeal shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance that has been repealed or superseded by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by the ordinance of adoption of this Code.  
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of parts of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-45)  
Sec. 1-9. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code, which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of the subsequent ordinances until the time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ___ of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Hanahan, South Carolina, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as enacted. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Hanahan, South Carolina, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ___, which section reads as follows: …." The new section shall then be set out in full as enacted. 
(d)  In lieu of the provisions of subsection (c) of this section, when the city council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in the Code, but which the city council desires to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made a part of the ordinance: "It is the intention of the council, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made part of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Hanahan, South Carolina, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish that intention." 
(e)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-46)  
Sec. 1-10. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code may be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, when necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ___ to ___" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-11. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the Code in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-47)  
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in the Code, ordinance or resolution the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance or resolution shall be punished by a fine not exceeding that permitted under state law or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any such ordinance or resolution shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalty provided in subsection (a) of this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance or resolution shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated as provided by law, and each day that the condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-48) 
State Law reference— Maximum fine and penalty established by governing body for violation of ordinance cannot exceed $500.00, or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-30.  
Sec. 1-13. - Corporate limits established. 
The map of the city showing the territorial limits thereof is hereby designated as the official map of the city, and the corporate limits as known thereon are declared to be the true and correct corporate limits of the city, including all annexations made through and including the date of adoption of this Code. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-49)  
Sec. 1-14. - Uniform ordinance summons adopted. 
(a)  S.C. Code 1976, § 56-7-80 authorizes municipalities to adopt by ordinance and use an ordinance summons for violation of municipal ordinances. Any person or entity violating any provision of this Code, or any code adopted pursuant thereto, within the corporate limits of the city may be issued a uniform ordinance summons. Issuance of the uniform ordinance summons shall vest jurisdiction in the municipal court to hear and dispose of the charge for which the uniform ordinance summons was issued and served. The uniform ordinance summons may be issued by any city law enforcement officer or by city employees designated by the council as code enforcement officers. The bond amount for violations shall be prescribed by the chief municipal court judge. Code enforcement officers are prohibited from accepting bonds. Bonds are to be posted in the manner prescribed in the uniform ordinance summons. The uniform ordinance summons shall not be used to perform a custodial arrest and/or apply to any ordinances which regulate the use of motor vehicles on the public roads. The form attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived is hereby adopted and referred to herein by reference as the city uniform ordinance summons. 
(b)  Any law enforcement and code enforcement officer who serves an ordinance summons must allow the person served to proceed without first having to post bond or to appear before a municipal judge. Acceptance of an ordinance summons constitutes a person's recognizance to comply with the terms of the summons. 
(Code 1983, § 6-4-1; Ord. of 2-9-1993)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Form of government adopted. 
The council form of municipal government, with a city council composed of seven members, including the mayor, all of whom shall be elected at large for four year terms, as provided in S.C. Code 1976, §§ 5-11-10 through 5-10-40, is hereby adopted for the city. 
(Code 1983, § 1-1-1) 
State Law reference— Requirement for municipalities to select form of government, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-5-10.  
Sec. 2-2. - [Collection costs for delinquent debts.] 
(a)  The city of may impose a collection cost of up to $25.00 to defray its internal costs of collection for any delinquent debts that are sought to be collected pursuant to the provisions of the Setoff Debt Collection Act, S.C. Code 1976, § 12-56-10 et seq. This cost is hereby declared to be a collection cost that arises by operation of law and shall be added to the delinquent debt and recovered from the debtor. 
(b)  The City of Hanahan hereby declares that the administrative fee charged by the Municipal Association of South Carolina is also a collection cost to the city/town, which shall also be added to the delinquent debt and recovered from the debtor. 
( Ord. No. 9-2018 , 11-13-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 9-2018 , adopted Nov. 13, 2018, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 2-2 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 2-3—2-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Powers conferred upon municipalities, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-30; general structure and functions of all municipalities, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-10 et seq.; municipal powers vested in council, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-160; local fee imposition limitations, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-1-330. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-21. - Powers. 
Except as otherwise provided, all powers of the city and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the council, with each member, including the mayor, having one vote. 
(Code 1983, § 1-2-1)  
Sec. 2-22. - Duties and responsibilities. 
Consistent with the provisions and requirements of state law, the city council, composed of a mayor and six councilmembers, shall perform and exercise the following powers, duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Establish basic legislative policies for the city through the enactment of ordinances and resolutions governing all city affairs; 
(2)  Establish and/or approve guidelines and standards to govern all administrative decisions and procedures; 
(3)  Act upon and approve the annual operating budget and proposed capital improvements program of the city for the ensuing fiscal year; and 
(4)  Appoint and remove the following officers: 
a.  City administrator; 
b.  City attorney; 
c.  Municipal court judge; 
d.  Clerk-treasurer; 
e.  Directors and heads of city departments. 
(Code 1983, § 1-2-2; Ord. of 1-14-2003; Ord. No. 4-2007, § 1, 3-13-2007)  
Sec. 2-23. - Appointments. 
All officers appointed in accordance with section 2-22(4) shall serve at the pleasure of council, unless otherwise specified in this Code. Department directors and heads shall be appointed and removed by council with the advice and counsel of the city administrator. Upon the appointment of any officer as a department head, the council shall make a clear instruction to the appointee that the department head is subject to the direction and supervision of the city administrator. 
(Code 1983, § 1-2-3; Ord. of 1-14-2003; Ord. No. 4-2007, § 2, 3-13-2007)  
Sec. 2-24. - Appointment of ad hoc committees. 
The council shall not exercise or attempt to exercise administrative control over staff and city operating departments through the use of special liaison officers appointed for such purpose; provided, however, the council shall appoint special ad hoc committees of its membership for the purpose of conducting studies and investigations on special projects. No ad hoc committee shall consist of more than three members of the council. 
(Code 1983, § 1-2-4)  
Sec. 2-25. - Investigations. 
The council, or any committee composed entirely of councilmembers to which power is specifically granted by the council, is authorized to make investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency or any officer or employee thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses or documents, records or other evidence, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production of evidence. Any subpoenas shall be issued by the clerk of the council on application by the council. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful ordinance, subpoena or summons issued in the exercise of this power by the council shall be guilty of contempt and fined no more than $200.00. 
(Code 1983, § 1-2-5)  
Sec. 2-26. - Official actions of council. 
All actions of council shall be by majority vote of members present at a public meeting. 
(Code 1983, § 1-2-6; Ord. of 2-11-1986)  
Sec. 2-27. - Powers, duties and responsibilities of mayor. 
Consistent with the provisions of state law, the mayor shall have the same power as any member of the council. Specifically, the powers, duties and responsibilities of the mayor shall be to: 
(1)  Preside at meetings of the city council and have all the rights, powers, duties and responsibilities as the members of the council as provided by law and be required to vote on all matters before the council; 
(2)  Serve as the official head and ceremonial office of the city; 
(3)  Sign contracts, deeds, resolutions and proclamations on behalf of the city after review and approval by the city council; 
(4)  Call special meetings of the council as provided for in division 2 of this article; 
(5)  Keep informed about the financial and other affairs of the city and from time to time present information about the affairs of the city and recommend such measures as deemed best for the city, including statements and reports to the citizens concerning the affairs of the city; 
(6)  Notify and confirm persons appointed by council to the various boards, commissions and special ad hoc committees of the city; 
(7)  Represent the city at meetings and in matters of intergovernmental relations in which the city has an interest; and 
(8)  Perform such other duties as may be consistent with law and as may be required by the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 1-2-7)  
Sec. 2-28. - Mayor pro tempore. 
(a)  The council shall, at the first meeting of the newly constituted council after any general election for council, elect one of its members as mayor pro tempore for a term of two years. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the mayor pro tempore to act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor, or in case of a vacancy in the office of the mayor. 
(Code 1983, § 1-2-8)  
Sec. 2-29. - Compensation. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive such compensation and expenses for performance of their duties as fixed by the council. 
(Code 1983, § 1-2-9)  
Sec. 2-30. - Oath of mayor and councilmembers. 
The mayor and councilmembers before entering upon the duties of their respective offices shall take the following oath: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I am duly qualified, according to the constitution of this state, to exercise the duties of the office to which I have been elected and that I will, to the best of my ability, discharge the duties thereof, and preserve, protect and defend the constitution of this state and of the United States. 
"As mayor (or councilmember) of the City of Hanahan, I will equally, fairly, and impartially, to the best of my ability, and skill, exercise the trust reposed in me, and will use my best endeavor to preserve the peace and carry into effect according to law the purposes for which I have been elected. So help me God." 
(Code 1983, § 1-2-10)  
Secs. 2-31—2-48. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS 
 
Sec. 2-49. - Meetings of council. 
(a)  Regular meetings of council shall be held on the second Tuesday in each month unless changed by a majority vote of members present at any regular meeting. 
(b)  Special meetings of council may be held on the call of the mayor or of a majority of the members. Notice of a special meeting shall be given immediately to all available members and the news media by the clerk-treasurer. 
(c)  All regular and special meetings of council shall be open to the public. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-1; Ord. of 1-21-1976; Ord. of 2-12-1979)  
Sec. 2-50. - Executive sessions. 
(a)  The council may hold executive sessions as permitted by the South Carolina Freedom of Information Act and this Code at such times and in such places as may be deemed necessary and in the public interest by a favorable vote of the council. 
(b)  Any formal action taken in executive session shall thereafter be ratified in public session prior to such action becoming effective. As used in this subsection, the term "formal action" means a recorded vote committing the council to a specific course of action. 
(c)  All information presented or discussed in executive session is ensured to be privileged by virtue of the rules governing executive sessions. All such information, written or expressed, shall remain privileged and shall not be divulged, discussed or distributed outside the executive session. 
(d)  Violations of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $200.00. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-2; Ord. of 12-21-1976; Ord. of 3-11-1997) 
State Law reference— Executive sessions of a public body, S.C. Code 1976, § 30-4-70.  
Sec. 2-51. - Quorum and rules of order. 
A majority of councilmembers serving shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business at any meeting. The mayor or mayor pro tempore shall preside, except that in the absence of both, the members present shall elect a presiding member. Except as otherwise required by state law or ordinance, all proceedings of council shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order and the city administrator shall act as parliamentarian. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-3; Ord. of 1-21-1976; Ord. of 2-12-1979; Ord. of 1-9-1990)  
Sec. 2-52. - Voting requirements. 
(a)  All actions of council shall be by majority vote of members present at a public meeting. 
(b)  Every member of council present shall vote on every question except when required to refrain from voting by state law. 
(c)  The vote on every question shall be by roll call and shall be recorded in the council minutes by the clerk-treasurer. 
(d)  No member of council shall leave the council chamber while in public session without notifying the presiding officer. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-4)  
Sec. 2-53. - Minutes of meetings. 
The clerk-treasurer shall keep the minutes of all public meetings of council which shall be a matter of permanent public record. At each council meeting, the minutes of the previous meeting shall be presented for approval. Minutes shall not be considered the official record of a meeting until approved by council. Any member of council desiring to express a position on a matter voted upon by council in the minutes may do so by presenting the position in writing to council not later than the next regular meeting. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-5)  
Sec. 2-54. - Appearance of citizens. 
Any citizen of the city shall be entitled to an appearance before council at any regular meeting concerning any municipal matter. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-6)  
Sec. 2-55. - Agenda. 
Matters to be considered by council at a regular meeting shall be placed on a written agenda prepared by the chief administrative officer and publicly posted by the clerk-treasurer by 12:00 noon of the day preceding the meeting. Matters not on the agenda may not be considered. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-7; Ord. of 1-21-1976; Ord. of 12-15-1981)  
Sec. 2-56. - Duty of city administrator to attend meetings. 
The city administrator shall attend all meetings of council unless excused by council. He shall act as parliamentarian, review all ordinances, resolutions and documents presented to council and give opinions upon questions of procedure and form to any member of council. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-8)  
Sec. 2-57. - Duties of clerk-treasurer. 
The clerk-treasurer shall be ex officio clerk of the city council. The clerk-treasurer shall give notices of meetings, post the agenda, attend regular and special meetings, record votes of council, keep minutes of council meetings and perform such other duties as may be assigned. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-9)  
Sec. 2-58. - Special committees. 
The council may appoint a special committee to assist in or hold a public hearing for council at any time upon any matter pending before it. Minutes or reports of hearings held by special committees shall be filed with the clerk-treasurer as public records. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-10)  
Secs. 2-59—2-89. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ORDINANCES 
 
Sec. 2-90. - Required for council action. 
(a)  Council shall act by ordinance in all matters required by law to be done by ordinance, including: 
(1)  Adopting or amending an administrative code or ordinances, creating, altering or abolishing any municipal department, office or agency; 
(2)  Providing for a fine or other penalty or establishing a rule or regulation in which a fine or other penalty is imposed for violations; 
(3)  Appropriating funds and adopting a budget; 
(4)  Granting, renewing or extending franchises, licenses or rights in public streets or public property; 
(5)  Authorizing the borrowing of money or the issuance of bonds; 
(6)  Levying taxes, assessing property for improvements or establishing charges for services; 
(7)  Annexing areas to the city; 
(8)  Conveying or leasing or authorizing the conveyance or lease of any lands of the city; and 
(9)  Amending or repealing any ordinance described in subsections (a)(1) through (8) of this section. 
(b)  In all other matters, council may act either by ordinance or resolution, written or oral, recorded in the minutes. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-21)  
Sec. 2-91. - Codification. 
All ordinances relating to administration, health, safety, vehicles, streets (except franchises and encroachments), traffic, railroads, crimes and offenses, utilities, solicitations, pollution, municipal court, descriptions of areas annexed to the city, and any other ordinances or portions of ordinances so required by council shall be codified and updated annually in a looseleaf Code of Ordinances. Standard codes, technical regulations and zoning ordinances may be cited in the Code by reference and copies thereof shall be made available by the clerk-treasurer for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-22)  
Sec. 2-92. - Notice required. 
Prior to the introduction of an ordinance granting a franchise, license or right for the use of any street or public property, or for the permanent closing of any abandoned street, the applicant for an ordinance shall publish a notice in three issues of a newspaper having general circulation in the city stating the nature of the franchise, license or right sought or a description of the street sought to be closed, and the date on which the application is to be presented to the city council, which shall be at least one week after the last notice. This requirement shall not apply to the temporary closing of a public street initiated by city council. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-23)  
Sec. 2-93. - Form. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption, which shall include: 
(1)  A title briefly describing the content; 
(2)  Findings, reasons or basis for the ordinance, if desired and appropriate; 
(3)  An enacting clause; 
(4)  Citation of any ordinance repealed; 
(5)  The provisions of the ordinance, including section numbers if the ordinance is to be codified or amends an existing codified ordinance; 
(6)  The effective date of the ordinance; 
(7)  The name of the person requesting introduction of the ordinance; 
(8)  The assignment of an ordinance number; and 
(9)  Space for the signatures of the mayor or presiding member of council and the clerk-treasurer attesting notice, if required, and adoption. 
(b)  Written resolutions shall be in any similar form as deemed appropriate by the city attorney. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-24)  
Sec. 2-94. - Introduction. 
An ordinance may be proposed by any member of council. A proposed ordinance shall be referred to the city attorney for approval as to form. The city administrator shall render assistance in the preparation of notices and ordinances. After an ordinance is in proper form and required notices have been given, the ordinance shall be deemed to be introduced when it appears on an agenda for a public meeting of council and its title is read. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-25)  
Sec. 2-95. - Introduction and adoption of resolutions. 
(a)  Introduction. A voice motion of a member of council shall be considered to be the introduction of an oral resolution which shall require no written record other than a notation of the clerk-treasurer in the council minutes. A resolution proposed in writing shall be introduced in the same manner as an ordinance. 
(b)  Adoption. Written or oral resolutions may be adopted on one reading unless a public hearing is set by a majority of the members of council present. 
(Code 1983, §§ 1-3-26, 1-3-28)  
Sec. 2-96. - Enactment of ordinances. 
(a)  An ordinance to levy a tax, adopt a budget, appropriate funds, grant a franchise, license or right to use or occupy a public street or public property for commercial purposes shall be complete in the form in which it is finally passed, and in this form remain on file with the clerk-treasurer for public inspection at least one week before final adoption. 
(b)  No ordinance shall be adopted until it shall have been read two times after the introduction and on two separate days with at least 13 days between each reading. 
(c)  Any proposed changes to any ordinance under consideration may be made at the first or second reading when the ordinance is under consideration. 
(d)  Emergency ordinances may be adopted on one reading without notice or hearing by affirmative vote of two-thirds of members present. An emergency ordinance may not levy taxes, relate to a franchise or a service rate and shall expire automatically on the 61st day following enactment. 
(e)  The introduction and reading of any ordinance shall be by the reading of the title only unless full reading is requested by a member of council. 
(f)  After the introduction of an ordinance, any member of council or any citizen of the city interested therein may request a public hearing which may be held at any time designated by council prior to final adoption. 
(g)  Upon final adoption by vote of council, an ordinance shall be signed by the mayor or presiding member and attested by the clerk-treasurer, who shall file the original in the council minutes. 
(Code 1983, § 1-3-27; Ord. No. 3-2013, 4-9-2013)  
Secs. 2-97—2-122. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES AND DEPARTMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-123. - Departments established. 
The administrative organization of the city shall be divided into the following departments, which are hereby established: 
(1)  Police; 
(2)  Fire; 
(3)  Administrative services; 
(4)  Public works; and 
(5)  Recreation. 
(Code 1983, § 1-4-1)  
Sec. 2-124. - Offices established. 
The council may create and establish city offices, departments and sections as it may deem proper for the orderly and efficient government of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 1-4-2) 
State Law reference— Authority to establish departments and agencies, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-11-40.  
Sec. 2-125. - Term of office. 
All appointed officers and employees shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority. 
(Code 1983, § 1-4-3)  
Sec. 2-126. - Compensation. 
The compensation of all appointed officers and employees of the city shall be fixed by the council. 
(Code 1983, § 1-4-4)  
Secs. 2-127—2-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR 
 
Sec. 2-151. - Appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
The city council shall appoint a city administrator who shall serve at the pleasure of council for an indefinite term of office and shall fix his compensation. The city administrator shall be appointed solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. He shall be qualified by training and experience in the fields of public administration or business management and shall have had at least two years' experience as an executive in either of these fields. He need not be a resident of the city or of the state at the time of his appointment; however, the city administrator must reside within the city limits after his appointment. 
(Code 1983, § 1-4-11; Ord. of 7-10-1979)  
Sec. 2-152. - Removal. 
The city council may remove the city administrator from office upon the affirmative vote of two-thirds of its members. The removal of the administrator must take the form of a preliminary resolution adopted by two-thirds majority vote of the council that states the reasons for removal of the administrator. Within five days after a copy of the preliminary resolution is delivered to the city administrator, he may file with the city council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing must be held at a council meeting not earlier than 15 days or later than 30 days after the request is filed by the city administrator. The city administrator may file with the city council a written reply not later than five days prior to the hearing. The city council may adopt a final resolution of removal which may be made effective immediately, by affirmative vote of a two-thirds majority of its members at any time after five days from the date when a copy of the preliminary resolution was delivered to the city administrator, if he has not requested a hearing, or at any time after the hearing if he has requested a hearing. The city administrator shall continue to receive his salary until the effective date of the final resolution of removal. 
(Code 1983, § 1-4-12; Ord. of 7-10-1979)  
Sec. 2-153. - Acting city administrator. 
By letter filed with the clerk of council, the city administrator shall designate, subject to approval of the city council, a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of office of the city administrator during his temporary absence or disability. 
(Code 1983, § 1-4-13; Ord. of 7-10-1979)  
Sec. 2-154. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The city administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. He shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in his charge by the city council. He shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  He shall appoint and, when he deems necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees except department heads, the clerk-treasurer, the city attorney and the municipal court judge. Provided, however, he may authorize any department head or administrative officer who is subject to his direction and supervision to exercise the powers of appointment and removal of city employees with respect to subordinates in that officer's or department head's department, office or agency. With respect to appointment of department heads, the city administrator shall assist, advise, and provide counsel to the city council with regard to the appointment and removal of such department heads. This advice and counsel shall include the taking of applications, the review and screening of applications and assistance in council interviews of prospective applicants for department head positions. 
(2)  He shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the city except as otherwise provided by law or by ordinance. Unless excused by council, he shall attend all meetings of the city council and shall have a right to take part in the discussion for information and advice, but may not vote. 
(3)  He shall direct the execution and enforcement of the laws and ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city in an expeditious manner. 
(4)  Matters to be considered by council at a regular meeting shall be placed on a written agenda and publicly posted by the clerk by 12:00 noon of the day preceding the meeting. 
(5)  He shall prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the city council. 
(6)  He shall approve all purchases of the city not to exceed $5,000.00, provided the items, commodities or equipment to be purchased are approved items in the budget. Any items, including commodities and equipment which are not a part of the budget and which have not been approved as an expenditure in the duly adopted budget of the city, shall be submitted to the city council for approval. He shall prepare bid specifications with council review prior to public release of these specifications for all purchases in excess of $5,000.00. 
(7)  He shall submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city within 60 days after the end of each fiscal year. In addition, the city administrator shall report quarterly on the finances of the city. Each quarterly report, as a minimum, shall show: 
a.  A combined statement of cash position of all funds. This statement will show the actual short-term assets in the city's accounts as of a certain date and will tell how much cash and easily liquidated assets the city has on hand as opposed to how much revenue it has collected or is due. 
b.  A combined statement of cash receipts and disbursements. This statement will show for each individual fund the cash balance at the start of the reporting period, the inflows and outflows of cash during the month and the balance at the end of the period. 
c.  A statement of actual and estimated revenues. This statement shall compare estimated revenues with actual receipts for the month and year to date. For all sources of revenue, the statement will show the estimated amount of revenue, the actual received during the month, the actual realized year to date, and the unreceived balance. 
d.  A statement of actual and estimated expenditure. This report will show expenditures for the month and year to date as well as encumbrances. The statement will reflect expenditures for each function or department showing the amount appropriated in the budget for that function or department, the actual amount expended during the month, the actual amount spent year to date, and the unexpended balance. 
(8)  In addition to the quarterly financial statement, the city administrator shall prepare a monthly program performance report which shows major programs and activities initiated or completed during the month. This statement of work performance shall be related to the statement of actual and estimated expenditures. It shall identify any major capital project startups and/or completions. The report shall be presented in the form of a monthly project summary. It shall show each major project, the work or activities completed on that project to date, the amount of money budgeted for that project and the amount of money expended during the month as related to any activities or project accomplishments completed during the month. 
(9)  He shall make any other reports as the city council may require concerning the operations and affairs of the city departments, offices and agencies subject to his direction and supervision. 
(10)  He shall keep the city council fully advised as to all current affairs and future needs of the city and make any recommendations to the council concerning the affairs of the city as is deemed desirable. 
(11)  He shall prepare news releases which shall be issued by the mayor on behalf of the city council. 
(12)  He shall perform any other duties as may be required by the city council. 
(13)  The city administrator shall be the overall legal custodian of the public records of the City of Hanahan. They shall be responsible for carrying out the duties and responsibilities of the city's public records program pursuant to this section and S.C. Code 1976, ch. 1, title 30, as amended. The records custodian shall appoint in writing a city records manager to act on his or her behalf in carrying out program responsibilities. The records custodian shall follow the State of South Carolina Retention Schedule and shall submit an "Approval of Records Retention Schedule" to the South Carolina Department of Archives and History, Division of Archives and Records Management. 
(Code 1983, § 1-4-14; Ord. of 7-10-1979; Ord. of 1-9-1990; Ord. of 1-14-2003; Ord. No. 4-2007, § 3, 3-13-2007; Ord. No. 3-2017 , 9-12-2017)  
Secs. 2-155—2-176. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CLERK-TREASURER 
 
Sec. 2-177. - Bond required. 
Before entering upon the duties of office, the clerk-treasurer shall give bond in a sum as may be required and with a surety company approved by the council, for the faithful performance of the duties of the office. 
(Code 1983, § 1-4-21)  
Sec. 2-178. - Duties. 
The clerk-treasurer shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Collect all claims and accounts that may be due and payable to the city; 
(2)  Receive all monies belonging to the city; 
(3)  Issue all licenses for which provisions may be made; 
(4)  Pay all bills owed by the city when approved by the council; 
(5)  Deposit funds in a bank designated by the council; 
(6)  Make statements of financial conditions of the city as ordered by the council; 
(7)  Keep account of all monies and accounts and report to the council; 
(8)  Give notice to the mayor and the members of the council of regular and special meetings; 
(9)  Record the ordinances and minutes of meetings of the council; and 
(10)  Perform other duties as may be required by the council. 
(Code 1983, § 1-4-22) 
State Law reference— Duties of municipal clerk, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-220.  
Secs. 2-179—2-209. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CITY ATTORNEY 
 
Sec. 2-210. - Appointment; term. 
The council shall appoint as city attorney a person who is a member of the South Carolina Bar and admitted to practice law in the state. 
(Code 1983, § 1-4-31)  
Sec. 2-211. - Duties and compensation. 
It shall be the duty of the city attorney, whenever called upon by the council, or the necessity arises, to give his advice and direction to the council, or any member thereof, or to the clerk-treasurer and chief of police on any and all legal questions which may arise in the course of the administration of the city government, or in the discharge of the duties of their respective offices; and whenever required to do so by the council, he shall give his legal opinion in writing. He shall draw or supervise the drawing or drafting of all ordinances, and other instruments of writing relative to the business of the city when required to do so by the council or any member thereof; and shall, whenever notified to do so, attend the meetings of the council and shall perform such other duties as required by the council. The city attorney shall receive such compensation for the discharge of his duties as fixed by the council. 
(Code 1983, § 1-4-32) 
State Law reference— Duties of municipal attorney, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-230.  
Secs. 2-212—2-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - RECREATION DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 2-231. - Established. 
There is hereby established a recreation department to be headed by a recreation director who shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 1-10-1(a); Ord. of 1-14-2003; Ord. No. 4-2007, § 4, 3-13-2007)  
Sec. 2-232. - Officers and employees. 
The recreation department shall consist of such officers and employees as shall be approved by the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 1-10-1(b); Ord. of 1-14-2003; Ord. No. 4-2007, § 4, 3-13-2007)  
Secs. 2-233—2-255. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PURCHASING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local governments required to adopt procurement ordinances, S.C. Code 1976, § 11-35-50. 
 
Sec. 2-256. - Purchasing agent, specific duties. 
The city administrator, or an officer of the city designated by the administrator, shall be the purchasing agent for the city. He shall be responsible for: 
(1)  The purchase of supplies, materials and equipment and contractual services required by an office, department or agency of the city government. 
(2)  Establishing written specifications, whenever practical, for supplies, materials and equipment required by an office, department or agency of the city. Such specifications shall be definite and certain and shall permit competition. 
(3)  Soliciting and maintaining an up-to-date list of qualified suppliers who have requested their names to be added to a "bidders list." The purchasing agent shall have authority to remove temporarily the names of vendors who have defaulted on their quotations, attempted to defraud the city or who have failed to meet established specifications or delivery dates. 
(4)  Obtaining as full and open competition as possible on all purchases, contracts and sales. 
(Code 1983, § 1-5-1; Ord. of 12-10-1996)  
Sec. 2-257. - Formal contracts procedure. 
All supplies and contractual services, except as otherwise provided herein, when the established cost thereof shall exceed $5,000.00, shall be purchased in accordance with section 2-259, after due notice inviting proposals. No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this section. All sales of personal property which has become obsolete or unusable, when the estimated value shall exceed $5,000.00, shall be sold by formal written contract or at a public auction to the highest responsible bidder, after due notice inviting proposals and bidders. However, in the event of an emergency affecting the public welfare, health or safety, the provisions of this section shall not apply. A full report of the circumstances of an emergency purchase shall be filed by the administrator with the city council and shall be entered in the minutes of the council. 
(Code 1983, § 1-5-2; Ord. of 12-10-1996)  
Sec. 2-258. - Bidding competitive; required exception. 
Before any purchases or contracts for supplies, materials, equipment or services exceeding $500.00 are made, the purchasing agent shall give ample opportunity for competitive bidding. For purchases or contracts not exceeding $1,000.00, oral bids may be accepted. All other bids shall be in writing. Competitive bidding shall be encouraged for all contracts, purchases or sales. However, in the event of an emergency affecting the public welfare, health or safety, the provisions of this section shall not apply. A full report of the circumstances of an emergency purchase shall be filed by the administrator with the city council and shall be entered in the minutes of the council. 
(Code 1983, § 1-5-3; Ord. of 12-10-1996)  
Sec. 2-259. - Award of bid; advertising when required; cooperative purchasing for procurement. 
(a)  Generally. Contracts for city improvements, materials, equipment, or services shall be awarded to responsive and responsible vendors submitting the lowest bid for the advertised bid for the advertised goods or services. In all cases, contracts shall be awarded to city resident bidders who submit bids within two percent of the apparent low bidder. Contracts shall be awarded to bidders who currently possess city business licenses, provided that their bids are within one percent of the apparent low bidder. A one-percent preference shall also be given to a bidder which is a resident of the state. All contracts exceeding $5,000.00 will be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation or by some other means where practical to ensure notification of at least five potential bidders. In the case of sole source or limited source providers, notification of all known bidders will be sufficient. When advertised, this notice shall appear at least five days prior to the last date set for receipt of proposals for bids; however, in the case of professional services, this section does not apply. The newspaper notice required herein shall include a general description of articles or services to be purchased, and shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured and the time, date and place for opening. 
(b)  Cooperative purchasing authorized. The purchasing agent, with the approval of the council, may either participate in, sponsor, conduct, or administer a cooperative purchasing agreement for the procurement of supplies, services, or construction with one or more public procurement units in accordance with an agreement entered into between the participants. Such cooperative purchasing may include, but is not limited to, joint or multiparty contracts between public procurement units. 
(Code 1983, § 1-5-4; Ord. of 12-10-1996)  
Sec. 2-260. - Bid deposits. 
When deemed necessary by the purchasing agent, bid deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Upon entering into a contracts, bidders shall be entitled to return to bid deposit where the purchasing agent has required such. A successful bidder shall forfeit any bid deposit required by the purchasing agent upon failure on his part to enter into a contract within ten days after the award; provided, however, that the city, in its uncontrolled discretion, may waive this forfeiture. 
(Code 1983, § 1-5-5; Ord. of 12-10-1996)  
Sec. 2-261. - Sealed bid procedures. 
The procedure for sealed bids shall be as follows: 
(1)  Sealing. Bids shall be submitted to the purchasing agent securely sealed in an envelope, and shall be identified on the envelope in accordance with bid instructions. 
(2)  Opening. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. 
(3)  Tabulation. A tabulation of all bids received shall be available for public inspection. 
(4)  Rejection of bids. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to reject all bids, parts of all bids, or all bids for any one or more supplies or contractual services included in the proposed contract, when the public interest will be served thereby. 
(5)  Bidders in default to city. The purchasing agent shall not accept the bid of a vendor or contractor who is delinquent in the payment of taxes, licenses, or other monies due the city. 
(6)  Award of contract. 
a.  Authority in agent. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to award contracts within the purview of this article; provided, however, that contracts in excess of $1,000.00 shall not be awarded without prior approval of the city council. 
b.  Lowest responsible bidder. Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. In determining the lowest responsible bidder, in addition to price, the purchasing agent shall consider: 
1.  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required; 
2.  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
3.  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder; 
4.  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services; 
5.  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or services; 
6.  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service; 
7.  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to the particular use required; 
8.  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract; 
9.  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
(7)  Award to other than low bidder. When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons for placing the order elsewhere shall be prepared by the purchasing agent and filed with the papers relating to the transaction and held for a period of no less than 12 months. 
(8)  Tie bids. For local vendors, if all bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, the contract shall be awarded to the local bidder. The purchasing agent shall award the contract to one of the outside tie bidders by drawing lots in public. 
(9)  Performance bonds. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to require a performance bond before entering into a contract, in such form and amount as he shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interest of the city. 
(10)  Payment bond and labor and material bond. The purchasing agent may require a payment bond and a labor and material bond before entering into a contract, in such form and amount as he shall deem necessary to protect the best interest of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 1-5-6; Ord. of 12-10-1996)  
Sec. 2-262. - Materials testing. 
The purchasing agent shall have the authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with the specifications. In the performance of such tests, the purchasing agent shall have the authority to make use of laboratory facilities of any agency of the city government or any outside laboratory. 
(Code 1983, § 1-5-7; Ord. of 12-10-1996)  
Sec. 2-263. - Financial interest of city officials and employees. 
No member of the city council or any officer or employee of the city shall have a financial interest in any contract or in the sale to the city or to a contractor supplying the city of any land or rights or interests in any land, material, supplies or services; except when a majority of the city council determines such exception in the best interest of the city, provided that no councilmember whose interest is involved shall vote on the question. Any willful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office and any officer or employee of the city found guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit his office or position. Any violation of this section with the knowledge, expressed or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with the city shall render the contract voidable by the city administrator or city council. 
(Code 1983, § 1-5-8; Ord. of 12-10-1996)  
Sec. 2-264. - Records of open market orders and bids. 
The purchasing agent shall keep a record of all open market orders and the bids submitted in competition thereon, and such records shall also be open to public inspection. 
(Code 1983, § 1-5-9; Ord. of 12-10-1996)  
Sec. 2-265. - Stock reports. 
All officers, departments or agencies of the city shall submit to the purchasing agent, at such times and in such form as he shall prescribe, reports showing stocks of all supplies which are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out or scrapped. 
(Code 1983, § 1-5-10; Ord. of 12-10-1996)  
Sec. 2-266. - Transfer of surplus stock. 
The purchasing agent shall have authority to transfer surplus stock to other offices, departments or agencies of the city government. 
(Code 1983, § 1-5-11; Ord. of 12-10-1996)  
Sec. 2-267. - Supplies unsuitable for public use, sale or exchanges. 
The purchasing agent shall sell all supplies which have become unsuitable for public use or to exchange the same, or trade in the same on, for new supplies. All items to be sold will be approved by the council. Sales will be made to the highest bidder. 
(Code 1983, § 1-5-12; Ord. of 12-10-1996)  
Sec. 2-268. - Gifts and rebates. 
The purchasing agent and every officer and employee of the city are expressly prohibited from accepting, directly or indirectly, from any person, company, firm or corporation to which any purchase order or contract is, or might be awarded, any rebate, gift, money, or anything of value whatsoever, except where given for the use and benefit of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 1-5-13; Ord. of 12-10-1996)  
Sec. 2-269. - Cooperative purchasing. 
The purchasing agent shall have authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchases when the best interests of the city could be serviced thereby; provided that the purchasing agent is given the authority to make purchases to supplies and equipment through the property division of the state budget and control board, without the formality of publication and receiving competitive bids. 
(Code 1983, § 1-5-14; Ord. of 12-10-1996)  
Secs. 2-270—2-286. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal Bond Act, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-21-210 et seq.; bonded indebtedness of political subdivisions, S.C. Const. art. X, § 14; council to provide for annual independent audits, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-240; adoption of annual budget and tax levy, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-11-40. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-287. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the city shall be July 1 to June 30 of each year. 
(Code 1983, § 1-6-1)  
Sec. 2-288. - Adoption of budget. 
The prepared budget and the estimated revenue for payment of budgeted expenses are hereby adopted by reference and are made a part of this Code as fully as if incorporated herein. 
(Code 1983, § 1-6-2)  
Sec. 2-289. - Form of budget; transfers of appropriations; lapse of appropriations. 
(a)  The annual budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance, setting out the estimated revenues in detail by source and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose or activity as set out in the budget document. The amounts thus set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit, purpose or activity shall then constitute the annual appropriation for such item and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriation to which it is chargeable. No interdepartmental transfers of the appropriations from one line item account to another line item account in the operating funds of the city shall be made unless upon approval by majority vote of four of the total membership of the city council. This approval shall be in the form of an amendment to the annual operating budget ordinance. 
(b)  The council shall adopt the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year in the form of an ordinance. No appropriations provided for in the capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, any member of the council may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, which amendments may be accompanied by recommendations thereon by the city administrator or the city planner. Any amendments to the capital improvements budget ordinance shall become effective only upon adoption by a majority of the total members of the council. 
(c)  Following adoption by ordinance of the annual operating and capital improvements budget for each fiscal year, the council shall levy by ordinance a tax upon all real and personal property within the city, the rates to be set by the ordinance shall be such that a reasonable estimate of cash revenues of the levy shall be at least sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances and applicable reserves to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget ordinance for defraying the expense of the city. 
(d)  Upon a certification of the director of finance that the revenues or any other resources actually realized with respect to any fund shall be less than was anticipated and will be insufficient to meet the amounts appropriated from the fund, it shall be the duty of council to impound any appropriations as may be necessary to prevent a deficit operation. 
(e)  The city council may make appropriations in addition to those contained in the current operating budget and capital improvements budget ordinance at any regular or special meeting called for such purpose. 
(f)  All unencumbered balances of appropriations in the current operating budget at the end of the fiscal year shall lapse into the unappropriated surplus or reserves of funds for which the appropriations were made. 
(Code 1983, § 1-6-3; Ord. of 7-10-1979)  
Sec. 2-290. - Annual property tax. 
The council shall impose by ordinance, a copy of which shall be published at least 20 days before the adoption thereof and setting forth the amounts levied for the several purposes for which levies may be made, an annual tax on all real estate lying within the corporate limits and on all personal property within the corporate limits and on all personal property within the city, including bonds and stocks of banks, insurance companies and other corporations and the real estate of churches and school associations from which the church and school associations draw a revenue or which is intended to be rented out for that purpose, except property that is exempt from taxation under the constitution and laws of this state, as will yield an amount necessary for the general fund operating purposes and for debt service requirements of the city. A change in the tax shall be by ordinance and in accordance with the notice requirement of this section. 
(Code 1983, § 1-6-4)  
Secs. 2-291—2-313. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - COLLECTION OF PROPERTY TAXES 
 
Sec. 2-314. - Basis of assessment; collection. 
(a)  The amount of tax levied by the council on property within the corporate limits, as assessed for taxation for state and county purposes, shall be levied upon the assessed value of such property as based upon the return and assessment for the current year in the office of the county auditor and county treasurer for the purpose of levying state and county taxes for the current year. 
(b)  All property taxes due and payable to the city shall be collected by the county treasurer. 
(Code 1983, § 1-6-11)  
Sec. 2-315. - Due date of taxes. 
All taxes for the year shall be due and payable between November 1 and January 1 after assessments each year. 
(Code 1983, § 1-6-12)  
Secs. 2-316—2-333. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PERSONNEL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-334—2-354. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CODE OF ETHICS 
 
Sec. 2-355. - Declaration of policy. 
Elected and appointed officers and employees of the city shall demonstrate by their example the highest standards of ethical conduct to the end that the public may justifiably have trust and confidence in the integrity of government. They, as agents of public purpose, shall hold their offices or positions for the benefit of the public, shall recognize that the public interest is their primary concern and shall faithfully discharge the duties of their offices regardless of personal considerations. 
(Code 1983, § 1-7-21; Ord. of 7-10-1979)  
Sec. 2-356. - Conflicts of interest. 
No elected or appointed officer or employee shall: 
(1)  Solicit or accept any gift directly or indirectly, whether in the form of money, loan, gratuity, favor, service, thing or promise, or any other form, under circumstances in which it can reasonably be inferred that the gift is intended to influence him in the performance of his official duties. Nothing herein shall preclude the solicitation or acceptance of lawful contributions for election campaigns; 
(2)  Disclose confidential information gained by reason of the person's office or position or use this information for personal gain or benefit of anyone; 
(3)  Engage in any business transaction or activity or have a financial interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of the person's official duties or which may intend to impair the person's independence or judgment in the performance of official duties; 
(4)  Receive any compensation for his services as an officer or employee of the city from any source other than the city except as otherwise provided by ordinance; or 
(5)  Represent private interest in any action or proceeding against the interest of the city or appear in behalf of private interest before any agency. 
(Code 1983, § 1-7-22; Ord. of 7-10-1979)  
Sec. 2-357. - Disclosure of interest. 
Any elected or appointed officer or employee who possesses or acquires any interest as might reasonably tend to create a conflict with the public interest shall make a full disclosure in writing to the appointing authority or to the city council in case of a member of the council, at any time the conflict becomes apparent. The disclosure statements shall be made a matter of public record and filed with the clerk-treasurer. Any member of the council who knows such member has a personal private interest, direct or indirect, and any proposal before the council, shall disclose the interest in writing to the council. This disclosure shall be made a matter of public record prior to the taking of any vote on the proposal. 
(Code 1983, § 1-7-23; Ord. of 7-10-1979)  
Sec. 2-358. - Fair and equal treatment. 
No elected or appointed officer or employee shall use that person's official position to secure or grant special consideration, treatment, advantage, privilege or exemption to himself or to any person beyond that which is available to every other person. 
(Code 1983, § 1-7-24; Ord. of 7-10-1979)  
Sec. 2-359. - No future employment. 
No person who has served as an elected or appointed officer or employee of the city shall, within one year after termination of such service or employment, appear for compensation before any agency of the city, or receive compensation for any services rendered in behalf of any private interest in relation to any case, proceeding or application with respect to which the person was directly concerned or which was under the person's active consideration, or with respect to which knowledge or information was made available to the person during the period of service of employment. 
(Code 1983, § 1-7-25; Ord. of 7-10-1979)  
Sec. 2-360. - City council to be judge of qualifications. 
The city council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its members and the grounds for forfeiture of their office and for that purpose shall have power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and require the production of evidence. Any member charged with conduct constituting grounds for forfeiture of his office shall be entitled to a public hearing on demand. A notice of the hearing shall be published in one or more newspapers of general circulation within the city at least one week in advance of the hearing. 
(Code 1983, § 1-7-26; Ord. of 7-10-1979)  
Sec. 2-361. - Penalties and disciplinary action for violation. 
Failure to comply with this division, or any violation of the standards of conduct established in this division, shall be grounds for forfeiture of office, removal from office or employment, or other offices, of all officers and employees of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 1-7-27; Ord. of 7-10-1979)  
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State preemption of acts encompassed in Alcohol Beverage Control Act, S.C. Code 1976, § 61-6-4490; municipal police enforcement powers, S.C. Code 1976, § 61-6-4510; municipal court jurisdiction of certain alcohol offenses, S.C. Code 1976, § 61-6-4500. 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Open alcoholic beverage containers in public. 
It shall be unlawful to publicly possess an open container of beer, wine, ale, porter, malt liquor or other alcoholic beverage on a public street or in a vehicle on a public street within the incorporated limits of the city. 
Public possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess an open container or to drink any spirituous malt, vinous, fermented, brewed or other type of beer or wine which contains alcohol and is used as a beverage on any street, highway, park or public place not lawfully licensed to sell such beverage. A lawful exemption of the aforementioned is during the hours and location of a special event that has been properly permitted by the city. 
(Code 1983, § 7-1-6; Ord. of 9-25-1978; Ord. of 1-10-1995; Ord. No. 8-2014, 11-12-2014)  
Sec. 4-2. - Hours for public consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Mondays through Sundays upon the premises of any private or nonprofit club, any store, beer parlor or any other place of business or commercial establishment authorized or licensed by law to sell wine, ale, porter, beer, malt liquors, or other alcoholic beverages it shall be unlawful for: 
(1)  An owner, employee or person in charge thereof to sell, offer for sale, give away, barter or exchange or in any manner dispense or permit the consumption of any wine, ale, porter, beer, malt liquor, or other alcoholic beverages; and 
(2)  Any person to drink or possess in an open container any wine, ale, porter, beer, malt liquor, or other alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not prohibit during the aforesaid hours the sale or possession in sealed containers of beer, ale, porter, wine or other malt liquors for consumption off the premises. 
(c)  Commercial establishments which allow for the on-premises consumption of beer, ale, porter. wine, malt liquors, or other alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited from operating between the hours 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Mondays through Sundays. 
(Code 1983, § 7-1-7; Ord. of 9-25-1978; Ord. No. 3-2016, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 6-2016, 7-12-2016)  
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Federal law reference— "Service animal" defined for purposes of Americans with Disabilities Act, 28 CFR 36.104. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to enact ordinances for care and control of dogs, cats, and other animals, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-3-20; municipal powers not limited by state laws, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-3-70; required annual inoculation of pets against rabies, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-5-60; notice to health department of animal suspected of rabies, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-5-80. 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandonment means a situation in which an owner of an animal or pet does not provide for humane disposal of the animal or pet, or transfer ownership to a responsible person, or who does not provide or arrange for adequate food, water, shelter and care. 
Animal control officers means the persons designated by the city police department as the enforcement officers of the provisions of this chapter. 
Animal shelter means any premises designated by the city council for the purpose of impoundment, care or destruction of animal or pets found in violation of this chapter. 
Animals means all domestic, domesticated or wild members of the animal kingdom, including birds, but not including man. 
At large means an animal which is off the property and/or premises of the owner or keeper and not under physical control by owner or keeper by means of a leash or similar physical restraining device. 
Dangerous dog means: 
(1)  A dog with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury, or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals; 
(2)  A dog which attacks a human being or domestic animal without provocation; 
(3)  A dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dogfighting or a dog trained for dogfighting; and 
(4)  Trained guard or attack dogs. 
Division means the animal control division of the city police department. 
Impound means assumption of custody of an animal by a police officer or employee of the police department for detention in a pound or animal shelter. 
Owner means any person who has a property right in a pet or an animal, keeps or harbors a pet or an animal or who has it in his care or acts as its custodian, or permits a pet or animal to remain in or about any premises occupied by him. There shall be a rebuttal presumption that a person has a property right in an animal if that person keeps or harbors a pet or animal or has an animal in his care or acts as its custodian for 21 consecutive days. 
Pet means all mammals of the order carnivore, including dogs and cats. 
Restraint means when a pet or animal is on the premises of its owner or keeper or when a pet is accompanied by owner or keeper and is physically controlled by a leash or similar physical device. 
Spayed female means any female dog or cat which has been operated on to prevent conception. 
Vaccination against rabies means the injection subcutaneously, intramuscularly or otherwise, of anti-rabid vaccine as approved by the department of agriculture/veterinary biologics division, administered by a licensed veterinarian. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-1; Ord. of 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 6-2. - Penalty. 
Any person found guilty of violating this chapter shall be subject to the fines, penalties and/or incarceration as in the court's discretion it deems proper. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-7; Ord. of 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 6-3. - Keeping of certain animals—Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within the city limits any horse, mule, cow, gannet, swine, domestic fowl, goat or cattle of any description, except as provided for in section 6-4. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-2; Ord. of 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 6-4. - Same—Exceptions. 
(a)  Any resident or property owner who keeps an animal described in section 6-3 on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be notified by a registered letter of the provisions of this chapter, and such property owner shall be given a period of 60 days to remove such animal so as to comply with the provisions of section 6-3. Failure to comply with the provisions of section 6-3 within 60 days from the receipt of the notice shall constitute a violation of this chapter, and each day thereafter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person who on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived is in violation of this chapter may apply to the city council for permission to keep such animal or apply to city council for permission to keep such animal. Such application to city council shall include information as to the facilities for the proper and humane care and treatment of such animal, type of shelter provided for the animal, and method for maintaining the area in a sanitary manner so as to remove health hazards. 
(c)  The council shall judge each separate application, provided, however, that the stable area or primary living area of such animal is not within 105 feet of any building owned or occupied by persons other than the owner of the animal. 
(d)  Such permit may at any time be revoked by council, upon 30 days' notice, if the council determines, after providing the owner an opportunity for a hearing, that the conditions on which the permit was issued have been violated. 
(e)  It is the purpose and intent of this section that none of the animals described in section 6-3 shall be henceforth brought into the city or kept or maintained within the city except as provided in this section. 
(f)  It is the further intent of the city council that any existing use of land for the purpose of keeping said animals within city limits shall be discontinued upon the animal's death. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-3; Ord. of 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 6-5. - Manner of keeping and maintaining animals. 
All animals shall be kept and maintained in such a manner as to not injure, interfere with or disturb the property, peace, comfort, health, safety, or general welfare of any person within the city. No animal shall be kept confined or tied by rope, chain or wire that is less than 12 feet in length and must allow pet access to shelter, food and water without becoming entangled. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-4; Ord. of 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 6-6. - Cruelty to animals. 
Any act, omission or neglect whereby unjustified physical pain, suffering or death of an animal caused or permitted shall be cruelty to animals. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, whoever does any of the following shall be guilty of cruelty to animals: 
(1)  Overloads, overdrives, overworks, tortures, torments, poisons, ill-treats, deprives of necessary sustenance, shelter or ventilation, inflicts unnecessary pain or suffering upon any animal or causes the same to be done; 
(2)  Drives or works an animal when it is unfit for labor; 
(3)  Abandons or fails to provide proper treatment for a maimed, diseased, disabled or infirm animal; 
(4)  Carries or causes an animal to be confined or cared in any vehicle, or otherwise, in an unnecessarily cruel manner; 
(5)  Knowingly or willfully authorizes or permits any animal to be abandoned or to unnecessary suffering, torture or cruelty of any kind; 
(6)  Exhibits, keeps or displays an animal without providing it with access to an area shaded from the sun; 
(7)  Causes, encourages or allows any animal to attack, fight or harm another animal either as owner or otherwise; or 
(8)  Robs or destroys nests of wild fowl or animal; 
provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall prevent the trapping and elimination of rats, mice, bugs or other household pests or, with prior written approval of the chief of police or his designated representative, the trapping or destruction of birds, squirrels or other animals on specific premises where they are inflicting damages or have become a health hazard. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-5; Ord. of 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 6-7. - Bird sanctuary. 
The territory embraced within the city or the police jurisdiction thereof is hereby declared to be a bird sanctuary. It shall be unlawful to kill, maim, or injure any wild or migratory bird or to destroy or to rob or molest eggs or nests in breeding places of any birds. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-6; Ord. of 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 6-8. - Guard dogs for business. 
Any business may keep a watchdog to protect the premises of that business during the hours it is closed. However, if the dog is allowed access to fenced outside or yard areas while not under direct control of its guardian, the fence must be at least six feet high to prevent small children from inadvertently getting into the area with the dog. In addition, signs with block-printed letters at least three inches high, with the statement "BEWARE—THIS PROPERTY IS GUARDED BY DOG," must be displayed on all sides of the property in easy visual access. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-8; Ord. of 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 6-9. - Sanitation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to allow the accumulation of waste excretions from animals which are offensive by sight or odor to any neighbor. All owners shall be required to move and dispose of all waste in a sanitary manner. Where a complaint is received regarding this section, the animal control officer shall investigate the complaint within 48 hours and if, in his opinion, the complaint is found to be justified, he shall give written notice to the owner (if necessary via adult member of the household) to clean the premises within 24 hours. If, by the expiration of the allotted time, the premises have not been satisfactorily cleaned, the owner or his agent shall be issued a summons (citation) to appear in municipal court. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, keeper or walker of any dog or cat to permit his dog or cat to discharge its excreta upon any public or private property except upon the property of the owner of the animal or upon the property of one who has assented thereto unless such owner, keeper, or walker immediately thereafter removes said animal's excreta from the public or private property in question. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-9; Ord. of 10-13-1992; Ord. of 12-11-2001)  
Sec. 6-10. - Animals at large prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any dog to be at large in the city unless it has a chain, substantial rope, leash or leather thong securely attached to its collar. A responsible person must be in actual physical control of the animal through the above-mentioned leash, etc., at all times. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any owner, possessor, or person who harbors or keeps any animal to confine such animal within the limits of his premises except as above stated. 
(c)  The minimum fine upon violation and conviction of this section shall be in accordance with section 6-2. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-10; Ord. of 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 6-11. - Procedure upon person being bitten. 
Any animal who bites any person within the city limits shall be confined for a period of not less than ten days. This section applies to both vaccinated and unvaccinated animals. It shall be at the discretion of the animal control officer and/or the chief of police whether said animal shall be confined upon the owner's premises or placed in a private or county pound. If deemed necessary to place the animal in a private or county pound, all costs shall be the responsibility of the owner of the animal. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-11; Ord. of 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 6-12. - Inspections and right of entry. 
Whenever it is necessary to conduct an investigation to enforce any of the provisions of or perform any duty imposed by this chapter, or other applicable law, or whenever the animal control officer or any authorized member of the department or a recognized humane society or SPCA or a volunteer animal control officer working under the police department has probable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any violation of the provisions of this chapter or other applicable law in an emergency situation, the animal control officer or any police officer is hereby empowered to enter such property at any reasonable time and to inspect the same and perform any duty imposed upon the animal control officer or any police officer by this chapter or other applicable laws; if not an emergency situation, a search warrant must be obtained. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-12; Ord. of 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 6-13. - Vaccination against rabies. 
(a)  No person shall own, keep, or harbor any pet within the city unless such pet has received, as evidenced by certificate, a vaccination from a licensed graduate veterinarian using a vaccine which is good for a period of one year, provided such vaccine has been approved with the longer period of time specified by the state department of health and environmental control after consolation with the executive committee of the state association of veterinarians. 
(b)  A state department of health and environmental control certificate of pet rabies vaccination will be issued by a licensed graduate veterinarian for each pet, stating the name and address of the owner, the name, breed, color and markings, age, sex of animal, and the veterinary or pharmaceutical control number of the vaccination. 
(c)  Coincident with the issuance of the certificate, the licensed graduate veterinarian shall also furnish a serially numbered metal tag bearing the same number and year as is on the certificate. The metal license tag shall bear the name of the veterinarian and shall at all times be attached to a collar or harness worn by the pet for which the certificate and tag have been issued. Tags must be of the same color and shape when issued in offices of veterinarians. 
(d)  The owner shall have a valid certificate of rabies vaccination readily available at all times for inspection by the animal control officer or the police department designee or health officials. 
(e)  In the event that a rabies tag is lost, the owner shall obtain a duplicate tag within seven working days. 
(f)  A certificate of rabies vaccination issued by a licensed veterinarian from another state will be accepted as valid evidence provided it is less than a year from date of issue. 
(g)  Rabies inoculation must be given by age four months to all cats and dogs. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-13; Ord. of 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 6-14. - Enforcement of rabies control provisions of this chapter and state law; impoundment. 
The provisions of this chapter relating to control of rabies and the provisions of the Rabies Control Act (S.C. Code 1976, § 47-5-10 et seq.) shall be enforced by animal control officers. 
(1)  Animals found running at large in violation of S.C. Code 1976, § 46-5-130 (having no valid rabies inoculation tag) shall be impounded by the animal control officer and transferred to the SPCA, county pound or suitable humane facility. 
(2)  Animals impounded under the provisions of the Rabies Control Act (S.C. Code 1976, § 47-5-130) may be redeemed only as provided in S.C. Code 1976, § 47-5-140. The redeemer must show proof of current payment for rabies inoculation, and the redeemer must pay for daily boarding costs assessed by the animal shelter and a $25.00 pickup fee for the city. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-14; Ord. of 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 6-15. - Impoundment of pets running at large; disposition. 
(a)  Any animal or dangerous animal running at large shall be impounded by the animal control officer or any of the persons empowered to enforce this chapter and held at the city or transported to the county animal shelter and there impounded and confined until redeemed or disposed of as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  Immediately after impounding any animal, the animal control officer shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner in writing of its impoundment and to inform the owner of the conditions whereby he can regain custody of the animal. 
(c)  Animals not claimed by their owners after notification or attempted notification, or before the expiration of seven days, shall become the property of the animal shelter and shall be euthanized in a manner prescribed in S.C. Code 1976, § 47-3-410 et seq., or placed for adoption through an approved animal shelter or private humane association. 
(d)  Any animal determined by the animal control officer to be abandoned shall be impounded by the animal control officer and transferred to an approved animal shelter or private humane association. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-15; Ord. of 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 6-16. - Redemption from impoundment. 
(a)  The owner shall be entitled to resume possession of an animal impounded under section 6-15 upon compliance with the rabies vaccination requirement, proper identification, and the payment of redemption fees herein set forth. 
(b)  The owner of an impounded animal must apply for the redemption of this animal. The animal may not be released unless authorized by the animal control officer or police officer with assurance from the owner that proper care or custody will be maintained. 
(c)  Redemption fees. The fees set forth herein shall be as determined from time to time by ordinance. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to release from impoundment without proper authority any animal or to resist animal control officers engaged in the impoundment of any animal. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-16; Ord. of 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 6-17. - Impoundment of animals without proper care due to incapacity or involuntary absence of owner; abandonment. 
Whenever the animal control officer or a police officer finds that any animal is or will be without proper care because of injury, illness, incarceration or other involuntary absence of the person responsible for the care of such animal, such officer may impound such animal and place it with the SPCA, county pound or other approved private humane organization until reclaimed by its owner. The owner must pay the applicable fees in the same manner as any other owner would redeem an impounded animal prior to the release of such animal. Any animal which has been impounded and not reclaimed for ten days after the circumstances causing the impoundment have ceased to exist, may be adopted out immediately after the expiration of ten days from the time of impounding without the posting of any notice whatsoever. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-17; Ord. of 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 6-18. - Animal care. 
(a)  No person or those owning or having possession, charge, custody or control of any animal shall cause or fail to provide said animal with sufficient good and wholesome food, clean water, proper shelter, care and veterinary treatment when needed. 
(b)  An animal control officer shall cause a citation to be issued if there is probable cause to believe that any of the following events has occurred: 
(1)  Abandonment an animal, or cause an animal to be abandoned, including abandoning any dog, cat or other domesticated animal in any public place including the rights-of-way of any public highway, road, street or on the property of another; 
(2)  An animal has been knowingly exposed to any poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the same shall be in a manner to be eaten by an animal, fish, bird, fowl or reptile, provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his own property common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substances; 
(3)  An animal has been beaten excessively or cruelly, ill treated, tormented, tortured, overloaded, overworked, or otherwise abused, or any fight or other combat between animals, or an animal and a human, has been caused, instigated or permitted; 
(4)  An operator of a vehicle has struck an animal, immediately reports such injury or death to the appropriate authorities; in the event the owner cannot be ascertained or found, such operator shall at once report the accident to the animal control officer or police; 
(5)  Any live animal, fish, bird, fowl or reptile has been given away as a prize for or as an inducement to enter any contest, game or other competition, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement or offer such species as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade; 
(6)  An animal's ears or tail has been cropped, notched or split by someone other than a licensed veterinarian; 
(7)  A person has failed to provide medical treatment or has denied medical treatment for any diseased, sick or injured animal; 
(8)  A person has failed to provide or has denied necessary sustenance, such as food or adequate amounts of food and water to sustain flesh or permit normal growth, or has provided an inadequate amount of clean water or water that is sour, filthy or spoiled; 
(9)  A person has failed to remove excrement and maintain the shelter of a confinement area in a clean, odor-free condition; and free of ticks, fleas, flies or mosquitoes; 
(10)  A person has teased, baited or in any manner molested any animal not belonging to him or legally under his control; 
(11)  A person has failed to provide or has denied shelter for any animal, fish, bird, fowl or reptile of any kind in any manner without shading same from the sun, any direct light, heat or cold and providing adequate ventilation for their use; and 
(12)  A person or owner who, through negligence, has let his animals run free, break loose, or escape in any manner. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-18; Ord. of 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 6-19. - Number of pets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to own and keep more than three male or female cats and three male or female dogs over the age of four months. 
(b)  Anyone violating subsection (a) of this section shall have the excess animals given to a new home. 
(c)  If corrective action is not taken after notice from the animal control officer, the animal control officer will remove the excess animals to the county pound or other humane facility. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-19; Ord. of 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 6-20. - Adoption. 
(a)  Any animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter may, at the end of the legal detention periods, have its title transferred to the county animal shelter or SPCA or be adopted by a person deemed to be a responsible and suitable owner, who will agree to comply with the provisions of this chapter. All required fees must be paid at the time of adoption. 
(b)  If at the end of the seven days' retention period the animal has not been reclaimed by its owner, it shall be considered eligible for adoption. To encourage adoption of animals, the adopter will be required to pay only the daily boarding fee for the initial seven-day retention period of $14.00. The adopter shall also complete an application for adoption which shall include a declaration of his intention to have the animal inoculated against rabies. When the application is properly completed and the fees paid, the animal shall be released to be adopted. Animals shall be considered adoptable if they are in good health and are not vicious. The city reserves the right to have a representative inspect the premises of a prospective adopter and may refuse the applicant if the accommodations do not meet the standards set forth in section 6-9. 
(c)  No animal over three months of age shall be released or adopted until prepayment is made for vaccination against rabies. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-20; Ord. of 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 6-21. - Restraining and pets which disturb the peace. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any pet or animal to permit same to run at large at any time upon streets or highways or properties other than his own property within the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to allow the animal to become a nuisance to any other resident. The following shall be deemed a public nuisance: 
(1)  Continuous, untimely barking, molesting passersby, chasing vehicles (motored or otherwise). 
(2)  Trespassing on public property. 
(3)  Trespassing on private property or attacking other domestic animals by an animal. 
(c)  Any animal found roaming at large will be picked up by the animal control officer and may be picked up by any police officer or other designated agent and taken to the animal impoundment facilities or restrained for pickup by the animal control officer. Any animal found trespassing on the private property of a resident or property owner may be humanely restrained by the resident or property owner pending notification to and pickup by the animal control officer. 
(d)  Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come in contact with another animal except for planned breeding. 
(e)  No owner of any pet shall allow his pet by reason of frequent or continual noise to disturb the peace of neighbors. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful to keep a dangerous dog in any manner not allowed under S.C. Code 1976, § 47-3-710 et seq. 
(g)  Violation of this section will be subject to penalties of section 6-2 (S.C. Code 1976, § 47-3-710 et seq.). 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-21; Ord. of 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 6-22. - Regulation of dangerous dogs. 
(a)  No person owning or harboring or having the care or the custody of a dangerous dog may permit the dog to go unconfined. Such dog must be securely confined indoors or confined in a securely enclosed and locked pen or dog-run with sides of at least six feet with a secure top. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, all sides must be embedded. However, the provisions of this section shall not apply to any dog that is owned by a licensed security company and is on patrol in a confined area. 
(b)  No person owning or harboring or having the care of a dangerous dog may permit the dog to go beyond his premises unless the dog is securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a minimum tensile strength of 300 pounds and not exceeding three feet in length. 
(c)  Dogfighting; offering for sale. 
(1)  No person may own or harbor a dog for the purpose of dogfighting or train, torment, badger, bait or use a dog for the purpose of causing or encouraging the dog to unprovoked attacks upon human beings or domestic animals. 
(2)  No person may possess with intent to sell, offer for sale, breed, or buy or attempt to buy a dangerous dog. 
(d)  Seizure and impoundment. 
(1)  In the event a law enforcement agent has probable cause to believe that a dangerous dog is being harbored or cared for in violation of this section, he may petition the city judge having jurisdiction to order the seizure and impoundment of the dangerous dog while the trial is pending. 
(2)  In the event a law enforcement agent has probable cause to believe that a dangerous dog is being harbored or housed in violation of this section, he may with proper court petition seize and impound the dangerous dog while the trial is pending. 
(3)  Penalties. 
a.  Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, for a first offense, must be fined not more than $200.00 and or imprisoned for not more than 30 days. 
b.  A dangerous dog which attacks a human being or another domestic animal may be ordered destroyed when in the court's judgment the dangerous dog represents a continuing threat of serious harm to human beings or other domestic animals. 
c.  Any person found guilty of violating this section shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food, veterinary expenses for boarding and veterinary expenses, necessitated by the seizure of any dog for the protection of the public or other expenses as may be required for the destruction of the dog. Furthermore, anyone found guilty of violating this section shall pay any medical expenses incurred by the victim as a result of the attack by a dangerous dog. 
(e)  Owner's premises. 
(1)  A person is lawfully upon the premises of the owner within the meaning of this section when he is on the premises in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by the laws of this state, by the laws or postal regulations of the United States, when he is on the premises upon invitation, expressed or implied, of the owner, or when he is in the performance of a duty relative to public safety, which includes police officer, firefighter or other authorized personnel. A person has the right to ingress and to egress from the premises for any purpose connected with the performance of the public safety duty. 
(2)  A person who is lawfully on the owner's premises and who is attacked by a dangerous dog or witnesses the attack may use reasonable force to repel the attack. A person is not liable in damages or otherwise for action to repel or any action taken to restrain or control a dog from an unprovoked attack. 
(3)  The chief of police, in exigent or emergency circumstances, may cause a dangerous animal to be slain or removed from the city. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-22; Ord. of 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 6-23. - Duties of animal control division. 
The police department's division of animal control shall be charged with the responsibility of: 
(1)  Cooperating with the health offices of the various state government units and assisting in the enforcement of the laws of the state with regard to the control of animals, and especially with regard to the vaccination of dogs and cats against rabies; 
(2)  Investigating all complaints with regard to animals covered by this chapter; 
(3)  Enforcing within the city all of the state laws, ordinances enacted by the city, and contracts entered into by the city for the care, control and custody of animals covered by this chapter; 
(4)  Supervising and being in charge of animals impounded in the holding facility, until such time as ownership of such animals is given to the appropriate animal shelter; 
(5)  Enforcing provisions of state law regarding dangerous dogs (S.C. Code 1976, § 47-3-710 et seq.). 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-23; Ord. of 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 6-24. - Division members as peace officers; badges. 
Each member of the animal control division, while performing his duties, shall wear a uniform and carry an identification card identifying him as an animal control officer of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-24; Ord. of 10-13-1992; Ord. of 9-13-2005, § 1)  
Sec. 6-25. - Trapping; steel traps. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to trap any form of wildlife without the written consent of the animal control officer. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use any type of steel traps, snares or other trapping devices which are known to cause bodily injury to animals. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-25; Ord. of 10-13-1992)  
Sec. 6-26. - Notice of violation; procedure; punishment. 
In discharging their duties under this chapter, the animal control officer and police officers are hereby empowered to issue a citation to any person if there is probable cause to believe that he has violated any of the provisions of this chapter. Any citation so issued may be delivered in person to the alleged violator by the animal control officer or any member of the police department or it may be mailed, certified, return receipt requested, to the person so charged, if he cannot be readily found. Any notice or citation so delivered or mailed shall direct the alleged violator to appear at a municipal court on a specific day and hour named in the notice, or pay a fine in lieu of appearing in court. 
(Code 1983, § 6-2-26; Ord. of 10-13-1992)  
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Enforcement of building codes by local governments, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-9-10; codes applicable to building inspections, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-9-130; building codes amendment procedure, S.C. Code Reg. 8-240; qualifications for building codes amendments, S.C. Code Reg. 8-245; local adoption of building codes, S.C. Code Reg. 8-265; municipality may not enforce national building code provisions regulating farm structures, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-9-65(B); municipal responsibility to enforce barrier-free building design standards, S.C. Code Reg. 19-400.3(B). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Fire limits designated. 
The fire limits are established as being such territory or portion as designated "general commercial" on the official zoning map of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-1) 
State Law reference— Establishing fire limits, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-25-1110.  
Sec. 8-2. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, demolish, or move any structure, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building or structure in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and approved thereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, or continued and, upon conviction of any violation, the person shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-12. Nothing therein contained shall prevent the city from taking any other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-90; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Secs. 8-3—8-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 8-21. - International Building Code adopted. 
For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction and removal of buildings or other structures, or any appurtenances connected or attached thereto, there is hereby adopted the International Building Code, with subsequent revisions and appendices D, E, F, I, and J thereto, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., a copy of which has been and is now filed in the office of the clerk-treasurer and is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as fully as if set out at length herein and the provisions of which shall be controlling as to all subjects therein contained, within the corporate limits of the city, except that in the event that any of the provisions of the building code are in conflict with other provisions of this Code, state law, or ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this Code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-2; Ord. of 6-5-1984; Ord. of 2-14-1989; Ord. of 11-8-1994; Ord. of 10-10-1995; Ord. of 6-12-2001)  
Sec. 8-22. - Administration. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in the International Building Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department of law means the city attorney. 
(b)  Smoke detectors required. Every existing dwelling, mobile home and every dwelling unit within an apartment house, condominium, townhouse and every guestroom in a motel or hotel, every sleeping room in dormitories and every basement or cellar within such dwellings shall be provided with an approved smoke detector, installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation and listing. When activated, the detector shall provide an audible alarm. The smoke detectors shall be tested in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation and listing. When activated, the detector shall provide an audible alarm. The smoke detectors shall be tested in accordance with and meet the requirements of UI 217, Single and Multi Station Smoke Detectors. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-3; Ord. of 6-12-2001)  
Sec. 8-23. - International Residential One- and Two-Family Building Code adopted. 
For the purpose of erecting, fabrication, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, location and use of detached one and two family dwellings, their appurtenances and accessory structures, there is hereby adopted the International Residential One- and Two-Family Building Code, and all appendices and revisions, except D, F, I, and K published by the International Code Council, Inc., and the whole thereof except the portions as are hereafter deleted, modified or amended, a copy of which has been and is now filed in the office of the building official, and which is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as fully as if set out at length herein and the provisions thereof shall be controlling as to all subjects herein contained, within the corporate limits, except that in the event that any of the provisions of the residential code are in conflict with other provisions of this Code, state law, or ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this Code, state law, or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-4; Ord. of 6-11-2002)  
Sec. 8-24. - Fees and penalties. 
(a)  The fee amounts and fines concerning building permits, inspections, moving fees, demolition fees, and temporary electrical poles are established from time to time by ordinance. 
(b)  Where work for which a permit is required by this Code is started or proceeded prior to obtaining such permit, the fees herein specified shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this Code in the execution of this work nor from any other penalties prescribed herein. When additional inspections are required for reason of deficient or defective work, or otherwise through fault or error on the part of the permit holder or on the part of his employees, after receiving notice in writing by the inspector setting forth the violation. Only one such inspection shall be made under the regular fees as herein prescribed, in building, mechanical, plumbing, gas, electrical and mobile homes, and for any additional inspection required. 
(c)  When the valuation of the proposed construction exceeds $1,000.00 and a plan is required to be submitted, a plan-checking fee shall be paid to the building official at the time of submitting plans and specifications for checking. Such plan-checking fee shall be equal to one-half of the building permit fee as set forth in subsection (a) of this section. Such plan-checking fee is in addition to the building permit fee. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-5; Ord. of 6-12-2001; Ord. of 4-9-2002)  
Secs. 8-25—8-51. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 8-52. - National Electrical Code adopted. 
The National Electrical Code, as recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, is adopted as the minimum standard for the installation of all electrical wiring, devices and equipment in the city, and is made a part of this article as fully and to the same extent as if copied herein in full. A copy of the electrical code is on file in the office of the building official. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the electrical code and the provisions of this Code, state law or ordinances, rules and regulations, the provisions of this Code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-11; Ord. of 6-5-1984; Ord. of 2-14-1989; Ord. of 1-9-1990; Ord. of 11-8-1994; Ord. of 10-10-1995; Ord. of 6-12-2001)  
Sec. 8-53. - Administration and enforcement of article provisions. 
The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the building official. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-12)  
Sec. 8-54. - Service connection, disconnection and installation. 
(a)  For all service entrances (S.E. cables) for electrical services which penetrate exterior walls of any commercial and industrial structure, an outside fused disconnect will be required. 
(b)  For all service entrances (S.E. cables) for electrical services which penetrate exterior walls of any residential structure, an outside fused disconnect will be required on all services 400 amps or more, and/or for those electrical services of 400 amps or less, in lieu of an outside disconnect, may penetrate the exterior wall with a minimum schedule 40 conduit (electrical) from the meter can to main disconnect. 
(c)  Service upgrades and those structures that have had their power off for a period exceeding six months will be required to meet the minimum safety requirements of the installation of GFCI (ground fault) circuits and disconnects at mechanical (heating and air conditioning) equipment. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-13; Ord. of 6-12-2001)  
Sec. 8-55. - Electrical wiring, plumbing, etc., not to be lathed or sealed prior to inspection and posting of notices. 
It shall be unlawful to lathe, seal or in any manner conceal any electrical wiring, plumbing, or equipment until it has been inspected by the inspector, and notices posted that the work is satisfactory. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-14; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-56. - Approval of electrical devices, materials and appliances. 
All electrical devices, materials or appliances designed for attachment or installation on any electrical circuit or system for light, heat or power shall not be sold, offered for sale, installed or used unless they shall be approved by the Underwriter's Laboratory, Inc. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-15; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-57. - Permit fees. 
Any person making application for a permit for the installation or alterations or maintenance of electrical wiring, devices, appliances and/or equipment shall pay to the city a fee as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-16; Ord. of 6-5-1984; Ord. of 4-9-2002(1); Ord. of 4-9-2002(2))  
Secs. 8-58—8-87. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING CODE 
 
Sec. 8-88. - International Plumbing Code adopted. 
The International Plumbing Code, and appendices A, B, D, E and F thereof, together with all subsequent revisions thereto published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the minimum standard relating to the installation of all plumbing, including the pipes for distributing the water supply, the fixtures for using water and sewage, together with fittings and appurtenances of various kinds, all within or adjacent to the buildings within the city or where connected to the city's sewerage system, and the whole thereof is incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length, and all plumbers shall be required to make installations in conformity with the plumbing code and the regulations contained therein, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk-treasurer. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the plumbing code and the provisions of this Code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this Code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-31; Ord. of 6-5-1984; Ord. of 2-14-1989; Ord. of 11-8-1994; Ord. of 10-10-1995; Ord. of 6-12-2001)  
Sec. 8-89. - Administration. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in the International Plumbing Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative authority and local governing body means the council. 
Department of law means the city attorney. 
Plumbing inspection department means the building official. 
Plumbing official means the building official. 
(b)  Pipe cleanouts. A pipe cleanout shall be installed at the property line and should be no more than 12 inches below grade with the access opening at grade level. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-32; Ord. of 6-12-2001)  
Secs. 8-90—8-106. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - GAS CODE 
 
Sec. 8-107. - International Fuel Gas Code adopted. 
The International Fuel Gas Code and appendices A, B, C, and D thereto, with all subsequent revisions, which fuel gas code is published by the International Code Council, Inc., and which is referred to, incorporated herein, and made a part hereof for all purposes, and a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk-treasurer, is hereby adopted. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the fuel gas code and any provision of this Code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this Code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-41; Ord. of 6-12-2001)  
Sec. 8-108. - Administration. 
Any person, company, or contractor shall be required to be licensed for performance of any kind of construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or other work upon any property for gas piping within the city. A license is also required for any public utility corporation subject to regulations by the duly constituted authorities of the public service commission. Permits shall be secured and such work shall be inspected as provided in the International Fuel Gas Code adopted by this article. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-42; Ord. of 6-12-2001)  
Sec. 8-109. - Administration, enforcement of article provisions. 
The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the building official. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-43)  
Sec. 8-110. - Scope, effect of provisions. 
This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any gas piping or gas appliances from damages to anyone injured thereby, nor shall the city be held as assuming any liability by reason of inspection authorized herein, or certificate issued. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-44)  
Secs. 8-111—8-133. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - MECHANICAL CODE 
 
Sec. 8-134. - International Mechanical Code adopted. 
The International Mechanical Code and appendices A and B thereto, with all subsequent revisions, published by the International Code Council, is adopted as the mechanical code of the city to provide basic code requirements governing the safe installation and maintenance of all mechanical equipment so as to safeguard life, health and public welfare and the protection of property, and each of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such mechanical code is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-51; Ord. of 6-5-1984; Ord. of 2-14-1989; Ord. of 11-8-1994; Ord. of 6-12-2001)  
Sec. 8-135. - Administration. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in the International Mechanical Code, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Mechanical inspection department means the building official. 
Mechanical official means the building official. 
(b)  Right of appeal. The right of appeal provided in the mechanical code shall be to the board of examiners and review. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-52; Ord. of 6-12-2001)  
Secs. 8-136—8-153. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 
 
Sec. 8-154. - International Property Maintenance Code adopted. 
The International Property Maintenance Code, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted. Such property maintenance code is incorporated herein and made a part hereof for all purposes, a copy of which is filed for record in the office of the clerk-treasurer, and the provisions of such property maintenance code shall be controlling in the use, maintenance and occupancy of all dwellings, dwelling units and/or structures within the city. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the property maintenance code and the provisions of this Code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this Code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-61; Ord. of 6-12-2001)  
Secs. 8-155—8-178. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - ENERGY CONSERVATION 
 
Sec. 8-179. - International Energy Conservation Code adopted. 
The International Energy Conservation Code, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted. Such energy conservation code is incorporated herein and made a part hereof for all purposes, a copy of which is filed for record in the office of the clerk-treasurer, and the provisions of such energy conservation code shall be controlling in the use, maintenance and occupancy of all dwellings, dwelling units and/or structures within the city. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the energy conservation code and the provisions of this Code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this Code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-71; Ord. of 6-12-2001)  
Secs. 8-180—8-196. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 
 
Sec. 8-197. - Permits required. 
No building construction, reconstruction, alteration or repairs; no swimming pool construction, reconstruction, alteration or repairs; no electrical construction, reconstruction, alteration or repairs; no mechanical construction, reconstruction, alteration or repairs; and no gas construction, reconstruction, alteration or repairs, unless it is metered gas, shall be installed within or on any building, structure or premises without first securing a permit therefor from the building official or his assistants authorized to issue such permits. Applications for permits shall be made on forms provided for this purpose by the building official. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-81; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-198. - Annual permits. 
(a)  Annual permits may be issued to firms employing a full-time engineering department and professionally supervised maintenance force. An annual permit shall entitle the firm to undertake repair and construction projects on its own buildings relating to operation and maintenance and to process related construction, alteration or modification without securing permits required in section 8-197. The firm shall be required to submit an annual report of any projects completed to the building official with an affidavit from the plant engineer or underwriter or approved inspection agency that all work has been done in accordance with the standard building code. The firm to which an annual permit is issued shall be entitled to such reasonable inspections as may be requested by the officer of said company. Annual permits shall expire on December 31 of the year in which they were issued. 
(b)  An annual permit may be issued to property managers for performance of normal maintenance on rental property provided that no single repair job exceeds the sum of $500.00; provided further, however, that should any electrical or plumbing repairs be made by the manager a regular permit must be obtained inasmuch as such electrical and plumbing repairs shall not be covered by the blanket permit. Annual permits shall expire on December 31 of the year in which they were issued. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-82; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-199. - Limitation. 
An unprocessed application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-83; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-200. - Examination of drawings. 
The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for permit and the drawings and computations filed therewith and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction or alteration indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-84; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-201. - Action on application. 
(a)  No owner, firm, corporation, authorized agent, or contractor shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
(b)  If the work described in an application for permit and the drawings filed therewith conform to the requirements of this chapter and other pertinent laws and ordinances, the building official shall issue a permit therefor to the applicant. 
(c)  If the application for a permit and the drawings filed therewith describe work which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the drawings to the applicant with his refusal to issue the permit. This refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reasons therefor. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-85; Ord. of 7-14-1975; Ord. of 11-8-1994)  
Sec. 8-202. - Conditions of the permit. 
The building official shall act upon an application for a permit with plans as filed, or as amended, without unreasonable or unnecessary delay, but no later than seven days after application is filed. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of this chapter, nor shall the issuance of a permit prevent the building official thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans or in construction, or of violations of this chapter. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by the permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the work is commenced; provided that, for cause, one or more extensions of time, for periods not exceeding 90 days each, may be allowed in writing by the building official. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-86; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-203. - Failure to obtain a permit. 
(a)  If any person commences any work on a building or structure before obtaining the necessary permit from the building official, he shall be subject to the penalty described in section 8-2. 
(b)  Where construction is commenced before a permit is obtained, the permit fees shall be doubled. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-87; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-204. - Table of construction values; grounds for refusal of permits. 
The building official is authorized to establish a table of values, which shall reflect the average cost of construction, and in the event that an application for a building permit reflects a figure which appears to be underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimated cost to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as plumbing, electrical, mechanical and other systems. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-88; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-205. - Permit to be kept at site; inspection. 
The permit when issued shall be kept at the building or place where the construction, erection, improvements or alteration is being done and on demand shall be produced by the person in charge of the work for inspection by any police officer, the inspector, or any member of the city council or city administrator, and it shall be unlawful to continue the work after such demand unless and until the permit is produced for the inspection. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-89; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-206. - Construction, installation or maintenance by homeowner. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent any homeowner from constructing, installing or repairing within his own property boundaries, providing the work is done by himself and is used exclusively by him or his family. This privilege does not convey the right to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, nor is it to be construed as exempting any property owner from obtaining a permit and paying the required fees therefor. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-91; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-207. - Notice to inspector that work is ready for inspection. 
When the building, swimming pool, electrical, mechanical, gas or other work in any building or structure for which a permit has been obtained is ready for inspection, notice shall be provided to the inspector stating the location of work, the name of the owner and the name of the contractor. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-92; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-208. - Notice for final inspection; certificate of inspection. 
After the entire completion of the work, a notice, the same as in section 8-207, shall be given to the inspector for the final inspection, and if he finds the work has been satisfactorily done, he shall issue a certificate of inspection. This certificate does not relieve the contractor of his responsibility for any defective work which may have escaped the notice of the inspector. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-93; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-209. - Permit not required. 
The building official shall not require permits for: 
(1)  The replacement of lamps; 
(2)  The connection of portable devices to suitable receptacles which have been permanently installed; 
(3)  The installation, alteration or repair of wiring, devices, appliances or equipment for the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence where such wiring, devices, appliances or equipment operate at a voltage not exceeding 50 volts between conductors and do not include generating or transmitting equipment capable of supplying more than 100 watts; or 
(4)  Public service corporations for the installation of equipment necessary in the generation, transmission and distribution of electric energy. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-94; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-210. - Requirement of licenses; work by owner; public utilities; equipment with automatic controls. 
(a)  This article shall not require a license for performance of any kind of electrical wiring installation upon any property: 
(1)  By the owner thereof, or by employees of the owner, or members of the family of the owner; 
(2)  By or for public utility corporations subject to regulation by the duly constituted authorities of the public service commission, and where such property is required as a part of the plant of the corporation and is so utilized in rendering its service to the public; or 
(3)  By or for mechanical contractors installing equipment with automatic controls and requiring interwiring. Permits shall be secured, however, and all such work shall be inspected as provided within this chapter. 
(b)  The phrase "by employees of the owner," as used in this section, shall not be construed to include any contractor employed by the owner; nor shall the wording in this section be interpreted so as to abrogate or in any way modify the permit, inspection, or any other sections and provisions of this chapter; nor shall the relief from licensing provided by this section apply to a builder, developer, or contractor engaged in the construction of buildings for resale. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-95; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-211. - Certificate of approval; notice to utility. 
(a)  After each required inspection, a notice shall be given to the permit holder as to approval or disapproval, with a listing of required corrections if any are required. Electrical wiring shall not be covered or concealed until after the work has been approved; inspection must be made by the inspector within 24 hours of request for inspection by the contractor, unless the request should come after 10:00 a.m. on a Friday or the day before a holiday. If the notice indicated that corrections are needed, the corrections shall be made forthwith and the inspector notified and inspection requested. 
(b)  Upon final inspection of the electrical wiring and in compliance with the electrical code of the city, a certificate of approval, if required, will be issued immediately to the permit holder; also a permanent release, if required, shall be issued to the utility notifying them of the approval. It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or reconnect any installation until a certificate of approval authorizing the connection has been issued. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-96; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-212. - Fees. 
Any person making application for a permit for the construction, reconstruction, alteration or repairs of buildings, appurtenant structures, swimming pools, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, gas or for any other work for which a permit is required shall pay to the city a fee in such amount as fixed from time to time by the council. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-97; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Secs. 8-213—8-234. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - BUILDING OFFICIAL 
 
Sec. 8-235. - Appointment; term. 
There shall be appointed by the council, with the advice of the city administrator, an officer of the city who shall be designated the building official, and who shall serve at the pleasure of the council. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-111)  
Sec. 8-236. - Duties. 
The building official shall be charged with the general supervision of all construction in the city and shall report to the chief of the fire department any infraction of the fire code. He shall assist any of the officials of the city in ascertaining all factual data useful to their consideration of matters coming before them. He shall meet with the board of examiners and review in all matters, but shall have no vote. The building official shall perform any other functions and duties as may be prescribed in this chapter, any ordinance of the city, any regulation adopted by the city council, or under state law or assigned to him by the city administrator. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-112; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-237. - Office of inspector created; building official as inspector. 
There is hereby created the office of inspector for the city. The building official shall be the inspector. For the purpose of this chapter, the inspector shall be the building, housing, swimming pool, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas inspector, unless some other person is appointed by the council to perform the duties of such office. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-113; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-238. - Deputy. 
The city administrator may designate as a deputy for the inspector an employee of the city who shall, during the absence or disability of the inspector, exercise all of the powers of the inspector. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-114; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-239. - Records, annual report and summary. 
The inspector shall keep or cause to be kept a record of the business of the division. The division records shall be open to the public. The inspector shall annually submit a report to the city administrator, covering the work of the division during the preceding year. He shall incorporate in this report a summary of appeals to and decisions of the board of examiners and review. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-115; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-240. - Right of entry. 
The inspector shall enforce the provisions of this chapter, and he, or his duly authorized representative, may enter any building, structure, or premises for just and proper cause, at any reasonable time and with reasonable prior notice to perform any duty imposed upon him by this chapter, except that no entry shall be made into occupied residences between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless permission shall have been granted by the occupant prior to the hour of 6:00 p.m. most immediately preceding. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-116; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-241. - Stop work orders. 
Upon notice from the inspector that work on any building or structure is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall be immediately stopped. This notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. The inspector shall have the authority to refuse any permits for future work to be done by such contractors. Where an emergency exits, no written notice shall be required. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-117; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-242. - Revocation of permits. 
The inspector may revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this chapter in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to material fact in the application or plan on which the permit or approval was based. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-118; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-243. - Tests. 
The inspector may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Tests, if required, are to be made at the expense of the owner or his agent by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. Copies of the test reports or the results of all tests shall be kept on file in the office of the inspector. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-119; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-244. - Unsafe buildings. 
All buildings or structures which are unsafe, unsanitary, or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment, are severally in contemplation of this section, unsafe buildings. All unsafe buildings are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  Whenever the inspector shall find any building or structure or portion thereof to be unsafe, he shall, in accordance with established procedure for legal notices, give the owner, agent, or person in control of the building or structure written notice stating the defects thereof. This notice shall require the owner within a stated time either to complete specified repairs or improvements, or to demolish and remove the building or structure or portion thereof. 
(2)  If necessary, the notice shall also require the building, structure or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the specified repairs and improvements are completed, inspected and approved by the inspector. The inspector shall cause to be posted at each entrance to the building a notice stating: 
"THIS BUILDING IS UNSAFE AND ITS USE OR OCCUPANCY HAS BEEN PROHIBITED BY THE BUILDING OFFICIAL." 
This notice shall remain posted until the required repairs are made or demolition is completed. It shall be unlawful for any person or his agents, or other servants, to remove the notice without written permission of the inspector, or for any person to enter the building except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing same. 
(3)  The owner, agent or person in control shall have the right, except in cases of emergency, to appeal from the decision of the inspector, as provided hereinafter, and to appear before the board of examiners and review at a specified time and place to show cause why he should not comply with the notice. 
(4)  In case the owner, agent, or person in control cannot be found within the stated time limit, or, if the owner, agent or person in control shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with notice to repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove the building or structure or portion thereof, the inspector, after having ascertained the cost, shall cause the building or structure or portion thereof, to be demolished, secured, or required to remain vacant. 
(5)  The decision of the inspector shall be final in cases of emergency which, in his opinion, involve imminent danger to human life or health. He shall promptly cause any building, structure, or portion thereof to be made safe or cause its removal. For this purpose, he may at once enter any structure or land on which it stands, or abutting land or structures, which any assistance and at any cost as he may deem necessary. He may order the vacation of adjacent structures and may require the protection of the public by appropriate fence or other means as may be necessary, and for this purpose may close a public or private way. 
(6)  Costs incurred under this section shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved and shall be collected in the manner provided by law. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-120; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-245. - Requirements not covered by chapter. 
Any requirement necessary for the strength or stability of an existing or proposed building or structure, or for the safety or health of the occupants thereof, not specifically covered by this chapter, shall be determined by the inspector, subject to appeal to the board of examiners and review. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-121; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-246. - Alternate materials and alternate methods of construction. 
The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of any material, or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this chapter, provided any alternate has been approved and its use authorized by the inspector. The inspector shall approve any alternate, provided he finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the provisions of this chapter, and that the material, method, or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and safety. The inspector shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim that may be made regarding its use. If, in the opinion of the inspector, the evidence and proof are not sufficient to justify approval, the applicant may refer the entire matter to the board of examiners and review. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-122; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-247. - Restrictions on employees. 
No officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board of examiners and review, shall be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, or in the making of plans or of specifications therefor, unless he is the owner of the building. No officer or employee shall engage in any work which is inconsistent with his duties or with the interests of the department. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-123; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-248. - Liability. 
No officer or employee or member of the board of examiners and review charged with the enforcement of his duties shall thereby render himself liable personally, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to person or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee because of any act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this chapter shall be defended by the city attorney until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-124; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-249. - Hardships. 
Where the literal application of the requirements of this chapter would appear to cause undue hardship on an owner or tenant or when it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of this chapter or any of the regulations therein have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the owner of the building or structure, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal from the decision of the inspector to the board of examiners and review. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-125; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-250. - Appeal from decision of inspector. 
It is the intention of this chapter that all questions arising in connection with the enforcement of this code shall be presented first to the inspector and that any questions shall be presented to the board of examiners and review only on appeal from the decision of the inspector. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-126; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Secs. 8-251—8-278. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - BOARD OF EXAMINERS AND REVIEW 
 
Sec. 8-279. - Created; membership. 
(a)  There is hereby created by the council a board, referred to in all standard codes as the board of adjustment and appeals, to be known as the board of examiners and review, which shall consist of seven members appointed by city council. The members shall be residents of the city and shall be closely related to the building industry. One member shall be a registered professional engineer and/or architect, if available. Members of this board shall be appointed for three-year terms. 
(b)  Any one or more members of the board shall be subject to removal or replacement by the council at any time for stated cause after a public hearing, if requested. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner in which the original appointments are required to be made. The members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
(c)  The board shall hold an annual organizational meeting in March to elect a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary for a one-year term. These officers of the board may succeed themselves in consecutive terms. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-141; Ord. of 7-14-1975; Ord. of 12-16-1975; Ord. of 12-9-1986)  
Sec. 8-280. - Duties. 
(a)  The duties of the board of examiners and review shall be: 
(1)  To consider and determine appeals from the decision of the inspector whenever it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of this chapter or any of the rules and regulations therein have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted; and 
(2)  To permit, in appropriate cases, where the application of the requirements of this chapter in the allowance of the stated time for the performance of any action required therein would appear to cause undue hardship on an owner, or contractor, a reasonable extension of time; provided, however, no extension shall be granted for more than eight months from date of such notice. 
(b)  No request for an appeal shall be considered where a previous decision pertaining to the same appeal has been rendered by the board of examiners and review. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-142)  
Sec. 8-281. - Meetings. 
(a)  Special meetings in addition to the annual meeting may be called by the chairman at any time, provided reasonable notice of the place, time and date of the meeting shall be given all members of the board and all interested parties in each case to be heard by the board. All meetings of the board shall be duly advertised and open to the public. 
(b)  All appeals referred to the board shall be scheduled within 15 working days after a written request has been received. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-143; Ord. of 7-14-1975; Ord. of 12-9-1986)  
Sec. 8-282. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The board of examiners and review shall establish its own rules of procedure for accomplishment of its duties and functions, provided that the rules shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter and the laws of the state. 
(b)  There shall be no fee imposed for submitting an appeal to the board. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-144; Ord. of 7-14-1975; Ord. of 12-9-1986)  
Sec. 8-283. - Quorum. 
Four members of the board shall constitute a quorum, and a majority vote of the members present shall be necessary on all questions brought before the board for a vote. No board member shall act in a case in which he has a personal interest. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-145; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-284. - Records. 
The secretary of the board shall make a detailed report of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decisions, the vote of each member participating therein, the absence of a member, and any failure of a member to vote. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-146; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-285. - Appeals to board. 
(a)  Any person receiving written notice from the inspector of deficiencies in his property under this chapter may, within 15 days following the date of the notice, enter an appeal in writing to the board of examiners and review. The appeal shall state the location of the property, the date of the notice of violations, and the number of the notice. The appellant must state the variance or modifications requested, the reasons therefor, and the hardship or conditions upon which the appeal is made. 
(b)  No appeal filed later than 15 days after the date of a notice shall be acted upon by the board of examiners and review unless the inspector shall consent thereto. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-147; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-286. - Decisions—Appeals. 
Every decision of the board of examiners and review shall be final, subject, however, to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. Decisions of the board shall be in writing and shall indicate the vote upon the decision. Each decision shall be promptly filed in the office of the inspector and shall be open for public inspection. A copy of each decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the applicant, protestant, appellant, or person against whom charges have been preferred. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-148; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-287. - Same—Other matters. 
(a)  The board may decide on other matters where a decision of the board of examiners and review may be specifically required by the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  In exercising the powers described in this article, the board may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm in whole or in part, or may modify the order, requirements, decision, or determination, and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. The board, in the execution of the duties for which appointed, may subpoena witnesses and in case of contempt may certify such fact to the circuit court in and for the county. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-149; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Sec. 8-288. - Appeals from decisions. 
Any person who may have a substantial interest in any decision of the board of examiners and review may appeal any decision of the board to the circuit court in and for the county by filing with the clerk of the court a petition in writing, setting forth, plainly, fully and distinctly wherein such decision is contrary to law. The appeal shall be filed within 30 days after the decision of the board is rendered. 
(Code 1983, § 5-1-150; Ord. of 7-14-1975)  
Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1-2019 , Exh. A, adopted March 12, 2019, repealed ch. 10 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former ch. 10, §§ 10-1—10-14 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation. 
State Law reference— Business license fees authorized for municipalities, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-30; imposition or increase of license tax, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-1-315; municipal authority to regulate hotels, restaurants, cafes and lunch counters for public health, comfort and convenience, S.C. Code 1976, § 45-3-10; local permits for holding professional sports and entertainment events, S.C. Code 1976, § 53-1-10. 
 
Sec. 10-1. - License required. 
Every person engaged or intending to engage in any calling, business, occupation or profession, in whole or in part, within the limits of the City/Town of Hanahan, South Carolina, is required to pay an annual license tax for the privilege of doing business and obtain a business license as herein provided. 
( Ord. No. 1-2019 , Exh. A § 1, 3-12-2019)  
Sec. 10-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed herein: 
Business means a calling, occupation, profession, or activity engaged in with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, either directly or indirectly. 
Charitable organization means an organization that is determined by the Internal Revenue Service to be exempt from federal income taxes under 26 U.S.C. section 501 (c) (3), (4), (6), (7), (8), (10) or (19). 
Charitable purpose means a benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary purpose which does not result in personal gain to a sponsor, organizer, officer, director, trustee or person with ultimate control of the organization. 
Classification means that division of businesses by major groups subject to the same license rate as determined by a calculated index of ability to pay based on national averages, benefits, equalization of tax burden, relationships of services, or other basis deemed appropriate by the council. 
Gross income means the gross receipts or gross revenue of a business, received or accrued, for one calendar or fiscal year collected or to be collected from business done within the municipality, excepting therefrom income earned outside of the municipality on which a license tax is paid by the business to some other municipality or a county and fully reported to the municipality. Gross income for agents means gross commissions received or retained, unless otherwise specified. Gross income for insurance companies means gross premiums written. Gross income for business license tax purposes shall not include taxes collected for a governmental entity, escrow funds, or funds which are the property of a third party. The value of bartered goods or trade-in merchandise shall be included in gross income. The gross receipts or gross revenues for business license purposes may be verified by inspection of returns and reports filed with the Internal Revenue Service, the South Carolina Department of Revenue, the South Carolina Department of Insurance, or other government agencies. 
License official means a person designated to administer this chapter. 
Licensee means the business, the person applying for the license on behalf of the business, an agent or legal representative of the business, a person who receives any part of the net profit of the business, or a person who owns or exercises control of the business. 
Municipality means the City/Town of Hanahan, South Carolina. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, LLP, LLC, cooperative non-profit membership, corporation, joint venture, association, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, holding company, or other group or combination acting as a unit, in the singular or plural, and the agent or employee having charge or control of a business in the absence of the principal. 
( Ord. No. 1-2019 , Exh. A § 2, 3-12-2019)  
Sec. 10-3. - Purpose and duration. 
The business license levied by this chapter is for the purpose of providing such regulation as may be required for the business subject thereto and for the purpose of raising revenue for the general fund through a privilege tax. Each yearly license shall be issued for the 12-month period of May 1 to April 30. The provisions of this chapter and the rates herein shall remain in effect from year to year as amended by the council. 
( Ord. No. 1-2019 , Exh. A § 3, 3-12-2019)  
Sec. 10-4. - License tax. 
(a)  The required license tax shall be paid for each business subject hereto according to the applicable rate classification on or before the due date of the 30th day of April in each year, except for those businesses in Rate Class 8 for which a different due date is specified. 
(b)  A separate license shall be required for each place of business and for each classification or business conducted at one place. If gross income cannot be separated for classifications at one location, the license tax shall be computed on the combined gross income for the classification requiring the highest rate. A license tax based on gross income shall be computed on the gross income for the preceding calendar or fiscal year, and on a 12-month projected income based on the monthly average for a business in operation for less than one year. The tax for a new business shall be computed on the estimated probable gross income stated in the license application for the balance of the license year. The initial tax for an annexed business shall be prorated for the number of months remaining in the license year. No refund shall be made for a business that is discontinued. 
( Ord. No. 1-2019 , Exh. A § 4, 3-12-2019)  
Sec. 10-5. - Registration required. 
(a)  The owner, agent or legal representative of every business subject to this chapter, whether listed in the classification index or not, shall register the business and make application for a business license on or before the due date of each year; provided, a new business shall be required to have a business license prior to operation within the municipality, and an annexed business shall be required to have a business license within 30 days of the annexation. A license for a bar (NAICS 722410) must be issued in the name of the individual who has been issued a state alcohol, beer or wine permit or license and will have actual control and management of the business. 
(b)  Application shall be on a form provided by the license official which shall contain the Social Security Number and/or the Federal Employer's Identification Number, the business name as reported on the South Carolina income tax return, and all information about the applicant and the licensee and the business deemed appropriate to carry out the purpose of this chapter by the license official. Applicants may be required to submit copies of portions of state and federal income tax returns reflecting gross receipts and gross revenue figures. 
(c)  The applicant shall certify under oath that the information given in the application is true, that the gross income is accurately reported, or estimated for a new business, without any unauthorized deductions, and that all assessments, personal property taxes on business property and other monies due and payable to the municipality have been paid. 
( Ord. No. 1-2019 , Exh. A § 5, 3-12-2019)  
Sec. 10-6. - Deductions, exemptions, and charitable organizations. 
(a)  No deductions from gross income shall be made except income earned outside of the municipality on which a license tax is paid by the business to some other municipality or a county and fully reported to the municipality, taxes collected for a governmental entity, or income which cannot be included for computation of the tax pursuant to state or federal law. The applicant shall have the burden to establish the right to exempt income by satisfactory records and proof. 
(b)  No person shall be exempt from the requirements of the ordinance [from which this chapter derives] by reason of the lack of an established place of business within the municipality, unless exempted by state or federal law. The license official shall determine the appropriate classification for each business in accordance with the latest issue of the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) for the United States published by the office of management and budget. No person shall be exempt from this chapter by reason of the payment of any other tax, unless exempted by state law, and no person shall be relieved of liability for payment of any other tax or fee by reason of application of this chapter. 
(c)  A charitable organization shall be exempt from the business license tax on its gross income unless it is deemed a business subject to a business license tax on all or part of its gross income as provided in this section. A charitable organization, or any for-profit affiliate of a charitable organization, that reports income from for-profit activities, or unrelated business income, for federal income tax purposes to the internal revenue service shall be deemed a business subject to a business license tax on the part of its gross income from such for-profit activities or unrelated business income. 
A charitable organization shall be deemed a business subject to a business license tax on its total gross income if (1) any net proceeds of operation, after necessary expenses of operation, inure to the benefit of any individual or any entity that is not itself a charitable organization as defined in this chapter, or (2) any net proceeds of operation, after necessary expenses of operation, are used for a purpose other than a charitable purpose as defined in this chapter. Excess benefits or compensation in any form beyond fair market value to a sponsor, organizer, officer, director, trustee or person with ultimate control of the organization shall not be deemed a necessary expense of operation. 
( Ord. No. 1-2019 , Exh. A § 6, 3-12-2019)  
Sec. 10-7. - False application unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the provisions of this chapter to make a false application for a business license, or to give or file, or direct the giving or filing of, any false information with respect to the license or tax required by this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1-2019 , Exh. A § 7, 3-12-2019)  
Sec. 10-8. - Display and transfer. 
(a)  All persons shall display the license issued to them on the original form provided by the license official in a conspicuous place in the business establishment at the address shown on the license. A transient or nonresident shall carry the license upon his person or in a vehicle used in the business readily available for inspection by any authorized agent of the municipality. 
(b)  A change of address must be reported to the license official within ten days after removal of the business to a new location and the license will be valid at the new address upon written notification by the license official and compliance with zoning and building codes. Failure to obtain the approval of the license official for a change of address shall invalidate the license and subject the licensee to prosecution for doing business without a license. A business license shall not be transferable and a transfer of controlling interest shall be considered a termination of the old business and the establishment of a new business requiring a new business license, based on old business income. 
( Ord. No. 1-2019 , Exh. A § 8, 3-12-2019)  
Sec. 10-9. - Administration of chapter. 
The license official shall administer the provisions of this chapter, collect license taxes, issue licenses, make or initiate investigations and audits to insure compliance, initiate denial or suspension and revocation procedures, report violations to the municipal attorney, assist in prosecution of violators, produce forms, make reasonable regulations relating to the administration of this chapter, and perform such other duties as may be duly assigned. 
( Ord. No. 1-2019 , Exh. A § 9, 3-12-2019)  
Sec. 10-10. - Inspection and audits. 
(a)  For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the license official or other authorized agent of the municipality is empowered to enter upon the premises of any person subject to this chapter to make inspections, examine and audit books and records. It shall be unlawful for any such person to fail or refuse to make available the necessary books and records. In the event an audit or inspection reveals that the licensee has filed false information, the costs of the audit shall be added to the correct license tax and late penalties in addition to other penalties provided herein. Each day of failure to pay the proper amount of license tax shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The license official shall have the authority to make inspections and conduct audits of businesses within the municipality to insure compliance with the ordinance. Financial information obtained by inspections and audits shall not be deemed public records, and the license official shall not release the amount of license taxes paid or the reported gross income of any person by name without written permission of the licensee, except as authorized by this chapter, state or federal law, or proper judicial order. Statistics compiled by classifications are public records. 
( Ord. No. 1-2019 , Exh. A § 10, 3-12-2019)  
Sec. 10-11. - Assessments, payment under protest, appeal. 
(a)  If a person fails to obtain a business license or to furnish the information required by this chapter or the license official, the license official shall examine such records of the business or any other available records as may be appropriate, and conduct such investigations and statistical surveys as the license official may deem appropriate to assess a license tax and penalties as provided herein. 
(b)  A notice of assessment shall be served by certified mail or personal service. An application for adjustment of the assessment may be made to the license official within five days after the notice is mailed or personally served or the assessment will become final. The license official shall establish a uniform procedure for hearing an application for adjustment of assessment and issuing a notice of final assessment. 
(c)  A final assessment may be appealed to the council only by payment in full of the assessment under protest within five days and the filing of written notice of appeal within ten days after payment pursuant to the provisions of this chapter relating to appeals to council. 
( Ord. No. 1-2019 , Exh. A § 11, 3-12-2019)  
Sec. 10-12. - Delinquent license taxes, partial payment. 
(a)  For non-payment of all or any part of the correct license tax, the license official shall levy and collect a late penalty of five percent of the unpaid tax for each month or portion thereof after the due date until paid. Penalties shall not be waived. If any license tax remains unpaid for 60 days after its due date, the license official shall report it to the municipal attorney for appropriate legal action. 
(b)  Partial payment may be accepted by the license official to toll imposition of penalties on the portion paid; provided, however, no business license shall be issued or renewed until the full amount of the tax due, with penalties, has been paid. 
( Ord. No. 1-2019 , Exh. A § 12, 3-12-2019)  
Sec. 10-13. - Notices. 
The license official may, but shall not be required to, mail written notices that license taxes are due. If notices are not mailed, there shall be published a notice of the due date in a newspaper of general circulation within the municipality three times prior to the due date in each year. Failure to receive notice shall not constitute a defense to prosecution for failure to pay the tax due or grounds for waiver of penalties. 
( Ord. No. 1-2019 , Exh. A § 13, 3-12-2019)  
Sec. 10-14. - Denial of license. 
The license official shall deny a license to an applicant when the license official determines: 
(1)  The application is incomplete, contains a misrepresentation, false or misleading statement, evasion or suppression of a material fact; or 
(2)  The activity for which a license is sought is unlawful or constitutes a public nuisance per se or per accidents; or 
(3)  The applicant, licensee or prior licensee or the person in control of the business has been convicted, within the previous ten years, of an offense under a law or ordinance regulating business, a crime involving dishonest conduct or moral turpitude related to a business or a subject of a business, or an unlawful sale of merchandise or prohibited goods; or 
(4)  The applicant, licensee or prior licensee or the person in control of the business has engaged in an unlawful activity or nuisance related to the business or to a similar business in the municipality or in another jurisdiction; or 
(5)  The applicant, licensee or prior licensee or the person in control of the business is delinquent in the payment to the municipality of any tax or fee; or 
(6)  The license for the business or for a similar business of the licensee in the municipality or another jurisdiction has been denied, suspended or revoked in the previous license year. 
A decision of the license official shall be subject to appeal to council as herein provided. Denial shall be written with reasons stated. 
( Ord. No. 1-2019 , Exh. A § 14, 3-12-2019)  
Sec. 10-15. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
When the license official determines: 
(1)  A license has been mistakenly or improperly issued or issued contrary to law; or 
(2)  A licensee has breached any condition upon which the license was issued or has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter; or 
(3)  A licensee has obtained a license through a fraud, misrepresentation, a false or misleading statement, evasion or suppression of a material fact in the license application; or 
(4)  A licensee has been convicted, within the previous ten years, of an offense under a law or ordinance regulating business, a crime involving dishonest conduct or moral turpitude related to a business or a subject of a business, or an unlawful sale of merchandise or prohibited goods; or 
(5)  A licensee has engaged in an unlawful activity or nuisance related to the business; or 
(6)  A licensee is delinquent in the payment to the municipality of any tax or fee. 
The license official shall give written notice to the licensee or the person in control of the business within the municipality by personal service or certified mail that the license is suspended pending a hearing before council for the purpose of determining whether the license should be revoked. 
The notice shall state the time and place at which the hearing is to be held, which shall be at a regular or special council meeting within 30 days from the date of service of the notice, unless continued by agreement. The notice shall contain a brief statement of the reasons for suspension and proposed revocation and a copy of the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 1-2019 , Exh. A § 15, 3-12-2019)  
Sec. 10-16. - Appeals to council. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a decision, final assessment, proposed revocation, suspension, or a denial of a business license by the license official may appeal the decision to the council by written request stating the reasons therefore, filed with the license official within ten days after service by mail or personal service of the notice of decision, final assessment, proposed revocation, suspension or denial. 
(b)  An appeal or a hearing on proposed revocation shall be held by the council within 30 days after receipt of a request for appeal or service of notice of suspension at a regular or special meeting of which the applicant or licensee has been given written notice, unless continued by agreement. At the hearing, all parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to present testimony and evidence and to cross-examine witnesses. The proceedings shall be recorded and transcribed at the expense of the party so requesting. The rules of evidence and procedure prescribed by council shall govern the hearing. Council shall by majority vote of members present render a written decision based on findings of fact and application of the standards herein which shall be served upon all parties or their representatives and shall be the final decision of the municipality. 
( Ord. No. 1-2019 , Exh. A § 16, 3-12-2019)  
Sec. 10-17. - Consent, franchise or license required for use of streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, maintain or operate in, on, above or under any street or public place under control of the municipality any line, pipe, cable, pole, structure or facility for utilities, communications, cablevision or other purposes without a consent agreement or franchise agreement issued by the council by ordinance that prescribes the term, fees and conditions for use. 
(b)  The annual fee for use of streets or public places authorized by a consent agreement or franchise agreement shall be set by the ordinance approving the agreement and shall be consistent with limits set by state law. Existing franchise agreements shall continue in effect until expiration dates in the agreements. Franchise and consent fees shall not be in lieu of or be credited against business license taxes unless specifically provided by the franchise or consent agreement. 
( Ord. No. 1-2019 , Exh. A § 17, 3-12-2019)  
Sec. 10-18. - Confidentiality. 
Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for any official or employee to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of income or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any report or return required under this chapter. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns. Any license data may be shared with other public officials or employees in the performance of their duties, whether or not those duties relate to enforcement of the license ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 1-2019 , Exh. A § 18, 3-12-2019)  
Sec. 10-19. - Violations. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be subject to a fine of up to $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days or both, upon conviction. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. Punishment for violation shall not relieve the offender of liability for delinquent taxes, penalties and costs provided for herein. 
( Ord. No. 1-2019 , Exh. A § 19, 3-12-2019)  
Sec. 10-20. - Classification and rates. 
(a)  The classifications of businesses included in each rate class are listed with United States North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) codes, by sector, sub-sector, group or industry. The business license class schedule (appendix B) is a tool for classification and not a limitation on businesses subject to a license tax. The business classification, pursuant to the most recent version of the business license class schedule adopted by the council, most specifically identifying the subject business, shall be applied to the business. The license official shall have the authority to make the determination of the business classification most specifically applicable to a subject business. 
(b)  The license tax for each class of businesses subject to this chapter shall be computed in accordance with the current business license rate schedule, designated as appendix A to this chapter, which may be amended from time to time by the council. A copy of the class schedule and rate schedule shall be filed in the office of the municipal clerk. 
( Ord. No. 1-2019 , Exh. A § 21, 3-12-2019) 
Editor's note— Appendices A and B as referenced above, have not been set out, but may be viewed in the office of the municipal clerk.  
Chapter 12 - COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-5 et seq. 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Established. 
There is hereby established a municipal court for the city, which shall be a part of the unified judicial system of the state, pursuant to Act No. 480 of 1980, for the trial and determination of all cases within its jurisdiction. 
(Code 1983, § 1-8-1; Ord. of 12-9-1980)  
Sec. 12-2. - Judges. 
The court shall be presided over by one or more full-time or part-time judges, at the discretion of the council. The municipal judge shall be appointed by the council for a term fixed by council, not less than two years and not to exceed four years. The compensation of the municipal judge shall be as determined by the council from time to time. Vacancies shall be filled in accordance with S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-25. 
(Code 1983, § 1-8-2; Ord. of 12-9-1980)  
Sec. 12-3. - Clerk of court. 
The chief judge shall designate a clerk of municipal court, who shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by the municipal judge of the state court administrator. The chief judge may designate the municipal clerk or other municipal employee to serve as clerk of the court. 
(Code 1983, § 1-8-3; Ord. of 12-9-1980)  
Sec. 12-4. - Jurisdiction. 
The municipal court shall have jurisdiction to try all cases arising under the ordinances of the city. The court shall also have all such powers, duties and jurisdiction in criminal cases made under state law and conferred upon magistrates. The court shall have the power to punish for contempt of court by imposition of sentences up to the limits imposed on municipal courts. The court shall have no jurisdiction in civil matters. 
(Code 1983, § 1-8-4; Ord. of 12-9-1980) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-45.  
Sec. 12-5. - Penalties imposed by court. 
Whenever the municipal judge finds a party guilty of violating a municipal ordinance or a state law within the jurisdiction of the court, he may impose a fine or imprisonment, or both, not to exceed $500.00 or 30 days. In addition, the municipal judge may order restitution in an amount not to exceed $5,000.00. In determining the amount of restitution, the judge shall determine and itemize the actual amount of damage or loss in the order. In addition, the judge may set an appropriate payment schedule. The municipal judge may hold a party in contempt for failure to pay the restitution ordered if the judge finds the party has the ability to pay. 
(Code 1983, § 1-8-5; Ord. of 12-9-1980)  
Sec. 12-6. - Suspension of sentences. 
The municipal judge may suspend sentences imposed by him upon such terms and conditions as he deems proper, including, without limitation, restitution or public service employment. 
(Code 1983, § 1-8-6; Ord. of 12-9-1980)  
Sec. 12-7. - Fines deposited in general fund. 
All fines and penalties collected by the municipal court shall be forthwith turned over to the clerk for deposit to the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 1-8-7; Ord. of 12-9-1980)  
Sec. 12-8. - Appeals. 
Any party shall have the right to appeal from the sentence or judgment of the municipal court to the court of common pleas. Notice of intention to appeal, setting forth the grounds for appeal, shall be given in writing and served on the municipal judge or the clerk of the municipal court within ten days after sentence is passed or judgment rendered, or the appeal shall be deemed waived. The party appealing shall enter into a bond, payable to the city to appear and defend such appeal at the next term of the court of general sessions or shall pay the fine assessed. 
(Code 1983, § 1-8-8; Ord. of 12-9-1980)  
Sec. 12-9. - Returns on appeal. 
In the event of an appeal, the municipal judge shall make a return to the court of common pleas as provided by S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-105. 
(Code 1983, § 1-8-9; Ord. of 12-9-1980)  
Sec. 12-10. - Jury trials. 
Any person to be tried in the municipal court may, prior to trial, demand a jury trial, and such jury, when demanded, shall be composed of six persons drawn from the qualified electors of the city in the manner prescribed by law. The right to a jury trial shall be deemed to have been waived unless demand is made prior to trial. 
(Code 1983, § 1-8-10; Ord. of 12-9-1980)  
Sec. 12-11. - Jury commissioners. 
The city council shall serve as jury commissioners for the municipal court. 
(Code 1983, § 1-8-11; Ord. of 12-9-1980)  
Sec. 12-12. - Ministerial recorder. 
There is hereby established the office of ministerial recorder. Ministerial recorders shall be elected from time to time by the council, and shall serve at its pleasure or until the office is vacated when employment with the city is terminated. Ministerial recorders shall perform the powers provided by law, and shall be subject to the supervision of the municipal judge. Ministerial recorders shall not be law enforcement officers. 
(Code 1983, § 1-8-12; Ord. of 12-9-1980) 
State Law reference— Ministerial recorder powers and duties, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-115.  
Chapter 14 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2-2018 , §§ 1—13, adopted March 13, 2018, has been treated as superseding the provisions of ch. 14, §§ 14-1—14-6. Former ch. 14 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1983 Code §§ 1-9-1, 1-9-5, 1-9-7, 1-9-9—1-9-11; and ordinances adopted March 11, 1986, July 11, 1995, Nov. 10, 1998, Feb. 12, 2002, March 9, 2004 
Federal law references— South Carolina municipalities are covered jurisdictions under Voting Rights Act of 1965, 28 CFR 51, Appendix; covered jurisdictions must obtain federal preclearance of voting changes, 42 USC 1973c; procedure for submitting changes to U.S. attorney general, 28 CFR 51.20 et seq. 
State Law reference— Nominations and elections for municipal offices, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-10 et seq.; South Carolina election law, S.C. Code 1976, § 7-1-10 et seq.; qualifications for office, dual-office-holding, S.C. Const. art. XVII, § 1A; no property qualifications, duelists prohibited, S.C. Const art. XVII, § 1B. 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Election method. 
Pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-20, the mayor shall be elected at large, and councilmembers shall be elected from the municipality at large. 
( Ord. No. 2-2018 , § 1, 3-13-2018)  
Sec. 14-2. - Terms of office. 
The office of mayor shall be for the term of four years. The office of council shall be for the term of four years staggered. 
( Ord. No. 2-2018 , § 2, 3-13-2018)  
Sec. 14-3. - Nonpartisan election procedure. 
Results for all general and special elections for mayor and councilmembers will be determined in accordance with the nonpartisan plurality method authorized by S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-61. 
( Ord. No. 2-2018 , § 3, 3-13-2018)  
Sec. 14-4. - Municipal election authority. 
(a)  The Berkeley County Voter Registration and Election Commission shall advertise municipal elections, prepare and distribute ballots and election materials, appoint managers of election for each polling place, and otherwise supervise and conduct all municipal elections within the City of Hanahan. 
(b)  Immediately upon the closing of the polls at any municipal election in the City of Hanahan, the Berkeley County Voter Registration and Election Commission shall begin to count and continuously count the votes cast and make a statement of the whole number of the votes cast in such election together with the number of votes cast for each candidate for mayor and councilperson, canvas the vote and publicly display the unofficial results. 
(c)  The Berkeley County Voter Registration and Election Commission shall thereafter certify the results of the elections and transmit the certified results to the City of Hanahan as soon as practicable following the certification. 
(d)  The Berkeley County Voter Registration and Election Commission shall accept candidate filings and filing fees, including but not limited to notices of candidacy and candidacy pledges, hear and decide protests, and certify the results of municipal elections. 
(e)  The Berkeley County Voter Registration and Election Commission shall utilize the current voting system operated by the county with the count publicly conducted. 
(f)  The Berkeley County Voter Registration and Election Commission shall take such other action as may be necessary or appropriate to conduct municipal elections and certify the results. The Berkeley County Voter Registration and Election Commission shall give notice of any special or regular election in the City of Hanahan in a newspaper of general circulation in the county or, in addition, in such other manner as it sees fit. Notice of election for mayor and council shall be given at least 60 days prior to the date of election. All other elections shall be given as provided by the code of laws of the state. Notice shall include all necessary information essential to the nomination or election process, to include, when appropriate, the offices to be filled, dates of filing of petitions and election, and polling place and poll manager. 
( Ord. No. 2-2018 , § 4, 3-13-2018)  
Sec. 14-5. - General and special election date and notice. 
General elections for the offices of mayor and members of council shall be held in even-numbered years on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November. 
In the event of a tie vote for any office, a runoff election shall be held two weeks following the election pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-25. Special elections to fill vacancies shall be held pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, §§ 7-13-190 and 5-15-70. Two public notices of a regular or special election shall be given. The first notice shall be given at least 60 days prior to the election. The second notice shall be given no later than two weeks after the first notice. 
( Ord. No. 2-2018 , § 5, 3-13-2018)  
Sec. 14-6. - Filing statement of candidacy. 
Each person offering as a candidate for the general election to any city office shall do so by filing a statement of intention of candidacy with the Berkeley County Election Commission beginning at 12:00 noon on August 1 or, if August 1 falls on a Saturday or Sunday, beginning at 12:00 noon the following Monday, ending no later than 12:00 noon on August 15 or, if August 15 falls on Saturday or Sunday, not later than 12:00 noon on the following Monday; S.C. Code 1976, § 7-13-352. 
A candidate filing for the office of mayor or a seat on city council must be a registered voter residing in the City of Hanahan at the time of filing. 
( Ord. No. 2-2018 , § 6, 3-13-2018)  
Sec. 14-7. - Filing fees. 
The filing fee for the office of mayor shall be $300.00. The filing fee for council shall be $150.00. 
( Ord. No. 2-2018 , § 7, 3-13-2018)  
Sec. 14-8. - Time of taking office. 
Newly elected officers shall be qualified to take office at any meeting of council at least 48 hours after an uncontested election. Incumbents shall remain in office until protests are finally determined and successors are qualified and take office. 
( Ord. No. 2-2018 , § 8, 3-13-2018)  
Sec. 14-9. - Polling place, location and time open and closed. 
The location of the polls and the hours of opening and closing the polls shall be according to the general election laws of the state. All elections shall be held at the polling places in the respective precincts as prescribed by the Berkeley County Board of Elections and Voter Registration. 
( Ord. No. 2-2018 , § 9, 3-13-2018)  
Sec. 14-10. - Reimbursement of election costs. 
The City of Hanahan shall reimburse the voter registration and election commission of the county for all costs incurred in providing ballots, advertising elections, printing costs, postage, transportation costs, temporary help, programming charges, poll managers' compensation and other related additional expenses incurred in its conduct of municipal elections in the City of Hanahan. In the event a protest is filed or litigation is commenced in connection with the conduct of municipal elections, the City of Hanahan shall pay all court costs, attorney's fees, court reporter fees and costs, and other costs and expenses incurred in such protest or litigation or the defense thereof. The county voter registration and election commission shall provide invoices to the city of all such costs and expenses incurred in the conduct of the City of Hanahan municipal elections, protests, certification or results, litigation or other costs which may be incurred, even if not specifically mentioned in this section. Further, the City of Hanahan shall provide payment upon such invoices within 30 days of receipt thereof. All filing fees collected shall be used to defray the costs of the election. 
( Ord. No. 2-2018 , § 10, 3-13-2018)  
Sec. 14-11. - Listing of candidates on the ballot. 
All candidates for office shall be listed in alphabetical order under the names of the office being sought, and all candidates shall be listed without title. Nicknames shall not be used unless approved by the Berkeley County Voter Registration and Election Commission. Insofar as possible, the style of the general election ballot shall be the same as that prescribed in the code of laws of the state for general elections. One space for each office to be filled must be allowed for the voters to write in the name of any qualified person for whom they may wish to vote. 
( Ord. No. 2-2018 , § 11, 3-13-2018)  
Sec. 14-12. - Contest of election. 
(a)  Within 48 hours after the closing of the polls, any candidate may contest the result of the election as reported by the managers by filing a written notice of the contest together with a concise statement of the grounds therefore with the Berkeley County Voter Registration and Election Commission. Within 48 hours after the filing of the notice, the Berkeley County Voter Registration and Election Commission shall, after due notice to the parties concerned, conduct a hearing on the contest, decide the issues raised, file its report together with all recorded testimony and exhibits, with the clerk of court of the county, notify the parties concerned of the decision made and when the decision invalidates the election, the council shall order a new election as to the parties concerned. 
(b)  Neither the mayor nor any member of council shall be eligible to pass on the issues arising in any contest in which the person is a party. 
(c)  Within ten days after notice of the decision of the Berkeley County Voter Registration and Election Commission, any party aggrieved thereby may appeal from the decision to the court of common pleas. Notice of appeal shall be served on the opposing parties or their attorneys and filed in the office of the clerk of court within ten days. The notice of appeal shall act as a stay of further proceedings pending the appeal. 
( Ord. No. 2-2018 , § 12, 3-13-2018)  
Sec. 14-13. - Later election in case of failure to hold when due, and the like. 
Whenever any election of the city shall fail of its purpose because of a tie vote or otherwise, or whenever any election shall fail to be held for any reason, the Berkeley County Voter Registration and Election Commission shall, whenever the failure appears, proceed forthwith to appoint a day and advertise for and hold another election and so continue to do so until the purpose of the election has been attained. 
( Ord. No. 2-2018 , § 13, 3-13-2018)  
Chapter 18 - ENVIRONMENT  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Declaration of public health nuisances. 
(a)  Any act of any person or corporation whereby the health or life of any individual may be endangered, injured or impaired, or which causes any disease is hereby declared a nuisance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or agent of lots or premises, whether occupied or vacant, within the corporate limits, to permit any property to become unsanitary by allowing any offensive matter or thing upon the lot or premises which may be detrimental to health; or to permit any trash, rubbish, waste, refuse, manure, straw, hay or thing to accumulate and remain upon the premises; or to throw, deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited upon any vacant lot or premises any thing which may endanger, injure or damage another's health or property. 
(Code 1983, § 6-1-3; Ord. of 2-11-1974)  
Sec. 18-2. - Abatement of public nuisances. 
(a)  It shall be lawful for the board of health to declare as nuisances things, the existence of which may be deemed unhealthy or harmful to the citizens of the city, and the nuisances may be abated by the health officer pursuant to directions from the health board at the property owner's expense. 
(b)  Upon the owner's failure to abate after being directed to do so, the city authorities shall remove the nuisance at the expense of the person who shall have caused or allowed the nuisance, from any occupant or tenant of the premises or, in case it affects the freehold, from the owner who after notice shall have failed to remove the nuisance. Costs of abatement by the city shall be a lien against the property of that person, next in priority to the lien for taxes; and the city may enforce the same by execution in the same manner as for taxes. 
(Code 1983, § 6-1-4; Ord. of 2-11-1974)  
Sec. 18-3. - Refusal to abate a public nuisance. 
Any person refusing or neglecting to abate a nuisance after having been directed to do so shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1983, § 6-1-5) 
State Law reference— Abatement of nuisances, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-30.  
Sec. 18-4. - Dangerous trees; notice and removal. 
Whenever it shall come to the attention of the city administrator or his designee that a tree standing within the city has, because of becoming dead, injured, or from other causes, become dangerous, he shall cause to be served upon the owner of the land upon which the tree is located, a written notice requiring that the tree be removed within five days. If, after the expiration of five days, the tree has not been removed, the city administrator or his designee shall proceed to have it removed and shall assess the cost of removal against the owner of the land, and any cost as assessed shall constitute a lien against the property next in priority to city taxes, and shall be collected by execution and sale, as for taxes. 
(Code 1983, § 6-1-6; Ord. of 2-11-1974)  
Secs. 18-5—18-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WEEDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipality may provide property owners to keep property clean and free of unhealthy material, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-80; municipal authority to abate nuisances, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-30; noxious weeds and plants as determined by the agriculture commissioner, S.C. Code Reg. 5-584. 
 
Sec. 18-27. - Prohibited. 
No person shall allow or permit weeds, bushes and grass to grow over 12 inches high upon his premises within the corporate limits of the city, uncut so as to render the premises unsightly or unhealthy from the growth and accumulation of such grass, bushes, and weeds thereon. Nor shall any person allow trash or other debris to be deposited or to remain upon his premises. 
(Code 1983, § 6-3-1; Ord. of 9-9-1974)  
Sec. 18-28. - Declared to be a nuisance. 
It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful to permit the growth and accumulation of grass, weeds and bushes or to permit the depositing or accumulation of trash or other debris so as to render premises unsightly or unhealthy, if within 500 feet of any building or dwelling. 
(Code 1983, § 6-3-2; Ord. of 9-9-1974)  
Sec. 18-29. - Notice to clean up premises; failure to comply. 
The health officer, upon notice of the failure of any person to comply with the requirements of sections 18-27 and 18-28, shall at once notify the persons so violating to clean up his premises within ten days. Any person violating these sections, or any person failing or refusing to remove the nuisance within ten days after notice as provided therefor, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1983, § 6-3-3; Ord. of 9-9-1974; Ord. of 12-13-2005, § 1)  
Sec. 18-30. - Removal by city. 
Upon the failure of any person to remove and abate the nuisance, as provided in this article, within ten days after notice, the city may enter upon the premises of the person offending and cause the nuisance to be removed by removing the objectionable matter from the premises and by cutting and removing the weeds, bushes and grass therefrom, and charge the expense thereof to the owner of the premises. These costs shall be a lien against the property of the person, next in priority to the lien for taxes, and the city may enforce the same by execution in the same manner as for taxes. 
(Code 1983, § 6-3-4; Ord. of 9-9-1974; Ord. of 12-13-2005, § 1)  
Sec. 18-31. - Keeping sidewalks or road rights-of-way clean and free of trash, ashes, weeds, etc. 
Every occupant, tenant and owner of every building and/or the holder of any possessory interest in any vacant lot abutting on a sidewalk or road right-of-way in the city shall jointly and severally keep and maintain such sidewalk, to the curb line thereof or if there is no sidewalk then to the edge of the road, in a clean and proper condition and free from trash, ashes, rubbish and unsightly grass and weeds. 
(Ord. No. 5-2015, 6-9-2015)  
Secs. 18-32—18-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5-2018 , adopted Sept. 11, 2018, repealed former Ord. No. 9-2014 , adopted Dec. 9, 2014, which pertained to stormwater management. 
 
Sec. 18-51. - Title amendment. 
An ordinance to authorize Berkeley County to enforce their stormwater management program within the municipal limits and to repeal and rescind any provisions within Ordinance No. 9-2014 , established on Dec. 9, 2014, for the creation of a stormwater management program ordinance, which are in conflict with any provisions of the Berkeley County Stormwater Management Ordinance 14-11-36, and all subsequent revisions or amendments of Ordinance 14-11-36, this 11th day of September, 2018 until the inter-governmental agreement - NPDES stormwater discharge permit compliance and other stormwater related services, signed into agreement on the 9th day of October, 2015, is properly terminated by either party. 
( Ord. No. 5-2018 , 9-11-2018)  
Chapter 20 - FIRE PREVENTION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Burning. 
(a)  Residential burning. It shall be unlawful to burn leaves, debris, trash, refuse, rubbish, tree limbs, shavings, building materials, or any other matter whatsoever or to kindle or maintain a fire outside of any house or other structure of any kind located within the city, unless such burning shall include all of the following: controlled by a competent individual, all burning accomplished during daylight hours, and all burning is subject to approval of the fire chief or other authorized officer of the city fire department. 
(b)  Specific requirements. 
(1)  Burning must be supervised by a competent attendant with adequate means on site to control and extinguish fires. "Competent attendant" is defined as a person or persons familiar with burning operations and capable of operating fire control equipment. The competent attendant shall also have the capability on site of alerting emergency services personnel in the event of a wild fire or emergency and shall be required to remain on site during all periods of burning. "Adequate means of fire control" is defined as any one or all of the following items: equipment, water or manpower that can control and extinguish fires. 
(2)  The initial burning must be started only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.; no combustible material may be added to the fire after 5:00 p.m. and must be extinguished by sunset. This is not to restrict fires for the purpose of cooking, warmth, or outdoor enjoyment. 
(3)  Burning to be done during favorable weather conditions. 
(4)  Materials to be burned shall be "natural vegetation and plant growth." 
(5)  All burning shall be done at a safe distance from any structure on the property. 
(c)  Additional restrictions and exemptions. 
(1)  The fire department reserves the right to impose restrictions and exemptions on burning in addition to whenever in the judgment of the fire department such is necessary to ensure safety. 
(2)  Any fire that creates a nuisance by means of smoke, ash or byproduct, wind conditions, dry weather conditions, or otherwise, or where any fire effects the safety, health, or welfare of any member or members of general public, the fire shall be immediately extinguished. All such determinations shall be made by the fire chief or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2-2011, 5-10-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2-2011, adopted May 10, 2011, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 20-1 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 20-2—20-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to equip and control fire department, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-25-20. 
 
Sec. 20-19. - Established. 
(a)  There is hereby established a fire department to be headed by a fire chief who shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
(b)  The department shall consist of such officers and employees as shall be approved by the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 2-2-1; Ord. of 1-14-2003; Ord. No. 4-2007, § 7, 3-13-2007)  
Sec. 20-20. - Fire chief responsible to city council; duties prescribed. 
The fire chief shall be responsible to the city council for the direction of all firefighting, fire prevention and fire service activities, including the inspection of properties within the corporate limits of the city and filing all required reports with the insurance commission for the state. The fire chief shall direct the assignment of fire personnel, establish training programs, establish procedures pursuant to this Code and shall promulgate administrative regulations having to do with the operation of the fire department and shall cooperate with all other firefighting and fire prevention agencies as may be provided by this Code or other valid laws, regulations or directives. 
(Code 1983, § 2-2-2; Ord. of 1-14-2003; Ord. No. 4-2007, § 8, 3-13-2007)  
Sec. 20-21. - Tampering with firefighting equipment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with the fire reels or appurtenances thereto, axes, tools, wrenches or any other firefighting equipment wherever located belonging to the city. 
(Code 1983, § 2-2-3)  
Sec. 20-22. - False fire alarm. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, report or turn in any false alarm of fire. 
(Code 1983, § 2-2-4)  
Sec. 20-23. - Tampering with alarm system. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, in any manner, the fire alarm box, switch, wiring or any other portion of the fire alarm system. 
(Code 1983, § 2-2-5)  
Sec. 20-24. - Driving over fire hose. 
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Code 1983, § 2-2-6)  
Secs. 20-25—20-51. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE CODE 
 
Sec. 20-52. - Appeals. 
Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire code mandated by applicable state law do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department to the council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Code 1983, § 2-2-25)  
Chapter 22 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(100—190, 200, 210, 300—330, 400, 500—530, 600—660, 700—720), adopted Nov. 14, 2017, repealed ch. 22 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former ch. 22, § 22-1, pertained to the floodplain management and drainage ordinance incorporated by reference, and derived from the 1983 Code, § 5-5-1. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Statutory authorization. 
The legislature of the State of South Carolina has in S.C. Code 1976, title 5, chs. 7, 23 and 25 (articles 5 and 7) and title 6, ch. 7, and amendments thereto, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the mayor and council of the City of Hanahan, South Carolina does ordain as follows. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(100), 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 22-2. - Findings of fact. 
The flood hazard areas of the City of Hanahan are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health, and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
Furthermore, these flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstruction in floodplains causing increased flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damage. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(110), 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 22-3. - Statement of purpose and objectives. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect human life and health, minimize property damage, and encourage appropriate construction practices to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions by requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. Uses of the floodplain which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion are restricted or prohibited. The provisions attempt to control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters, and control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion. Additionally, the article prevents or regulates the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
The objectives of this chapter are to protect human life and health, to help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, and to ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. The provisions of the article are intended to minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in the floodplain, and prolonged business interruptions. Also, an important floodplain management objective of this chapter is to minimize expenditures of public money for costly flood control projects and rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding. 
Floodplains are an important asset to the community. They perform vital natural functions such as temporary storage of floodwaters, moderation of peak flood flows, maintenance of water quality, groundwater recharge, prevention of erosion, and habitat for diverse natural wildlife populations, recreational opportunities, and aesthetic quality. These functions are best served if floodplains are kept in their natural state. Wherever possible, the natural characteristics of floodplains and their associated wetlands, especially floodways and stream channels, should be the result of careful planning processes which evaluate resource conditions and human needs. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(120), 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 22-4. - Land to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of City of Hanahan as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study, date December 7, 2018, as published by the Federal Emergency Management Act, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and other supporting data, which are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. Upon annexation, any special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study for the unincorporated areas of Berkley County, with accompanying map and other data, are adopted by reference and declared part of this chapter. 
Nonresidential and residential structures must be constructed so that the lowest floor, including basements if permitted, is located no lower than the base flood elevation plus two feet. No environmentally conditioned space shall be allowed below the lowest floor. Floodproofing shall not be permitted within the city. 
This chapter shall also apply to areas outside of the special flood hazard areas as prescribed in section 22-52 of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(130), 11-14-2017; Ord. No. 6-2018 , 11-13-2018)  
Sec. 22-5. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(140), 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 22-6. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(150), 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 22-7. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state law. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, which imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(160), 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 22-8. - Partial invalidity and severability. 
If any part of this chapter is declared invalid, the remainder of the chapter shall not be affected and shall remain in force. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(170), 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 22-9. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land areas outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create a liability on the part of City of Hanahan or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(180), 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 22-10. - Penalties for violation. 
Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection to grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person or corporation who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00, or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the City of Hanahan from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy a violation. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(190), 11-14-2017)  
Secs. 22-11—22-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 22-21. - Definition interpretation. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(200), 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 22-22. - Definitions. 
Accessory structure or use means a structure or use which is located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Detached garages, carports, storage sheds, and swimming pools are common urban accessory structures or uses. 
Addition (to an existing building) means an extension or increase in the floor area or height of a building or structure. Additions to existing buildings shall comply with the requirements for new construction, unless the addition, renovation or reconstruction to any building that was constructed prior to the initial flood insurance study for that area, and the addition, renovation or reconstruction does not equal 50 percent of the present tax value of the structure or certified appraisal. Where a fire wall, load-bearing or exterior wall is provided between the addition and the existing building, the additions(s) shall be considered a separate building and must comply with the standards for new construction. Compliance with mandatory building or zoning codes is also required. 
Agricultural structure means a structure used solely for agricultural purposes in which the use is exclusively in connection with the production, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of agricultural commodities, including the raising of livestock. Agricultural structures are not exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity now may be evident. 
Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means any enclosed area of a building which is below grade on all sides. 
Building. See "structure." 
Crawlspace means an under-floor space that has its interior floor area (finished or not) no more than five feet below the top of the next-higher floor. Crawlspaces generally have solid foundation walls. 
Critical facility means a structure or other improvement that, because of its function, size, service area, or uniqueness, has the potential to cause serious bodily harm, extensive property damage, or disruption of vital socioeconomic activities if it is destroyed or damaged or if its functionality is impaired. Critical facilities include but are not limited to fire stations, police stations, hospitals, residential health care facilities, electrical transmission switching stations and distribution substations, main telephone switching office, and hazardous materials storage sites. Sanitary sewer pump stations are not considered a critical facility for the purpose of this chapter. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls parallel to the flow of water. 
Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before the initial FIRM date, or before June 15, 1981, for FIRMs effective before that date. 
Existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for services the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site-grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before June 15, 1981. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site-grading or the pouring of concrete slabs). 
Flood means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been identified. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Flood-resistant material means any building material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact (minimum 72 hours) with floodwaters without sustaining damage which requires more than low-cost cosmetic repair. Any material which is water soluble or is not resistant to alkali or acid in water, including normal adhesives for above-grade use, is not flood-resistant. Pressure-treated lumber or naturally decay-resistant lumber are acceptable flooring materials. Sheet-type floor coverings which restrict evaporation from below and materials which are impervious, but dimensionally unstable are not acceptable. Materials which absorb or retain water excessively after submergence are not flood-resistant. Please refer to Technical Bulletin 2-93, Flood-Resistant Materials for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas in Accordance with the National Flood Insurance Program, document number FIA-TB-2, date 4/93, and available from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Class 4 and 5 materials, referenced therein, are acceptable flood-resistant materials. 
Flood vent means a permanent opening in a wall that allows the free passage of water automatically in both directions without human intervention. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water such as a fishing pier, docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include longterm storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation, as certified by a registered land surveyor or engineer or architect, of the ground surface next to the proposed exterior walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior (DOI)), or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary [of the Interior] to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places; and 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of Interior in states without approved programs. 
Some structures or districts listed on the state or local inventories may not be "historic" as cited above, but have been included on the inventories because it was believed that the structures or districts have the potential meeting the historic structure criteria of the DOI. In order for these structures to meet NFIP historic structure criteria, it must be demonstrated and evidenced that the South Carolina Department of Archives and History has individually determined that the structure or district meets DOI historic structure criteria. 
Limited storage (enclosures) means an area used for storage and intended to be limited to incidental items which can withstand exposure to the elements and have low flood damage potential. Such an area must be offload-resistant or breakaway material, void of utilities except for essential lighting and cannot be temperature controlled. If the area is located below the base flood elevation in an A, AE and A1—A30 zones, it shall meet the requirements of section 22-51(4)b. of this chapter. No storage or enclosures shall be permitted below the base flood elevation in a V, VE and V1—V30 and Coastal A zone. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area. Any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built to HUD standards on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term manufactured home does not include a "recreational vehicle" or a South Carolina Building Code Council approved "modular home." 
Manufactured home park or subdivisions means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means, for the purpose of this chapter, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which the base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) are shown. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) means, as corrected in 1929, elevation reference points set by National Geodetic Survey based on mean sea level. 
New construction means structure for which the start of the construction commenced on or after June 15, 1981. The term also includes any subsequent improvements to such a structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of the facilities services the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete slabs) is completed on or after June, 15, 1981. 
Nonconversion agreement means an agreement signed by the owner as a condition of a certificate of occupancy. The owner must agree to not alter the building at a later date so as to violate the building code or flood damage prevention ordinance requirements. The agreement shall be binding upon heirs, grantees, successors and assigns of parties hereto and shall constitute a covenant running with the structure being constructed under said permit. The agreement shall be recorded in the Berkley County Register of Deeds prior to obtaining a certificate of occupancy inspection. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) means datum point established at Pointe-au-Pere on the St. Lawrence River, Quebec Province, Canada, based on the mass or density of the earth. The datum listed as the reference datum on flood insurance rate maps should be used for elevation certificate and floodproofing certificate completion. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 vertical control means, as corrected in 1988, unused as the reference datum on flood insurance rate maps. 
Special flood hazard area means the area that will be inundated by the flood event having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The one-percent annual chance flood is also referred to as the base flood or 100-year flood. SFHAs are labeled as zone A, zone AO, zone AH, zones A1—A30, zone AE, zone A99, zone AR, zone AR/AE, zone AR/AO, zone AR/A1—A30, zone ARIA, zone V, zone VE, and zones V1—V30 and Coastal A. 
Start of construction, for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement, and means the date of the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for footings, piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary form; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For substantial improvement, the actual start of the construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, including a gas or liquid storage tank or other manmade facility, accessory or appurtenance that is principally above the ground. For the purpose of this chapter, swimming pools and solid fencing shall also be included as a structure. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged conditions would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. Such repairs may be undertaken successively and their costs counted cumulatively. Please refer to the definition of substantial improvement. 
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the tax or certified appraised value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. Permits shall be cumulative for a period of five years. If the improvement project is conducted in phases, the total of all cost associated with each phase, beginning with the issuance of the first permit, shall be utilized to determine whether "substantial improvement" will occur. The term does not, however, include: 
(1)  Any project of improvement to a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official, and safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions (does not include Americans with Disabilities Act compliance standards); or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. Permits shall be cumulative for a period of five years (ordinary minor repairs do not count towards cumulative permit totals). If the improvement project is conducted in phases, the total of all costs associated with each phase, beginning with the issuance of the first permit, shall be utilized to determine whether "substantial improvement" will occur. 
Variance means the grant of relief from a term or terms of this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with these regulations. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(210), 11-14-2017)  
Secs. 22-23—22-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 22-31. - Definition of local administrator. 
The planning, building and zoning director or his/her designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(300), 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 22-32. - Development permit and certification requirements. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the local administrator on forms furnished by the city prior to any development activities. The development permit may require, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing: the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures; and the location of storage areas, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  A certified survey providing the following information: 
a.  Scale and north orientation arrow; 
b.  Parcel boundaries and the location and names of adjacent streets; 
c.  All watercourses on the parcel; 
d.  All floodplain, A, A1—A30, AE, V, VE, or V130, Coastal A-zone, and floodway boundaries that run through the parcel certified by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer with the FIRM map number and date the map was enacted; 
e.  Flood boundaries/zones must be certified accurate with latest adopted flood map information included; 
f.  All required buffer or setback lines from shoreline or channel banks; 
g.  All drainage and utility easements; 
h.  All areas to be cleared, cut or graded; 
i.  The location of existing and proposed fences, walls and other structures; 
j.  Show the 100-year floodplain contour or a statement certifying that the entire lot is within the floodplain must be provided by the development permit applicant when the lot is within or appears to be within the floodplain as mapped by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the floodplain identified pursuant to either section 22-33 or section 22-53 of this chapter; 
k.  The survey must be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same; 
l.  If the permit includes a new building or an expansion of an existing building the plot plan or survey must show the footprint of all existing and proposed buildings and building additions; 
m.  As a condition of receiving a building permit a complete stormwater plan with narrative as set forth in Berkley County Stormwater Management regulations shall be submitted and approved with the permit application. This requirement shall apply to all parcels within the city limits. 
(2)  The survey required by section 22-32 must show the floodway, if any, as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the floodway identified pursuant to section 22-51(6) of this chapter. 
(3)  Where base flood elevation data is provided as set forth in section 22-4 or section 22-33 of this chapter, the application for a development permit within the flood hazard area shall include an elevation certificate showing the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor of all new construction, additions, and substantially improved structures. 
(4)  If no base flood elevation data is provided as set forth in section 22-32 or section 22-33 of this chapter, the application for a development permit must show construction of the lowest floor at least five feet above the highest adjacent grade, if no BFE exists in the model. If a BFE exists in the model then, the development must meet the elevation requirements of section 22-51(1) or (2). 
(5)  Where any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development, the application for a development permit shall include: a description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; an engineering report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation. 
(6)  An elevation certificate providing floor elevation is required after the lowest floor is completed. As soon as possible after completion of the lowest floor and before any further vertical construction commences, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the local administrator a certification of the lowest floor, as built, in relation to mean sea level. Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. Any work done prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local administrator shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior additional working being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(7)  Upon completion of the development, a registered professional engineer or land surveyor, whichever professional is appropriate, shall certify by elevation certificate and any other documentation required that 0[subsection] (6) is built in accordance with the submitted plans and previous predevelopment certifications. 
(8)  A nonconversion agreement shall be required on all buildings within the special flood hazard area when the building is completed and the owner applies for a certificate of occupancy or a use permit. This is done after the final inspection, when the community confirms that the building meets all building code and flood damage prevention ordinance requirements. The agreement must be recorded in the Berkley County Register of Deeds office and a clocked copy must be returned to the city to be filed with the planning, building and zoning department prior to a certificate of occupancy inspection being made. This requirement includes but is not limited to new construction, additions, substantial improvements and renovations. 
(9)  If the proposed project will impact the configuration of a watercourse, floodway, or base flood elevation for which a detailed flood insurance study has been developed, the applicant shall apply for and must receive approval for a conditional letter of map revision with the Federal Emergency Management Agency prior to actual construction. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(310), 11-14-2017; Ord. No. 6-2018 , 11-13-2018)  
Sec. 22-33. - Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator. 
Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development permits to assure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)  Requirements of federal and/or state permits: Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. 
(3)  Watercourse alterations: 
a.  Notify adjacent communities and the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources, Land, Water, and Conservation Division, State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
b.  In addition to the notifications required, watercourse alterations per 0[section 22-33], duties of the local administrator, written reports of maintenance records must be maintained to show that maintenance has been provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained. This maintenance must consist of a comprehensive program of periodic inspections, and routine channel clearing and dredging, or other related functions. The assurance shall consist of a description of maintenance activities, frequency of performance, and the local official responsible for maintenance performance. Records shall be kept on file for FEMA inspection. 
c.  If the proposed project will modify the configuration of the watercourse, floodway, or base flood elevation for which a detailed flood insurance study has been developed, the applicant shall apply for and must receive approval for a conditional letter of map revision with the Federal Emergency Management Agency prior to the start of construction. 
d.  Within 60 days of completion of an alteration of a watercourse, referenced in the certification requirements of section 22-32 of this chapter, the applicant shall submit as-built certification, by a registered professional engineer, to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(4)  Floodway encroachments—Prevent encroachments within floodways unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of section 22-51(6) of this chapter are met. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretations as provided in this article. 
(6)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data has not been provided in accordance with section 22-32 of this chapter, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize best available base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other sources (including data developed pursuant to section 22-54 of this chapter) in order to administer the provisions of this chapter. Data from preliminary, draft and the final flood insurance studies constitutes best available data from a federal, state, or other source. If an appeal is pending on the study in accordance with 44 CFR Ch. 1, Parts 67.5 and 67.6, the data does not have to be used. 
(7)  When the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards conflict with the current natural topography information at the site, the property owner may apply and be approved for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) by FEMA. A copy of the letter of map amendment issued from FEMA will be maintained by the local administrator in the permit file. 
(8)  Make onsite inspections of projects in accordance with section 22-34 of this chapter. 
(9)  Serve notices of violations, issue stop work orders, revoke permits, and take corrective actions in accordance with section 22-34 of this chapter. 
(10)  Maintain all records pertaining to the administration of this chapter and make these records available for public inspection. 
(11)  Annexations. Notify the land resources and conservation districts division, within six months, of any annexations that include special flood hazard areas. The community must incorporate applicable maps from surrounding jurisdictions into this chapter within 90 days of annexation. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(320), 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 22-34. - Administrative procedures. 
Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator. Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to a permit progresses, the local administrator or his designee shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the terms of the permit. A minimum of three inspections shall be performed for each permitted development project in the regulated floodplain: 
The first inspection is conducted when the site is staked out or otherwise marked. A "construction drawings" elevation certification is provided to the city. The inspector checks that areas subject to special requirements are clearly marked on the ground. 
The second inspection is conducted when the lowest floor is built for a building or building addition. The builder provides the city with documentation of the surveyed lowest floor elevation ("building under construction" elevation certificate). The inspector checks that: 
a.  The foundation or forms for the structure are correctly located on the site; 
b.  Where buildings have enclosures below the base flood elevation (permitted in AE zones only), the location and size of the openings are as specified on the approved plans; 
The third inspection is conducted when the project is finished; the "finished construction" elevation certificate is submitted, and before the final building inspection. The inspector checks: 
a.  The foundation and floor elevation have not been altered since the second inspection; 
b.  All areas below the required elevation are constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
c.  Where buildings have enclosures below the base flood elevation, the location and size of the openings are specified on the approved plans and recorded on the elevation certificate; 
d.  All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning, ductwork, and other equipment is located, elevated, or protected as specified on the approved plans and recorded on the elevation certificate; and 
e.  There has been no alteration of the ground since the second inspection or the ground has been graded according to the approved plans. 
(2)  Stop work orders. Whenever a building or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation of this chapter, the administrator or his designee may order the work to immediately be stopped. The stop work order shall be in writing and directed to the person doing the work. Notification of the property owner is also required. The stop work order shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reasons for the stoppage, and the conditions under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop work order shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(3)  Revocation of permits. The local administrator may revoke and require the return of the development permit by notifying the permit holder and owner in writing, stating the reason for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the approved application, plans, or specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may also be revoked. 
(4)  Periodic inspections. The local administrator and each member of the inspection department shall have a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action. 
(5)  Violations to be corrected. When the local administrator finds violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his duty to notify the owner of the building of the violation. The owner shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law on the property he owns. 
(6)  Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the owner of a structure or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the administrator shall give him written notice, by certified or registered mail, to his last known address or by personal service, that: 
a.  The building or property is in violation of the flood damage prevention article; 
b.  A hearing will be held before the local administrator at a designated place and time, not later than ten days after the date of notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and 
c.  Following the hearing, the local administrator may issue such order to alter, vacate, or demolish the structure, or to remove till as appears appropriate. 
(7)  Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the administrator shall find that the structure or development is in violation of the flood damage prevention article, he shall make such an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation within such period, not more than 60 days, the administrator may prescribe; provided that where the administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period that may be feasible. 
(8)  Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action may appeal from the order of the City of Hanahan Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals by giving notice of appeal in writing to the local administrator and the clerk within ten days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order of the administrator shall be final. The local appeals board shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke the order. 
(9)  Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a structure or property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action from which no appeal has been taken, or rails to comply with an order of the appeals board following an appeal, they shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in the discretion of the court. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(330), 11-14-2017)  
Secs. 22-35—22-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 22-41. - General standards. 
Development may not occur in the special flood hazard floodplain where alternative locations exist due to inherent hazards and risks involved. Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall demonstrate that new structures (and additions) cannot be located out of the floodplain and that encroachments onto the floodplain are minimized. In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  All new construction, additions and/or substantial improvements shall conform to the requirements contained in the latest adopted International Building Code or International Residential Code, whichever is applicable, reviewed to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  All new construction, additions and/or substantial improvements shall be constructed with flood-resistant materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(3)  All new construction, additions and/or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages. 
(4)  Electrical, ventilation, plumbing, heating and air conditioning equipment (including ductwork), and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located at least two feet above the required base flood elevation so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within or on the components during conditions of flooding. This requirement does not preclude the installation of outdoor faucets for showerheads, hoses, etc., as long as cutoff devices and backflow devices are installed to prevent contamination of the service components and thereby minimize any flood damages to a structure and contents. 
(5)  New gas containers shall be buried below grade and anchored to prevent flotation. Existing gas tanks, when replaced, shall be strapped to prevent movement and flotation. 
(6)  Noncommercial developable lots located in the X, X shaded, and AE flood zones shall have an average grade of all adjacent lots. A foundation/current conditions survey shall be provided and approved prior to the foundation being poured or piers being filled prior to additional inspections being performed. Adjacent lot grades shall be measured at a minimum of 20 feet into all adjacent lots. 
(7)  Water supply and sanitary sewage systems. New and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(8)  Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(9)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, addition or improvement to a structure which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this chapter. This includes post-FIRM development and structures. 
(10)  Nonconforming structures or uses. Nonconforming structures or uses may not be enlarged, replaced, or rebuilt unless such enlargement or reconstruction is accomplished in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. Use of nonconforming ground floor habitable spaces or walls for an addition of a second floor above the base flood elevation shall not be allowed. 
(11)  Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). A building must meet the specific standards for floodplain construction outlined in section 22-51 of this chapter as well as any applicable ADA requirements. The ADA is not justification for issuing a variance or otherwise waiving these requirements. Also, the cost of improvements required to meet the ADA provisions shall be included in the costs of the improvements for calculating substantial improvement. 
(12)  All new construction, additions and/or substantial improvements shall be designed and sealed by a registered design professional as complying with the requirements of the latest adopted International Building Code or International Residential Code, whichever is applicable. 
(13)  Floodproofing or wet-proofing as a flood protection measure shall be prohibited. All structures (including nonresidential) shall be required to elevate to the base flood elevation plus two feet. 
(14)  New septic systems in floodplains are prohibited. 
(15)  Critical facilities: Critical facilities as defined in section 22-22 of this chapter shall be prohibited in the 500-year flood zone. (Note: The 500-year floodplain includes the entire SFHA plus other land that is lower than the 500-year flood elevation). 
(16)  Hazardous velocities. 
Hydrodynamic pressure must be considered in the design of any foundation system where velocity waters or the potential for debris flow exists. Therefore, solid foundation walls shall not be permitted within any special flood hazard area. 
(17)  All fences crossing floodplain boundaries are subject to flood review. The most restrictive zone crossed by the fence will prevail. All fencing material shall be flood-resistant materials. 
(18)  There shall be no alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential flood damage. 
(19)  Swimming pools in special flood hazard area: Pools located within the SFHA shall be built to the following standards: 
a.  Swimming pools must meet all applicable requirements set forth in the zoning ordinance. 
b.  Swimming pools must be sited as far away from the regulatory flood boundary as feasible. 
c.  Swimming pools beneath a structure in any SFHA must be flush with the natural grade and must be engineered certifying: 
1.  The swimming pool or other obstruction will not be subject to breaking up or flooding out the ground and affecting the piles or columns of the structure; and 
2.  The swimming pool shall meet the same anchoring requirements as the support system of the building. 
(20)  Recreational vehicles shall not be permitted within the SFHA. 
(21)  Outdoor storage of any kind shall be prohibited within the SFHA. 
(22)  No basements shall be permitted within the city limits. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(400), 11-14-2017; Ord. No. 6-2018 , 11-13-2018)  
Secs. 22-42—22-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SPECIFIC STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 22-51. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard AE zones where base flood elevation data has been provided, as set forth in section 22-32 of this chapter, the following provisions are required in addition to those set forth in article IV of this chapter: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction, addition and substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the lowest floor elevated not lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. No basements are permitted. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. 
a.  New construction, addition and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential structure (including manufactured structures) shall have the lowest floor elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation. 
b.  A variance may be considered for wet floodproofing agricultural structures in accordance with the criteria outlined [in] article II [of] this chapter. Agricultural structures not meeting the criteria of article II must meet the nonresidential construction standards and all other applicable provisions of this article. 
(3)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, provided the anchoring and the elevation standards specified in section 22-51(3)c. of this chapter are met. 
b.  Manufactured homes that are substantially improved on sites outside a manufactured home park or subdivision, or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, must be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and movement. 
c.  Manufactured homes as permitted in section 22-51(3)a. of this chapter shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement. For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement in accordance with section 19-425.39 of the South Carolina Manufactured Housing Board Regulations, effective date May 25, 1990, as amended. Additionally, the chassis must be elevated a minimum of two feet above the base flood elevation. The chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements at least equivalent strength. 
(4)  Elevated buildings. New construction, addition and/or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include limited enclosures (allowed only in AE flood zones) in an area other than a basement, and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to preclude finished space and designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must be certified by a professional engineer or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above the higher of the interior or exterior grade immediately under the opening; 
3.  Only the portion of openings that are below the base flood elevation (BFE) can be counted towards the required net open area; 
4.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; and 
5.  Subgrade crawlspaces are not permitted. Fill placed around foundation walls must be graded so that the grade inside the enclosed area is equal to or higher than the adjacent grade outside the building on at least one side of the building. 
b.  Enclosures below lowest floor in AE zones (excluding crawlspaces): 
1.  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). Total enclosed area shall not exceed 290 square feet. No other enclosures shall be permitted below the required base flood elevation. 
2.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned or finished into separate rooms, must be void of utilities except for essential lighting as required for safety, and cannot be temperature controlled. 
3.  One wet location switch and/or outlet connected to a ground fault circuit interrupt breaker may be installed below the required lowest floor elevation as specified in section 22-51 of this chapter. 
4.  All construction materials below the required lowest floor elevation specified in specified in section 22-51 of this chapter shall be of flood-resistant materials. 
5.  New construction and substantial improvements with enclosed areas under elevated buildings, shall sign a declaration of land restriction (nonconversion agreement); the agreement shall be recorded on the property deed prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy or final inspection. 
c.  Hazardous velocities. Hydrodynamic pressure must be considered in the design of any foundation system where velocity waters or the potential for debris flow exists. Therefore, solid foundation walls shall not be permitted. 
(5)  Accessory structures. Any detached accessory structure, the cost of which is greater than $3,000.00, must comply with the elevated structure requirements of sections 22-51(2) and (5) of this chapter or constructed completely of flood-resistant materials. When accessory structures of $3,000.00 or less are to be placed in the floodplain, the following criteria shall be met: 
a.  Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation, temporary or otherwise, including office, workshop, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas; 
b.  Accessory structures shall be constructed of flood-resistant material designed to have low flood damage potential; 
c.  Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters; 
d.  Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure; 
e.  Service facilities such as electrical shall be installed in accordance with section 22-41(4) of this chapter; 
f.  Openings to relieve pressure during a flood event shall be provided below the base flood elevation in accordance with section 22-51(4)a. of this chapter; 
g.  Accessory structures shall comply with city zoning regulations; and 
h.  Detached garages, used for purposes other than parking of vehicles or limited storage, shall meet the requirements of new construction. 
Exception: Swimming pools shall be allowed meeting section 22-41(20) of this chapter. 
(6)  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 22-32 of this chapter are areas designated as floodway. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris and potential projectiles and has erosion potential. The following provisions shall be presented to the local administrator: 
a.  No encroachments, including fill or raised slab foundation, new construction, substantial improvements, additions, and other developments shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood. Such certification and technical data shall be presented to the local administrator. Raised slab foundation may be utilized in floodways only when no other practical alternative exists. 
b.  If specified standards in section 22-51(6) of this chapter are satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions. 
c.  Stream crossing for any purpose (i.e., timber harvesting operations), if temporary, shall be permitted. Otherwise, the development shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions. 
d.  No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, provided the anchoring and the elevation standards of section 22-51(3) of this chapter. 
e.  Permissible uses within floodways may include: general farming, pasture, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, forestry, wildlife sanctuary, game farm, and other similar agricultural, wildlife and related uses; also, lawns, gardens, play areas, picnic grounds, hiking and horseback riding trails are acceptable uses, provided that they do not employ structures or fill. The uses listed in this section are permissible only if and to the extent that they do not cause any increase in base flood elevations. 
(7)  Fill. Fill and raised slab construction is discouraged because storage capacity is removed from floodplains. Elevating buildings by other methods should be utilized. An applicant shall prove through engineering analysis that fill is the only alternative to raising the building to at least two feet above the base flood elevation, and that the amount of fill used will not affect the flood storage capacity or adversely affect adjacent properties. Slabs of any kind, including raised slab foundations, or stem walls shall not be utilized in the special flood hazard area. Piers, pilings, or flow-through crawlspaces shall be utilized. The following provisions shall apply to any fill placed in the special flood hazard area: 
a.  Fill may not be placed in a floodway unless it is in accordance with section 22-51(6) of this chapter; 
b.  Fill may not be placed in tidal or nontidal wetlands without the required state and federal permits; 
c.  Fill must consist of soil and rock materials only. Dredged material may be used as fill only upon certification of suitability by a registered professional geotechnical engineer. Landfills, rubble fills, dumps and sanitary fills are not permitted in the floodplain; 
d.  Fill used to support structures must be certified by a registered professional engineer for "designed and compacted fill" that meets the criteria of (1) section 1803.5.8 and section 1804.5 of the International Building Code, (2) section 2.4 of ASCE 24, or (3) their equivalent; and must be on fill that has appropriate protection from erosion and scour; 
e.  Fill slopes shall be no greater than two horizontal to one vertical. Flatter slopes may be required where velocities may result in erosion; 
f.  The use of fill shall not increase flooding or cause drainage problems on neighboring properties; and 
g.  Fill may not be used for structural support in the coastal high hazard areas (V, VE, or V130). 
(8)  Any unauthorized or construction inconsistent with plans approved by the city will be required to return the area to original conditions. This requirement includes existing properties. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(500), 11-14-2017; Ord. No. 6-2018 , 11-13-2018)  
Sec. 22-52. - Standards for area outside of the special flood hazard area (SFHA). 
Other areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation of floodwaters due to acts of nature, stormwater drainage and other issues. These properties, although outside of the SFHA, need to be protected. The city wishes to minimize any potential loss due to periodic flooding by enforcing certain requirements within the 100-year and 500-year flood zones. These flood zones have no base flood elevation data therefore the following requirements are to be enforced on all new construction and additions: 
(1)  Minimum finished floor elevation. 
a.  All new noncommercial structures, not located in a special flood hazard area, shall have the lowest floor and all mechanical or electrical equipment, such as compressors, air conditioning units, etc., elevated not less than 18 inches above the highest adjacent grade of the lot. Final site grading shall insure that ponding of stormwater will not occur beneath the building, nearer than three feet from the building's perimeter or any mechanical or electrical equipment. 
b.  All new commercial structures, not located in a special flood hazard area, shall have the lowest floor and all mechanical or electrical equipment, such as compressors, air conditioning units, etc., elevated not less than 18 inches above the centerline of the road. Final site grading shall insure that ponding of stormwater will not occur beneath the building, nearer than three feet from the building's perimeter or any mechanical or electrical equipment. 
(2)  Enclosed crawl space construction must be designed and certified by a professional engineer or meet the following minimum criteria: 
a.  Provide a minimum of two flood vents on different walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
b.  The bottom of all flood vents shall be no higher than one foot above the higher of the interior or exterior grade immediately under the opening; and 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
(3)  The installation of outdoor faucets for showerheads, hoses, etc., are permitted as long as cutoff devices and backflow devices are installed to prevent contamination of the service components and thereby minimize any flood damages to a structure and contents; 
(4)  Gas containers shall be strapped and anchored to prevent movement and flotation or buried below grade and anchored to a reinforced footing. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(510), 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 22-53. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in these regulations. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. An access road at or above the base flood elevation shall be provided to allow emergency access during flood conditions. 
(2)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(3)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for all subdivision proposals of 50 lots or more than five acres or greater. 
(4)  All residential subdivision proposals having 50 lots or more shall be required to provide an approved evacuation plan. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(520), 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 22-54. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 22-4 of this chapter are areas designated as shallow flooding. The following provisions shall apply within all such areas in addition to those requirements set forth in article IV of this chapter: 
(1)  All new construction, addition and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor elevated to at least as high as the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(2)  All new construction, addition and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor elevated to at least as high as the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(3)  All structures on slopes must have drainage paths around them to guide water away from the structures. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(530), 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 22-55. - Standards for streams with established base flood elevations but without floodways. 
Along rivers and streams where base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway is identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in the FIS. 
(1)  No encroachments including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
( Ord. No. 6-2018 , 11-13-2018)  
Secs. 22-56—22-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 22-61. - Establishment of appeals board. 
The construction board of adjustments and appeals as established by the City of Hanahan shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(600), 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 22-62. - Right to appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to court. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(610), 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 22-63. - Historic structure. 
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(620), 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 22-64. - Consideration. 
In passing upon such applications, the appeal board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of the article and: 
(1)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage, and the safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage to the individual owner; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(6)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(7)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development, and the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(8)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(9)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges; and 
(10)  Agricultural structures must be located in wide, expansive floodplain areas, where no other alternative location for the agricultural structure exists. The applicant must demonstrate that the entire farm acreage, consisting of a contiguous parcel of land on which the structure is to be located, must be in the special flood hazard area and no other alternative locations for the structure are available. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(630), 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 22-65. - Findings. 
Findings listed above shall be submitted to the appeal board, in writing, and included in the application for a variance. Additionally, comments from the department of natural resources, land resources and conservation districts division, state coordinator's office, must be taken into account and included in the permit file. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(640), 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 22-66. - Floodways. 
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(650), 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 22-67. - Conditions. 
Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. The following conditions shall apply to all variances: 
(1)  Variances may not be issued when the variance will make the structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations or ordinances. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(3)  Variances shall only be issued upon a showing of good and sufficient cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing laws or ordinances. 
(4)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and a written statement that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. 
(5)  The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued for any structure or development begun without proper permits that is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Violations shall be corrected in accordance with section 22-34(5) of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(660), 11-14-2017)  
Secs. 22-68—22-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISION 
 
Sec. 22-71. - Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing flood damage prevention ordinance. 
This chapter in part comes forward by reenactment of some of the provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance enacted June 21, 1988, as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather reenact and continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be enforced. The enactment of this chapter shall not affect any action, suit, or proceeding, instituted or pending. All provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance of the City of Hanahan enacted on April 14, 1981, as amended, which are not reenacted herein, are repealed. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(700), 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 22-72. - Effect upon outstanding building permits. 
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size or designated use of any building, structure or part thereof for which a building permit has been granted by the building official or his authorized agents before the time of passage of this chapter; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such outstanding permit within a period of 60 days subsequent to the passage of this chapter, construction or use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(710), 11-14-2017)  
Sec. 22-73. - Effective date. 
This chapter shall become effective upon adoption. 
( Ord. No. 4-2017 , § 1(720), 11-14-2017)  
Chapter 24 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal police officers, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-110; reserve police officers, S.C. Code 1976, § 23-28-10 et seq.; powers and duties of police chief and officers relevant to municipal court, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-55. 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Police department established; officers and employees. 
(a)  There is hereby established a city police department to be headed by a police chief who shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
(b)  The department shall consist of such officers and employees as shall be approved by the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 2-1-1; Ord. of 1-14-2003; Ord. No. 4-2007, § 5, 3-13-2007)  
Sec. 24-2. - Duties of police chief. 
Other than those duties and powers already granted herein, the chief of police shall: 
(1)  Serve and return writs and processes; 
(2)  Suppress all riots, disturbances and breaches of the peace; apprehend all disorderly persons; pursue and arrest any person fleeing from justice; and apprehend any person in the act of violating the laws of the state or this Code and bring the violator before competent authority for examination and trial; and 
(3)  Render any accounts of the police department, his duties, department operations and receipts as may be required by the city administrator or the council and keep records of the department and his office open to public inspection at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1983, § 2-1-2; Ord. of 1-14-2003; Ord. No. 4-2007, § 6, 3-13-2007)  
Sec. 24-3. - Resisting arrest. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to resist arrest, or, if under arrest, to refuse to accompany the arresting officer or to endeavor to force the officer to drag, pull or carry him to the place of destination. 
(Code 1983, § 2-1-3)  
Sec. 24-4. - Resisting, interfering with officer or city employee—Generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to assault, resist, abuse or in any manner, by word or act, interfere with a police officer or any other officer or employee of the city in the discharge of his duty or to aid or abet any assault, resistance, abuse or interference. 
(Code 1983, § 2-1-4)  
Sec. 24-5. - Same—In execution of warrant, other process. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to assault, obstruct, hinder, prevent or in any manner interfere with any officer or other person charged with the execution of any lawful warrant or other process in arresting any person for whose apprehension the warrant has been issued; or to rescue or attempt to rescue any person from the custody of an officer or person lawfully arresting him; or, directly or indirectly, to aid, abet or assist any person so arrested to escape from custody; or to harbor or conceal any person for whose arrest a warrant or other process shall have been issued, so as to prevent the discovery of the person, after notice or knowledge of the fact of the issuing of the warrant or other process. 
(Code 1983, § 2-1-5)  
Sec. 24-6. - Failure or refusal to stop. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and knowingly fail or refuse to stop when signaled, hailed or commanded to stop by a police officer or other officer of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 2-1-6)  
Chapter 26 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Misdemeanors under state law. 
Any act the commission of which constitutes a misdemeanor under the laws of the state is prohibited within the city, and any prohibited act, if committed within the city, shall constitute a violation of this Code; provided, however, that the penalty for the offense committed shall not exceed the penalty prescribed in section 1-12. 
(Code 1983, § 9-1-1)  
Sec. 26-2. - False reports. 
Any person who shall willfully, maliciously or mischievously make a false report or furnish false information, by any means whatsoever, to any police officer, employee of the police department or any other official or employee of the city while said police officer, employee or official is acting in an official capacity shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1983, § 9-1-2; Ord. of 8-12-1986)  
Sec. 26-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3-2011, adopted May 10, 2011, repealed former § 26-3 which pertained to loitering and trespassing at public boat landings, and derived from the 1983 Code, § 9-1-3; and an ordinance adopted Feb. 11, 1992. See § 26-36.  
Sec. 26-4. - Prohibited activities. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in a public place, park or playground within the City of Hanahan to do any of the following acts: 
(1)  Deface, damage or destroy any structure, facility, seat, walkway, driveway, monument, tree, shrub, flower or grass; 
(2)  Walk, drive, sit or stand in any space posted with a "keep off" sign; 
(3)  Litter or deposit waste on the grounds, in bodies of water, or in any place other than designated waste receptacles; 
(4)  Erect, post or display signs or posters; 
(5)  Sell or offer to sell any merchandise except by permit from the City of Hanahan; 
(6)  Posses, sell, consume, or be under the influence of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances; 
(7)  Engage in obnoxious, disorderly, loud, vulgar, or indecent conduct; use any language or any conduct that annoys, threatens or is a nuisance to members of the public; 
(8)  Possess animals or fowl which are unrestrained; 
(9)  Operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater than the posted limit; 
(10)  Park any vehicle, except in a designated parking space or in a driveway in accordance with traffic signs and in a manner which does not impede pedestrian or other vehicular traffic; or 
(11)  Be present in a park when closed according to the hours of operation posted at main entrances to the park. 
(Ord. No. 3-2011, 5-10-2011)  
Secs. 26-5—26-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE 
 
Sec. 26-26. - Firearms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring a loaded or unloaded firearm into any building, structure, recreation facility or any other property owned by the city, or onto any property owned by the city. Any person violating this section is subject to punishment by fine or imprisonment. 
(1)  A firearm is considered the same as that which is delineated in S.C. Code 1976, § 16-23-420. 
(2)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as applying to: 
a.  Duly constituted law enforcement officers; or 
b.  Members of the National Guard or Armed Forces who are on active duty and are carrying firearms as a part of, and in the course of, their duty assignments. 
(3)  The bringing of firearms onto the city property or into city buildings may be permitted if the use thereof is for theatrical, ceremonial or athletic events, and prior permission of the city administrator is secured. 
(4)  The penalty for each violation shall be not more than a $500.00 fine or 30 days imprisonment. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-1; Ord. of 9-9-1980; Ord. of 4-12-1983; Ord. of 1-10-1984; Ord. of 10-8-1996)  
Sec. 26-27. - Concealed weapons; carrying weapons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry concealed about his person any dirk, metal knuckles, razor, ice pick, hawkbill knife or any spring or clasp knife, which has a blade more than three inches in length, or other weapon usually used for the infliction of personal injuries. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry about the person, whether concealed or not, any dirk, slingshot, metal knuckles, razor or other weapon usually used for the infliction of personal injury. This section shall not apply to peace officers while in the discharge of their duties. 
(Code 1983, §§ 9-2-2, 9-2-3)  
Sec. 26-28. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Incite a riot means, but is not limited to, urging or instigating other persons to riot, but shall not be deemed to mean the mere oral or written advocacy of ideas or expression of belief, not involving advocacy of any act of violence or assertion of the rightness of, or the right to commit, any such act. 
Public place means any place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds areas or parks. 
Riot means a public disturbance involving an act of violence by one or more persons part of an assemblage of three or more persons, which act shall constitute a clear and present danger of, or shall result in, damage or injury to the property of any other person or to the person of any other individual or a threat of the commission of an act of violence by one or more persons having, individually or collectively, the ability of immediate execution of such threat, where the performance of the threatened act of violence would constitute a clear and present danger of, or would result in, damage or injury to the property of any other person or to the person of any other individual. 
(b)  Prohibited. A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder, nuisance, or if his conduct is likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, he willfully does any of the following acts in a public place: 
(1)  Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in danger of his life, limb or health; 
(2)  Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health, or property of another; 
(4)  Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl; 
(5)  Congregates with others or in crowds for unlawful purposes, as defined by federal or state law, this Code or other ordinances; 
(6)  Interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation by acts of violence, angry threats or abusive conduct; 
(7)  Obstructs, either singly or together with other persons, the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by the city police or other lawful authority known to be such; 
(8)  Is in a public place under the influence of an intoxicating liquor or drug in such condition as to be unable to exercise care for his own safety or the safety of others; 
(9)  Resists or obstructs the performance of duties by city police or any other authorized official of the city, when known to be such an official; 
(10)  Incites, attempts to incite, or is involved in attempting to incite a riot; 
(11)  Addresses threats to any member of the city police department, any other authorized official of the city who is engaged in the lawful performance of his duties, or any other person when such words have a direct tendency to cause acts of violence; words merely causing displeasure, annoyance or resentment are not prohibited; 
(12)  Damages, befouls, or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy, or physically offensive condition; 
(13)  Makes or causes to be made any loud, boisterous and unreasonable noise or disturbance to other persons nearby, or near to any public highway, road, street, lane, alley, park, square, or common, whereby the public peace is broken or disturbed; 
(14)  Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose or with the intent to engage in gaming; 
(15)  Frequents any public place with the intent to obtain money from other persons by illegal or fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devices; 
(16)  Assembles with any person for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the city, or who shall aid or abet therein; 
(17)  Is at any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated; 
(18)  Fails to obey a lawful order to disperse by a police officer when known to be such an official, where one or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, and the public health and safety is imminently threatened; or 
(19)  Uses obscene language or makes an obscene gesture. 
(c)  Exemptions. This section shall not be construed to suppress the right to lawful assembly, picketing, public speaking or other lawful means of expressing public opinion not in contravention of other laws. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-4; Ord. of 12-13-1983) 
State Law reference— Disorderly conduct generally, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-17-530.  
Sec. 26-29. - Instigating, aiding or participating in a riot. 
Any person, upon conviction, engaging in a riot, rout or affray when no weapon was actually used and no wound inflicted shall be subject and liable for each offense. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-5)  
Sec. 26-30. - Discharge of dangerous devices. 
It shall be unlawful to fire or discharge any air rifle, slingshot, or other device which may be potentially harmful to any persons or property. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-6)  
Sec. 26-31. - Aiders or abettors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to counsel, advise, incite, abet, procure, or aid any other person in the violation of any of the ordinances of the city. Such person shall be held and deemed a principal. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-7)  
Sec. 26-32. - Noises. 
The creation and continuance of any loud, disturbing noises is hereby prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, make or contribute to creating any loud or disturbing noise of such character, intensity, or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any citizen. The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing noises in violation of this section, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Blowing horns. The sounding or blowing of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, motorbus or other vehicle, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or if in motion only as a danger signal; the creation by means of any signal device of any loud or harsh noise; and the sounding of such device for any unnecessary period of time. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, television, etc. The playing of any radio, phonograph, piccolo, television or any musical instrument in any manner or with such volume as to disturb any person, or the playing of the instruments in any manner as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in any dwelling, hotel or other residence. 
(3)  Pets. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(4)  Vehicle noises. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or used or repaired in such manner, as to create loud or unnecessary noises, particularly grating, grinding, rattling, riveting or other disturbing noises. 
(5)  Blowing whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of danger. 
(6)  Exhaust discharge. To discharge into the open air the exhaust from any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat engine or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)  Loudspeakers or amplifiers on vehicles. The use of any mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks, airplanes or other vehicles for advertising or other purposes. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-8)  
Sec. 26-33. - Assault and battery. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault and battery upon any other person. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-9)  
Sec. 26-34. - Sale and discharge of fireworks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fire, shoot or discharge any fireworks of any description within the city, except on Independence Day (July 4), Christmas Eve (December 24), Christmas Day (December 25), New Years Eve (December 31), New Year's Day (January 1) and as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(b)  On Christmas Eve and Christmas Day the discharge of any type of firework after 10:00 p.m. and before 10:00 a.m. is strictly prohibited. 
(c)  On New Year's Eve day beginning at 10:00 a.m. the discharge of fireworks shall be permitted all day until 1:00 a.m. on New Year's Day. 
(d)  On July 4th, the discharge of fireworks shall be permitted from 10:00 a.m. until 12:00 a.m. on July 5th. 
(e)  If an individual(s) would like to discharge fireworks on a day not specified above due to their religious practices or in celebration of a cultural holiday or other event, a fireworks demonstration permit will be obtained from the Hanahan Police Department. 
(f)  If an individual(s), group, or organization would like to discharge fireworks on a day not specified for the purpose of a public demonstration, a fireworks demonstration permit must first be obtained from the state fire marshall's office and then from the Hanahan Police Department. 
(g)  The discharge of fireworks from neighboring private or public property without permission from the property owner or government entity that controls the public property is strictly prohibited at all times. This provision shall not apply to public firework displays authorized to be held on city property. 
(h)  The sale of fireworks within the city shall be allowed pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, §§ 23-35-10 to 23-35-170 and in accordance with the city's zoning ordinance. 
(i)  Violations of this section may result in a $1,093.00 fine. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-10; Ord. of 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 4-2016, 5-10-2016) 
State Law reference— State regulation of fireworks and explosives, S.C. Code 1976, title 23, ch. 35.  
Sec. 26-35. - Permits for public displays of fireworks. 
Any person desiring to hold a public display of fireworks shall first secure from the fire chief a written permit to hold the display at least ten days prior to the date of the display; provided that no permit shall be issued to allow any public display of fireworks within the fire limits, or at any location whereby, in the judgment of the fire chief, life or property may be endangered. 
(Code 1983, § 9-2-13)  
Sec. 26-36. - Loitering. 
(a)  Loitering. No person shall loiter or prowl in a place or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals. 
(b)  Dwelling areas. No person shall hide, wait, or otherwise loiter in the vicinity of any private dwelling, house, apartment building or any other place of residence with the unlawful intent to watch, gaze, or look upon the occupants therein in a clandestine manner. 
(c)  Schools and public grounds. No person shall loiter in or about any school or public place at or near which children or students attend or normally congregate. As used in this subsection, "loiter" means to delay, to linger, or to idle in or about any said school or public place without a lawful purpose for being present. 
(d)  Buildings. No person shall loiter, lodge in any building, structure, or place, whether public or private, without the permission of the owner of person entitled to possession or control thereof. 
(e)  Restaurants, taverns. No person shall loiter in or about a restaurant, tavern or other building open to the public. As used in this subsection, "loiter" means to, without just cause, remain in a restaurant, tavern, or public building or to remain upon the property immediately adjacent thereto after being asked to leave. 
(f)  Parking lots. No person shall loiter in or upon any public parking surface lot or public parking structure, either on foot or in or upon any conveyance being driven or parked thereon, without the permission of the owner or person entitled to possession of in control thereof. As used in this subsection: 
(1)  Public parking structure means a building enclosure or garage above or under the ground, or any portion thereof, in which automobiles or motor vehicles may be parked, stored, housed or kept, open to the public use with or without charge. 
(2)  Public parking surface lot means five or more ground level parking spaces, or any portion thereof, in which automobiles or motor vehicles may be parked, stored, housed or kept, open to public use with or without charge. 
(g)  Private or public residential property. No person shall loiter in or on private or public residential property in residential neighborhoods. As used in this subsection, "loiter" means to, without just cause, linger, remain in or on private or public residential property, or to remain upon the property immediately adjacent thereto after being asked to leave by the owner or person entitled to possession or in control thereof, or where "no loitering" signs are posted. 
(h)  Requirements of identification. A person being asked for identification pursuant to this section shall provide the police officer with his name and address either verbally or by providing the officer with written evidence or the person's name and address, including but not limited to, a driver's license or picture identification. 
(i)  Penalty; continuing violations. Any person who is convicted of any violation of this section, the court before whom the offender shall be tried may sentence him to pay a fine not exceeding the maximum fine permitted by law or serve a term not exceeding 30 days in jail, or both. Each day any violation of this section occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 12-2008, 12-9-2008)  
Secs. 26-37—26-58. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC WELFARE 
 
Sec. 26-59. - Indecent exposure. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit willful and malicious indecent exposure of his person in any public place, on property of others or to the view of any person on any street or highway. 
(Code 1983, § 9-3-1)  
Sec. 26-60. - Bawdy house. 
The keeping of a bawdy house or disorderly house or a house of prostitution within the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed a misdemeanor. It shall also be a misdemeanor for the owner or lessee of any dwelling house, or other building situated within the corporate limits, to let or sublet the dwelling house, or other building, to any person to be used, or with the knowledge that the same is intended to be used and kept, as a bawdy house or house of prostitution. 
(Code 1983, § 9-3-2)  
Sec. 26-61. - Solicitation for illegal purposes. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to invite or entice any person upon any street, public square or enclosure to accompany, go with or follow such person to any place for illegal purposes, or to invite, entice or address any person from any door, window, porch or portico of any house or building to enter any house, go with or accompany such person to any place for illegal purposes. 
(Code 1983, § 9-3-3)  
Sec. 26-62. - Gambling or games of chance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in gambling or games of chance within the corporate limits of the city, unless otherwise permitted under state law. 
(Code 1983, § 9-3-5)  
Sec. 26-63. - Public drunkenness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be upon the streets or in any public place in a drunken condition. 
(Code 1983, § 9-3-6)  
Sec. 26-64. - Interference with streets, sidewalks, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to close up or in any manner interfere with the free use of any public street or thoroughfare, sidewalk, or alley without the previous written consent of the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 9-3-7)  
Sec. 26-65. - Drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Deliver or delivery means the actual, constructive, or attempted transfer of a controlled drug or paraphernalia whether or not there exists an agency relationship. 
Paraphernalia means any instrument, device, article, or contrivance used, designed for use, or intended for use in ingesting, smoking, administering, or preparing marijuana, hashish, hashish oil, or cocaine, and shall not include cigarette papers and tobacco pipes, but shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic marijuana or hashish pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
(2)  Water pipes designed for use or intended for use with marijuana, hashish, hashish oil, or cocaine; 
(3)  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
(4)  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
(5)  Roach clips; 
(6)  Separation gins designed for use or intended for use in cleaning marijuana; 
(7)  Cocaine spoons and vials; 
(8)  Chamber pipes; 
(9)  Carburetor pipes; 
(10)  Electric pipes; 
(11)  Air-driven pipes; 
(12)  Chilams; 
(13)  Bongs; 
(14)  Ice pipes or chillers; 
(15)  Syringes; 
(16)  Heroin spoons; and 
(17)  Bottle caps. 
(b)  Unlawful acts; determination of paraphernalia. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise for sale, manufacture, possess, sell or deliver, or to possess with the intent to sell or deliver paraphernalia. 
(2)  In determining whether an object is paraphernalia, a court or other authority shall consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
a.  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
b.  The proximity of the object to controlled substances; 
c.  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object; 
d.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of law; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of law shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia; 
e.  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use; 
f.  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use; 
g.  National and local advertising concerning its use; 
h.  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; 
i.  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products; 
j.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object to the total sales of the business enterprise; 
k.  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; and/or 
l.  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(Code 1983, § 9-3-8; Ord. of 10-11-1983)  
Sec. 26-66. - Uninvited solicitation. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The city council wishes to protect the privacy of residents who do not desire door-to-door solicitation or canvassing and to protect the privacy of those residents who wish to receive door-to-door solicitation or canvassing only during certain desired hours. In addition, it is the intent and purpose of the city council to protect and further the rights of residents who desire to receive door-to-door solicitation or canvassing at all times. 
Recognizing that political and religious canvassing and/or solicitation is a Constitutional right, nothing herein shall limit or constrict the rights of a political candidate, political campaign worker, or church representative from communicating with the public about their cause. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Soliciting shall mean and include any one or more of the following activities: 
(1)  Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, services of any kind, character or description whatever for any kind of consideration whatever; or 
(2)  Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of insurance of any type, kind or publication; or 
(3)  Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; or 
(4)  Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit association, organization, corporation or project. 
(c)  Duty of solicitor. It shall be the duty of every solicitor or canvasser, commercial or noncommercial, upon going into a neighborhood or residential address to look for any signs that would preclude solicitation. Further, upon entering any premises in the city on which a residence is located to proceed from the adjacent road right-of-way directly toward the front or main entrance of such residence to examine and look for the notice provided for in paragraph (d) herein. 
If any such notice is posted, then any solicitor or canvasser shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises or neighborhood, as applicable, and shall leave on the premises no documents or literature of any kind. Under no circumstances shall a solicitor enter upon a side or rear yard of any residence unless expressly invited to do so by the occupant thereof. 
Any solicitor or canvasser who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by an occupant or owner hereof. 
(d)  Declaration. It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a trespass for any person to: 
(1)  Go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door or create any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engaged in soliciting or canvassing commercially or noncommercially in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Not immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by an occupant or owner thereof. 
(e)  Notice to solicitor. 
(1)  When a homeowners association (HOA) or private residence owner or occupant does not wish to receive door-to-door solicitation or canvassing, a sign shall be posted at the entrance to the community, if an HOA, or in the immediate vicinity of the front door or front door bell area, which sign shall read: 
NO SOLICITATION INVITED 
or 
NO SOLICITING 
(2)  The signs provided for in subsection (1) shall be made of a durable material, such as plastic, metal or wood. Further, the sign letters shall be at least three-quarter inch in height. In addition, the sign shall be capable of being temporarily or permanently affixed to the hanging surface. 
(3)  Penalties. Any person, corporation or business entity violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $1,093.00 fine or 30 days imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 7-2013, 7-9-2013)  
Secs. 26-67—26-88. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 26-89. - Petit larceny. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of petit larceny, as defined under state law, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 9-4-1) 
State Law reference— Petit larceny prohibited, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-13-30.  
Sec. 26-90. - Damaging property. 
Any person who shall injure any animal or the property of another, or who shall damage any goods, wares or merchandise, or other personal property of another person or any public property, if the property or animal has a value of $1,000.00 or less, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who shall damage or destroy any fencing, fences, trees, shrubbery or buildings on the land of another or belonging to any other person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1983, § 9-4-2)  
Sec. 26-91. - Removing, destroying, or leaving down fences. 
Any person other than the owner who shall remove, destroy or leave down any portion of any fence intended to enclose animals of any kind, crops or uncultivated lands or who shall leave open any gate or leave down any bars or other structure intended for a like purpose shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1983, § 9-4-3)  
Sec. 26-92. - Altering and removing landmarks. 
If any person shall knowingly, willfully, maliciously or fraudulently cut, fell, alter or remove any certain boundary tree or other allowed landmark, lamppost, lamp, or shade tree, the person so offending shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1983, § 9-4-4)  
Sec. 26-93. - Intefering with, obstructing or improperly using drains and ditches. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any of the drains or ditches within the city by depositing therein any dirt, trash, refuse or other matter. It shall also be unlawful for any person to empty into these ditches and drains any filth, garbage or sewage or to construct anything on, over, or contiguous to such ditches and drains in such manner that the construction shall or may thereafter constitute an obstruction or tend to obstruct the ditches and drains or in any manner interfere with keeping and maintaining the ditches and drains, unless a permit first is secured from the city administrator in writing, approving the nature, form and extent of the construction. 
(Code 1983, § 9-4-5; Ord. of 5-13-1974)  
Sec. 26-94. - Entry upon railroad rights-of-way or property prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or be upon any railroad right-of-way without the express consent of the company owning such right-of-way or property; provided, however, that the prohibition of this section shall not apply to entry or presence on any publicly maintained grade crossing. 
(Code 1983, § 9-4-6; Ord. of 8-9-1983)  
Chapter 28 - PLANNING, LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 28-1—28-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local planning commission, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-310 et seq. 
 
Sec. 28-19. - Establishment; purpose. 
In order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and harmonious development of the area which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, the Hanahan Planning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the planning commission, is hereby established. 
(Code 1983, § 5-2-1; Ord. of 10-8-1973)  
Sec. 28-20. - Membership; term; compensation. 
The planning commission shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the city council. Members shall serve four-year staggered terms. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the city council which shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 1983, § 5-2-2; Ord. of 10-8-1973; Ord. of 4-13-2004)  
Sec. 28-21. - Organization; meetings; rules; staff; finances. 
The planning commission shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among its members. The term of the chairperson and other officers shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. The commission shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer or an employee of the city council or of the planning commission. The planning commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its recommendations, transactions, findings and determinations; and shall meet at the call of the chairperson and at such times as the chairperson or commission may determine. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the commission shall be a public record. The commission may appoint any employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may make expenditures for salaries of any employees and staff, contracts with consultants, and for the purchase of required equipment and supplies. The expenditures of the commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for this purpose by the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 5-2-3; Ord. of 10-8-1973)  
Sec. 28-22. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  From and after the time when the planning commission shall have organized and selected its officers and shall have adopted its rules of procedure, the commission shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth by state law. 
(b)  In general, the planning commission shall have the power to: 
(1)  Prepare and revise periodically a comprehensive plan and program for the development of its jurisdiction; 
(2)  Prepare and recommend for adoption to the appropriate governing authority as a means for implementing the plan and program: 
a.  Zoning ordinances or resolutions, and maps and appropriate revisions thereof for its jurisdiction; 
b.  Regulations for the subdivision of land and appropriate revisions thereof within its jurisdiction, and to administer the regulations that may be adopted; 
c.  An official map and appropriate revision thereof showing the exact location of existing or proposed public street, highway and utility rights-of-way and public building sites, together with regulations to control the erection of buildings or other structures or changes in land use within such rights-of-way, building sites or open spaces within its political jurisdiction or a specified portion thereof; and 
d.  A capital program for its jurisdiction based on the comprehensive plan and the capital improvements necessary to implement the plan. Such a capital program shall include an annual capital budget based on estimates of the cost of proposed projects and the means of financing them. The commission shall submit the capital program, including the capital budget, to the governing authority as directed; 
(3)  Establish principles and policies for guiding action in the development of the area; 
(4)  Prepare and recommend to the city council for adoption ordinances promoting orderly development in accordance with the comprehensive plan; 
(5)  Determine whether specific proposed developments conform to the principles and requirements of the comprehensive plan for the growth and improvement of the area; 
(6)  Review and recommend to the city council any needed changes in the zoning ordinance and the official zoning map, as well as the subdivision regulations, official map, other codes, ordinances, and controls related to the city's development; and 
(7)  Keep the city council and the general public informed and advised as to the matters described in this section. 
(Code 1983, § 5-2-4; Ord. of 10-8-1973)  
Secs. 28-23—28-47. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SUBDIVISIONS 
 
Sec. 28-48. - Ordinance incorporated by reference. 
The subdivision ordinance of the city, adopted November 4, 1975, as amended, are hereby incorporated herein and made a part of this Code by reference. Copies of the subdivision ordinance are on file in the office of the clerk-treasurer. 
(Code 1983, § 5-3-1)  
Secs. 28-49—28-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Federal law references— Preservation of local zoning authority concerning wireless telecommunications facilities, 47 USC 322(c)(7); limited federal preemption of state and local zoning laws affecting amateur radio facilities, Memorandum Opinion and Order, PRB-1, 101 FCC 2d 952 (1985) and 47 CFR 97.15(b); Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act, 42 USC 2000cc et seq. 
State Law reference— Zoning ordinances and purposes, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-710; zoning districts, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-720; board of zoning appeals, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-29-780. 
 
Sec. 28-70. - Ordinance incorporated by reference. 
The zoning ordinance of the city, adopted November 12, 1973, as now or hereafter amended, is hereby incorporated herein and made a part of this Code by reference. Copies of the zoning ordinance are on file in the office of the clerk-treasurer. 
(Code 1983, § 5-4-1)  
Chapter 30 - SIGNS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 30-1—30-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POLITICAL SIGNS 
 
Sec. 30-19. - Prohibited; exception. 
No sign shall be erected within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of identifying, supporting, or advertising in any form or fashion persons, positions of persons, or any party or organization seeking election to a public office except as specifically provided for in, and in compliance with, chapter 8, section 8.8 of the City of Hanahan Zoning Ordinance. 
(Code 1983, § 5-6-21; Ord. of 8-14-1978; Ord. No. 6-2014, 8-13-2014)  
Chapter 32 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Solid waste management and storage, transportation and collection of municipal solid wastes, S.C. Code Reg. 61-107.5; full cost disclosure by local governments concerning solid waste management, S.C. Code 1976, § 44-96-90. 
 
Sec. 32-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Brown trash means furniture items such as sofas, chairs, TVs, mattresses, carpeting/padding, etc. 
Business means any commercial operation, church, school, governmental or nonprofit organization or residential sites with more than two units on any common property. 
Common property means any lot, lot record, lot of record, property, tract, or property under common ownership which is used for a single purpose whichever term encompasses the larger unit of land. 
Garbage means normal household waste, including kitchen waste, organic waste matter, both animal and vegetable, small cans, bottles, clothing, rags, boxes, paper and any other similar waste. 
Residence means single-family units and any other residential unit with no more than two units on any lot. 
White goods means metal items such as appliances, metal furniture, wire or pipe, free of nonmetal materials, which can be safely accommodated by city personnel and equipment. 
Yard trash means all ashes, leaves, grass, bushes, vines, tree branches with no piece exceeding four inches in diameter and four feet in length, or other vegetation normally found outside the home. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-1; Ord. of 12-10-1996, § I; Ord. of 10-14-1997; Ord. of 9-27-2000; Ord. of 9-14-2004, § I)  
Sec. 32-2. - Penalties. 
(a)  Every person failing to comply with this chapter will be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. The city shall have the authority to refuse collection services for failure to comply with the rules of this chapter. Designated personnel from the public works department shall be authorized to enforce this chapter. Specific violations shall be as follows: 
(1)  Improper household solid waste containerization. 
(2)  Failure to properly handle excess household waste. 
(3)  Uncover household containers. 
(4)  Failure to follow prescribed curbside practices. 
(5)  Litter or unsightly growth on private or public property. 
(6)  Accumulation of litter at construction or residential sites. 
(b)  The penalty for the violations in subsection (a) of this section shall be a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-9; Ord. of 12-10-1996, § IX; Ord. of 9-27-2000)  
Sec. 32-3. - Prohibited waste. 
(a)  Discarded building materials, lumber, shingles, rocks, bricks, concrete, etc., or dead animals shall not be deposited for garbage collection. These items shall be disposed of by the property owner. 
(b)  Tree removal. The removal of entire trees exceeding four-inch trunk diameter shall not be placed at the curb for collection. Property owners will be responsible for removal of all materials (i.e., limbs, trunks, stumps, etc.). 
(c)  No tires, lead-acid batteries, oil or auto parts of any kind will be collected by the city. Disposal shall be the responsibility of the owner, individual, or individuals in possession of the same. 
(d)  Contractors' and builders' refuse, bricks, scraps of lumber, mortar, plaster, roofing, guttering, shavings, tree debris, and all other like materials generated by a contractor during new construction, renovations, demolition, etc., shall be removed by the contractor, owner or tenant of the premises, each being jointly and severally responsible for such removal and transported to the county construction, demolition and land clearing debris landfill. 
(e)  Materials generated by residents or businesses as a result of salvage operations shall be the responsibility of the generator for removal and disposal (i.e., white goods, tires, electronics, lawnmowers, etc.). 
(f)  No waste classified and identified by the department of health and environmental control as hazardous waste shall be collected by the city. 
(g)  The city shall not assume responsibility for the collection of any materials left behind by tenants. Disposal shall be the responsibility of property owners. 
(h)  Any materials deemed by the city to pose a hazard to collection personnel or equipment shall not be collected. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-2; Ord. of 12-10-1996, § II; Ord. of 9-27-2000; Ord. of 9-14-2004, § II)  
Sec. 32-4. - Liquids prohibited. 
All garbage and refuse shall be drained of liquid before being deposited for collection. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-3; Ord. of 12-10-1996, § III; Ord. of 9-27-2000; Ord. of 9-14-2004, § III)  
Sec. 32-5. - Throwing waste from elevated places prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, let fall or permit to drop from windows, roofs, porches or other elevated places any dirty water, garbage, ashes, paper, or other unclean useless waste material where this act may damage or affect surrounding property. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-4; Ord. of 12-10-1996, § IV; Ord. of 9-27-2000; Ord. of 9-14-2004, § IV)  
Sec. 32-6. - Refuse collection. 
(a)  White goods, pieces of metal and tin, which can be safely accommodated by city personnel and equipment and which is placed at the curb by the resident shall be collected by the city on designated days. For purposes of this section, the term "white goods" shall include refrigerators, stoves, washing machines, dryers, water heaters, window air conditions, and such other items as may be added from time to time by the public works director. Metals other than white goods may not exceed four feet in length and two feet in width and 25 pounds in weight. For the safety of all, it shall be the responsibility of the resident to remove the doors from all refrigerators and freezers. The city will transport all white goods containing Freon in a manner which ensures against accidental discharge of Freon. 
(b)  All leaves, grass clippings and all other small yard waste shall be placed in biodegradable paper bags, not exceeding 65 pounds, at the curb on designated days. It shall be the responsibility of the resident to provide the necessary bags. Loose leaves, grass clippings and other small yard waste placed at the curb in piles, boxes or bags other than biodegradable paper bags, not exceeding 65 pounds, will not be collected. Loose leaves and grass may be placed in the approved city-issued 96-gallon cart, or 32-gallon trash cans with lids. No household garbage or other materials will be mixed with leaves or grass. Home composting of leaves and grass is encouraged for all residents. 
(c)  Limbs, brush, hedge and shrub trimmings, and all like materials may be placed at the curb in unbagged piles for collection subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Piles of unbagged yard debris must be placed near the curb in an orderly manner, allowing city equipment and personnel reasonable access. 
(2)  The length of material shall be limited to four feet. 
(3)  The diameter of the material shall be limited to four inches. 
(4)  Materials must be compatible with city collection methods and equipment. 
(5)  No materials, as listed in this section, generated by contractors, landscapers, residential remodeling, lot clearing/preparation, etc., shall be collected by the city. 
(6)  Each resident shall be entitled to the collection of three cubic yards of unbagged yard waste per scheduled collection. Unbagged yard waste in excess of three cubic yards shall not be placed on the street until the following week of collection. 
(d)  Brown trash, including furniture, mattresses, tires, carpeting/padding, and other dry bulk items placed at the curb by the resident, shall be collected by the city on designated days subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No hazardous materials shall be collected by the city. 
(2)  No shingles or building materials shall be collected by the city. 
(3)  No bricks, rocks, sand, concrete, mortar, etc., shall be collected by the city. 
(4)  Large items such as couches or chairs shall be placed near the curb, but safely out of the roadway. 
(5)  Carpeting/padding must be bundled and secured with length not exceeding five feet in diameter and weighing no more than 75 pounds. 
(6)  These items may not be placed on the curb prior to 8:00 a.m. of the day previous to the day of collection. 
(e)  Material shall not be placed on top of water meters, driveways, adjacent to fire hydrants, mailboxes, drainage ditches, stormwater intakes, on top of sprinkler heads, or close to any object or material that may be damaged by mechanical loading devices. Damage to such hidden objects or properties in the course of collection shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
(f)  Collection of materials listed in subsections (a) through (d) of this section shall be subject to the following additional conditions: 
(1)  Items in each of the four categories must be separated and placed within six feet of the curb in such a way as to allow for easy access from the street by collection crews. If different categories of waste are mixed together, the material shall not be collected by the city. It shall be the owner's or resident's responsibility to separate these materials at the curb. 
(2)  Collection days shall be identified and scheduled by the city. Every effort will be made to notify all residents of collection days and any changes in collection days. 
(3)  Routes and schedules shall be designated and published by the city. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-5; Ord. of 12-10-1996, § V; Ord. of 9-27-2000; Ord. of 9-14-2004, § V)  
Sec. 32-7. - Containerization and removal. 
(a)  All residences, commercial establishments, churches, and institutions located within the city shall have sufficient container capacity to accommodate their normal volume of garbage and trash collections. The type and size of containers as prescribed by the public works department shall be as follows: 
(1)  Type. The type of container shall be watertight, heavy-duty plastic, city-issued 96-gallon cart dumping containers. 
(2)  Size. The size of the container shall be 96 gallons in volume per container and 200 pounds in weight when filled. This container shall be specified by city council. 
(3)  Damaged, lost or stolen containers. The city shall not assume responsibility for any containers that are, through no fault of the city, damaged, lost or stolen. Property owners/tenants shall be jointly or severally responsible for the replacement of such containers. 
(b)  In placing carts and refuse for collection and removal, establishments, churches and institutions shall do the following: 
(1)  Household garbage. Household garbage must be placed in 96-gallon, city-issued carts for collection by the public works department at the curb or designated pickup site by 8:00 a.m. on the scheduled pickup days only. Empty carts shall be removed as soon as possible after pickup, but not later than 7:00 p.m. on the scheduled pickup days. 
(2)  If normally generating more refuse than can be contained in one 96-gallon city-issued cart per week, the establishment will be required to purchase a second city-issued cart. 
(3)  All loose materials which normally fit into carts but which are in excess as a result of special circumstances must be handled in the following manner: 
a.  Excess materials must be bagged or placed in 32-gallon trashcans with lids. 
b.  Boxes broken down, bundled and tied securely. Boxes may not be used as containers. 
c.  Large trash items shall be placed in orderly piles and tied if needed. 
(4)  Collection days as prescribed by the public works department are Monday through Friday. All solid waste categories will be collected according to a published schedule. 
(5)  Covers shall be kept on containers at all times except when depositing or removing garbage or trash. 
(6)  All refuse containers must be kept clean and sanitary. 
(7)  All apartment complexes, condominiums, and other multifamily complexes with greater than five units on a common property shall arrange for private collection. Mobile home parks with paved surface streets may be serviced by the city. In these instances, the collection vehicle shall be able to maneuver freely from limbs, brush or other obstacles and should have adequate turnaround areas to eliminate the need for reversing. Mobile home parks may also be serviced with a paved pad (concrete or asphalt or compacted ROC), which would allow the collection vehicle to back onto the pad, clearing the paved road of traffic. Carts must be placed at the rear side of the pad in accordance with subsection (b)(1) of this section. Businesses whose garbage can be accommodated by once-a-week collection in two 96-gallon or 64-gallon city-issued carts may be serviced by the city. Garbage shall be limited to household-type garbage. Wire, metals, etc., shall not be placed in carts to be collected by the city. Building materials generated by contractors shall be disposed of by the contractors. They shall be considered contractor-generated material and shall not be collected by the city. In such cases where the council deems that an unsafe condition exists (i.e, health or safety), council may deem that residential service be initiated. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-6; Ord. of 12-10-1996, § VI; Ord. of 10-14-1997; Ord. of 9-27-2000; Ord. of 9-14-2004, § VI)  
Sec. 32-8. - Frequency of garbage collection. 
The city shall have the authority to collect garbage and waste at such times and intervals as deemed necessary for the health and sanitation of the community. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-7; Ord. of 12-10-1996, § VII; Ord. of 9-27-2000; Ord. of 9-14-2004, § VII)  
Sec. 32-9. - Keeping property clean. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, lessee or occupant to keep the exterior of private and public property free of litter and unsightly growth. All material generated as a result of neglect shall be the responsibility of the property owner for removal and disposal. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner, contractor or individual performing construction or remodeling work at a construction or residential site to remove all unsightly litter at the end of each workweek. 
(Code 1983, § 3-2-8; Ord. of 12-10-1996, § VIII; Ord. of 9-27-2000; Ord. of 9-14-2004, § VIII)  
Chapter 34 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Streets and sidewalks, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-10 et seq.; issuance of permits to charitable groups to solicit funds from motorists, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-27-910; municipality may establish a farm marketing center, S.C. Code 1976, § 46-19-110; municipal authority to regulate processions on highways, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-710(3). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Public works department established. 
(a)  There is hereby established a public works department to be headed by a public works director who shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
(b)  The public works department shall consist of such officers and employees as shall be approved by the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-1; Ord. of 1-14-2003; Ord. No. 4-2007, § 9, 3-13-2007)  
Sec. 34-2. - Approval of names of new streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to lay out any new street within the city without first procuring from the council approval of the name to be assigned to the new street. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-2)  
Sec. 34-3. - Street and roadway acceptance. 
No street or roadway shall be accepted until it has been paved or surface treated in a manner acceptable to the city. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-3)  
Sec. 34-4. - Requirements for lots draining toward sidewalk. 
Every person owning any lot which drains toward a sidewalk shall provide suitable and proper drainage under the sidewalk as will deliver the gutter and drainage water from the lot to the drainage system of the adjoining streets. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-4)  
Sec. 34-5. - Numbering of lots and properties. 
(a)  All property owners, residents, lessees or lessors of property are hereby required to adequately mark or number their lots, residences, establishments or places of business in an appropriate manner, attaching the numbers designated by city council, as shown on the attached plan. 
(b)  All property owners, residents, lessees and lessors of property are hereby required to number their residences, lots, establishments or places of business, using numbers of adequate size and placing them in such a position that they may be clearly and easily seen from the street in the nighttime and in the daytime. 
(c)  All property owners, residents, lessees or lessors are requested to use standard size numbers in order to make the numbering as uniform as possible. 
(d)  The clerk-treasurer and chief of police are required to revise the numbering plan from time to time as designated by the city council. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-5)  
Sec. 34-6. - Crime watch signs. 
The city administrator is authorized to place crime watch signs on highway rights-of-way in areas which are designated as crime watch areas. Placement, replacement and site locations for the signs shall be accomplished in strict accordance with state highway department regulations. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-6; Ord. of 5-13-1986)  
Secs. 34-7—34-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATION AND OBSTRUCTION 
 
Sec. 34-31. - Excavation permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, mutilate or make an excavation in any paved or unpaved street or sidewalk for any purpose without a permit from the director of public works. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-21)  
Sec. 34-32. - Backfilling and resurfacing. 
It shall be the duty of the person making any excavation hereunder to fill the excavation and restore the surface to a condition at least equal to the surface prior to the excavation. If so required by the council, the person making an excavation shall furnish a bond, deposit or other security sufficient to ensure compliance with this section; provided, however, that the city may elect to fill and resurface the excavation and charge the cost thereof against the person making the excavation. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-22)  
Sec. 34-33. - Danger signals required at excavations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any trench, ditch or excavation in any street, sidewalk or public place to remain open between sunset and sunrise, unless the trench, ditch or excavation has a sufficient number of lights properly displayed around it as danger signals to prevent accidents to persons or property. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-23)  
Sec. 34-34. - Removing danger signals at excavations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or extinguish any light which may be placed as a signal at night to warn persons of danger from ditches, trenches, building materials, scaffolds, excavations, impediments or obstacles of any description whatsoever. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-24)  
Sec. 34-35. - Obstructions prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any obstruction upon or cause to be obstructed in any manner any street, sidewalk or public way, or part thereof, so as to render the passage of persons, vehicles or other travel thereon difficult, inconvenient, dangerous or impossible except as otherwise provided in this article. This section shall not apply to any employee of the city, county or state while the employee is immediately and actively engaged in the maintenance, improvement or construction of any street, sidewalk or public way in the city. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-25)  
Secs. 34-36—34-58. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - UNLAWFUL ACTS 
 
Sec. 34-59. - Damaging city property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to mutilate, deface or injure any public property within the corporate limits of the city, or any trees, buildings or other property, or to obstruct any street, alleyway, avenue, bridge, ditch or public road within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-31)  
Sec. 34-60. - Throwing glass, nails, dangerous substances on streets or sidewalks. 
Any person who shall throw or place on any of the streets or sidewalks any glass in any shape or form, tin cans, nails, brick, pieces of iron, sticks or any other obstructions shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-32)  
Sec. 34-61. - Vehicles leaking or scattering load prohibited. 
The owner or operator of every cart or other vehicle employed in removing or carrying any dirt, sawdust, sand, coal or materials liable to be blown by the wind, or any manure, filth or offensive matter of any kind or description, along or over any of the streets, shall have and keep the vehicle in such a tight and secure condition that the matter shall not be scattered or suffered to fall on any of the streets. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-33)  
Sec. 34-62. - Vehicles prohibited on sidewalk. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, propel or park any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle upon any sidewalk, except as may be necessary in entering or leaving the premises or buildings. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-34)  
Sec. 34-63. - Breaking, removing streetlights. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to break any lamp or electric light or to remove any electric lightbulb or otherwise from to tamper with the streetlights. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-35)  
Sec. 34-64. - Breaking, destroying curbing prohibited; permit required for entrance to property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to break, deface or destroy the curbing of any street, or to construct any entrance into property on any of the paved streets, unless the person shall have first obtained a permit in writing to do so from the public works director. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-36)  
Sec. 34-65. - Burning matter on streets or sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful to burn leaves or other matter on the streets or sidewalks. 
(Code 1983, § 3-1-37)  
Secs. 34-66—34-88. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PARADES 
 
Sec. 34-89. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parade means any march, procession, motorcade or promenade consisting of persons, animals or vehicles, floats or a combination thereof, having a common purpose, design, destination or goal, upon any street, road or public thoroughfare within the city, which parade, march, procession, motorcade or promenade does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulation and control.  
Sec. 34-90. - Permit required. 
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the city council, or the chief of police as designated by the city council, under the provisions of this article.  
Sec. 34-91. - Application. 
A person seeking the issuance of a permit under this article shall file an application in person on forms provided between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Mondays through Fridays, legal holidays excepted, with the police chief or city administrator. An application for a permit shall be filed with the police chief or city administrator not less than ten days (Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays excluded) nor more than 60 days, before the date upon which the parade is proposed to be conducted.  
Sec. 34-92. - Application contents. 
The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone number, and email address, if any, of the person seeking to conduct the parade; 
(2)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for or behalf of an organization, the address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized director or manager with responsibility for the parade with the organization; 
(3)  The proposed date for the parade; 
(4)  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point; 
(5)  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute the parade; the types of animals, and description of all vehicles, including a description of any sound amplification equipment or be used; 
(6)  The hours when the parade will start and terminate; 
(7)  The location by street names of any assembly areas for the parade; 
(8)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at the assembly area; 
(9)  If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from this person authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf; 
(10)  Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination regarding issuance of a permit.  
Sec. 34-93. - Issuance of permit. 
The city council shall issue a permit as provided for under this article when, from a consideration of the application and from any other information obtained by the chief of police, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so many police officers to properly police the line of movement and contiguous areas as to unreasonably diminish normal police protection of the city; 
(3)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so many emergency vehicles and ambulances so as to unreasonably diminish normal service to the city; 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the assembly areas; 
(5)  The conduct of the parade will not unduly interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire; 
(6)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays; 
(7)  The conduct of the parade will not interfere or conflict with any other parade for which a permit has been issued; 
(8)  No other parade permit has been granted, or is under consideration, for any portion of the time sought by the applicant, nor shall a permit be granted for a parade which will commence after sunset; 
(9)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product or goods and is not designed to be held purely for private profit.  
Sec. 34-94. - Permit contents. 
Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  The starting and conclusion times for the parade; 
(2)  What portions of the streets to be traversed may be occupied by the parade; 
(3)  The maximum length of the parade in miles and fractions thereof; 
(4)  The assembly and disbanding areas, and times for each; 
(5)  That the amplification of sound permitted to be emitted from amplification equipment be fixed and not variable; 
(6)  That the permit holder shall advise all parade participants, either orally or in writing, of the terms and conditions of the permit, prior to commencement of the parade; 
(7)  Any other information that the city administrator and chief of police shall find reasonably necessary for the protection of persons or property.  
Sec. 34-95. - Alternate permit. 
The police chief or city administrator, in denying an application for a parade permit, is empowered to authorize the conduct of a parade on a date, at a time or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall file a written notice of acceptance with the police chief or city administrator at least ten days prior to the alternate commencement date. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirement of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this article.  
Sec. 34-96. - Compliance by permit holder. 
A permit holder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions, all application commitments and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade chairperson or other person heading or leading the parade shall carry the parade permit on his person during the parade.  
Sec. 34-97. - Appeal procedure. 
Any applicant aggrieved by the denial of a parade application, or of a condition that he deems unreasonable, shall have the right to appeal to the city council. Notice of appeal shall be filed by the applicant in writing with the presiding officer of the city council within two days of the denial or notice of the condition; Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays are excluded. The presiding officer shall place the appeal on the agenda for the next regular meeting of the board, provided there is a meeting scheduled within ten days of the filing of the notice of appeal. If no regularly scheduled meeting is scheduled within ten days after the filing of the notice of appeal, the presiding officer shall call a special meeting to be held within ten days of the filing of the notice of appeal. The applicant may agree, in writing, to an extension of the time for holding this meeting. The city council shall consider the appeal and may reverse, affirm or modify in any regard the determination of the police chief or city administrator.  
Sec. 34-98. - Revocation of permit. 
The police chief or city administrator shall have the authority to revoke a permit issued by him, upon violation of standards for issuance of said permit as set forth, or when, by reason of disaster, emergency, public calamity, riot, or other civil or military disturbance, the safety of the public or property requires revocation. Notice of the revocation shall be delivered in writing to the permit holder in person or by certified mail.  
Sec. 34-99. - Public conduct during parades. 
(a)  No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with, any parade or public assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating in a parade or public assembly. 
(b)  No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when the vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade, unless specifically authorized to do so by a law enforcement officer. 
(c)  The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway, street or road, or part thereof, constituting a part of the parade route. The chief of police shall post "no parking" signs, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street where "no parking" signs are not posted pursuant to this section.  
Sec. 34-100. - Obstructing streets by assembling. 
Any person who shall assemble a crowd or hold a public meeting in any street without a parade permit, as provided in this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished as set forth in section 1-12.  
Secs. 34-101—34-121. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FILMING 
 
Sec. 34-122. - Filming regulations. 
(a)  Residential areas. A permit is required for any film, video or still photography activity (hereinafter the "filming activity), whether on public or private property, to be conducted within the city limits, with the exception that news coverage and production companies with a cast and crew totaling ten persons or less do not require such a permit. Application shall be on the city's application form to be obtained from the Building and Codes' office, and shall be submitted to the city administrator at least five business days before commencement of the filming activity. Upon the showing of exceptional circumstances which prevent the applicant's timely submission of a permit application, the city administrator shall have the discretion to allow an untimely permit application, taking into consideration the size, scale and potential impact of the proposed activity upon the area, citizens, businesses and residents to be affected. Applicants are advised that early application is encouraged in order to allow necessary time to resolve any difficulties associated with the filming activity. 
No filming activity which involves the use of explosives, pyrotechnics, fire or other special effects which involve flames or incendiary devices may be undertaken unless a permit has been obtained from the state fire marshal's office and approved in writing by the City of Hanahan Fire Chief, or his designee. At the discretion of the City of Hanahan Fire Chief, or his designee, it may be required to have fire/EMS personnel and equipment at the location at an additional cost to the production company. 
Use of public water by way of hydrant hookup shall require coordination with and specific approval by the City of Hanahan Fire Chief, or his designee, and the Charleston Water System. Payment for any such water consumed shall be coordinated with the CWS. 
Residents, their visitors, delivery personnel and/or repair and maintenance personnel shall not be denied access to neighboring homes within the area. 
Filming activities shall not begin prior to 7:00 a.m. and will end by 11:00 p.m. Requests for night scenes extending beyond the designated time window shall require prior approval granted in writing by the city administrator. 
Prior to arrival, a parking plan must be developed and approved by the city administrator and the chief of police or his designee. The plan should detail off-site parking of equipment or support vehicles not in use, as well as any large trucks or trailers used by the company. The plan should detail staging of production vehicles, and should include a statement of approval from any private property owner on whose property those vehicles may be parked. 
Lighting for filming, both during the day and night, shall be oriented away from neighboring residences wherever possible, and shall not interfere with the safe movement of traffic. 
Base camps and dressing room trailers should be parked away from neighboring residences wherever possible. 
Base camps and equipment trucks moving into or out of residential areas shall not do so before 6:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m. unless specifically approved in the permit, or by written authorization of the city administrator. 
If a selected zoned residential area is wanting to be used and that area has a governing homeowners association (HOA), a letter must be obtained from the HOA president or governing HOA body and submitted to the city administrator at least five days prior to the filming start date for approval. 
If at any point the filming activity is deemed a nuisance due to the disruption of the peace or poses a safety hazard to people and/or property, the chief of police and/or fire chief, or their designees, may order the immediate ceasing of all filming activity until it is deemed appropriate to resume filming activities. 
(b)  Business/industrial areas. No less than five business days prior to commencement of the filming activity, the filming company shall notify in writing all businesses and residents affected by the proposed activity. The filming company shall provide a signed copy of such notification to the city administrator. Where the planned activity may have a significant and/or prolonged impact on the normal activities of the area (for example, activities impacting parking or traffic in areas zoned as business and/or industrial), the city administrator shall have the discretion to require earlier notification. The city administrator shall be satisfied with the compliance of said notifications before the issuance of the filming permit. 
After commencement of the filming activity, the film company shall provide written notification to the affected businesses and residents of any subsequent changes to the information provided in the original notification and of any additional variances or permits granted by the city to the filming company. 
Base camps and equipment trucks moving into or out of business and/or industrial areas shall not do so before 5:00 a.m. or after 1:00 a.m. unless specifically approved in the permit, or by written authorization of the city administrator. 
Filming activities shall not begin prior to 6:00 a.m. and will end by 1:00 a.m. Requests for night scenes extending beyond the designated time window shall require prior approval granted in writing by the city administrator. 
If at any point filming activity is deemed a nuisance due to the disruption of the peace or interferes with the normal day to day operations of businesses not directly involved with the filming location or poses a safety hazard to people and/or property, the chief of police and/or fire chief, or their designees, may order the immediate ceasing of all filming activity until it is deemed appropriate to resume filming activities. 
(c)  Care of location. All properties utilized for the film activity shall be left clean and orderly and shall be restored to their previous condition, including public and private lands. The city shall be reimbursed by the permit applicant for all costs of restoring and/or repairing public property due to damage resulting from the filming activity. The city administrator may, in his sole discretion, require the filming company to pay a bond to guarantee the restoration of the location if the city administrator determines that the proposed activity may cause damage to or require extensive restoration of public property. 
(d)  Traffic control and street closures. The permit application must specify whether the film activity will disrupt the normal flow of traffic within the affected area. Traffic control, if necessary as determined by the city administrator, shall be handled through a contract with the City of Hanahan Police Department. The city administrator, in consultation with the police chief, or his designee, shall determine the number of officers needed. Intermittent holding of traffic shall not exceed three-minute intervals except when specifically approved in the permit. 
Except in exceptional circumstances, complete closure of streets shall be discouraged. Requests for temporary street closure or diverting of traffic must be approved by the South Carolina Department of Transportation where state streets or rights-of-way are involved. Berkeley County Roads and Bridges and SCDOT must also grant approval for temporary street closures or diverting of traffic if the road/street is maintained by the County of Berkeley or SCOOT. Requests for street closure or diverting of traffic must be made well enough in advance to allow for planning rerouting, or alternate routes, and for proper signage. 
(e)  Notification. The area to be covered by the notification prescribed in (a) above shall be a minimum of one block radius in each direction from the perimeter of the planned activity. Based upon the nature of the planned activity, the city administrator shall have the discretion to specify a wider area of notification as a condition of issuance of the permit. 
Notification will include all available information concerning the location and duration of the filming, prep and wrap activities, the times of day required for each location, proposed parking restrictions and restrictions on public streets, proposed location for all support facilities, as well as specifics regarding the use of lights, noise and any special effects or extraordinary equipment. The notification shall also include the film company's production office telephone number and the location manager's telephone/cell phone/pager numbers, as well as the office/pager number of the city administrator. The notification shall also inform that any concerns, objections or complaints pertaining to the planned activity may be registered the city administrator, the police department or the office of building and codes. 
(f)  Insurance. Filming companies shall be required to have liability insurance in the minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 covering bodily injury, including death and property, with the City of Hanahan and the "City of Hanahan officials and agents" named as additional insureds in said policy. A larger amount of insurance may be required by the city administrator if, in his sole discretion, he determines that the nature of the proposed film activity necessitates an increased coverage. 
(g)  Indemnity. Filming companies in the city shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the City of Hanahan from all damages, suits, actions or liabilities, including payment of all attorney's fees, resulting from acts of the filming company or its agents during the filming activity or occurring as a result of the use of filming locations by the filming company. 
(Ord. No. 9-2015, 10-13-2015)  
Chapter 36 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, local authority, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-30; general rules regarding maximum speed limits, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-1520; alteration of speed limits by local authorities, signs and approval by state, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-1540; powers of local authorities concerning traffic laws, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-710. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 36-1—36-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 36-19. - Adoption of state law. 
There is hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof as if set out in full those provisions of state law known as the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, as contained in S.C. Code 1976, title 56, ch. 5. 
Editor's note— The cited state law may be incorporated by reference in an ordinance by municipalities. Op. Atty. Gen., No. 2460, p. 125 (1967—1968). Municipalities may further regulate traffic, provided the additional regulations do not conflict with state law, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 56-5-30 and 56-5-710. 
(Code 1983, § 8-1-1)  
Sec. 36-20. - Only licensed operators may drive vehicles. 
No vehicle shall be operated within the city limits other than by a properly licensed driver. 
(Code 1983, § 8-1-2)  
Sec. 36-21. - Obedience to traffic signals. 
Drivers of all vehicles shall abide by signals of traffic officers and all automatic and stationary traffic signs and signals within the city limits. 
(Code 1983, § 8-1-3)  
Sec. 36-22. - Authority of chief of police to make special regulations, erect signs, etc. 
The chief of police, with the approval of the council, shall have authority to make, promulgate and enforce special traffic regulations, including the designation of one-way streets, dangerous intersections where traffic shall be required to slow or stop, school zones, safety zones and regulations as to parking, nonparking and time limits for parking, and to cause to be erected or placed signs, signals, markings or other traffic control devices for the purpose of enforcing the same. These special regulations shall not become effective until they shall have been advertised two times in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the city. Any person failing or refusing to obey any regulation so advertised shall be guilty of violation of this article. 
(Code 1983, § 8-1-4) 
State Law reference— Local traffic control devices must conform with state manual of standards and specifications for uniform systems of traffic control devices, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-6-940.  
Sec. 36-23. - Impounding vehicles. 
Any unoccupied and unattended vehicle found violating the terms of this article may be removed and impounded by any police officer or duly authorized person and shall be surrendered to the duly identified owner thereof only upon payment of cost of impounding. 
(Code 1983, § 8-1-5)  
Sec. 36-24. - Hitchhiking prohibited. 
No person shall stand in any street or street right-of-way, sidewalk or curb for the purpose of soliciting a ride from a driver of any vehicle. 
(Code 1983, § 8-1-6) 
State Law reference— Similar state law, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-6-3180.  
Sec. 36-25. - Authority of police to accept cash bail in traffic offenses. 
When any person is apprehended by a city police officer upon a charge of violating any city or state traffic ordinance or law, the enforcement of which by the officer is authorized, the person so charged upon being served with the official summons issued by the arresting officer, in lieu of being immediately brought before the municipal judge, recorder or other judicial officer to enter into a formal recognizance or make direct deposit of a sum of money in lieu of a recognizance or incarceration, may deposit with the apprehending police officer a sum of money, not less than the minimum or more than the maximum fine, but in no case to exceed $100.00 to be in due course turned over to the judicial officer as money for bail in lieu of entering into a recognizance for his appearance for trial as set in the aforesaid summons or being incarcerated by the arresting officer and held for further action by the appropriate judicial officer. A receipt for the sum so deposited shall be given to the person by the arresting officer shall release the person so charged as above and provide for his further appearance before the proper judicial officer as provided for and required by the summons. 
(Code 1983, § 8-1-7; Ord. of 4-8-1974)  
Sec. 36-26. - Removal of glass from streets after removal of wrecked vehicle. 
Anyone removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street or highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped from the vehicle. Any person failing or refusing to remove the injurious substance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1983, § 8-1-8; Ord. of 4-8-1974)  
Sec. 36-27. - Opening doors of vehicles. 
No person shall open the door of a vehicle unless and until this movement can be made with reasonable safety. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1983, § 8-1-9; Ord. of 4-8-1974)  
Sec. 36-28. - Riding on outside of vehicle. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to ride on the outside of a motor vehicle or anywhere except within the body thereof; provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to persons riding motorcycles or other two-wheel vehicles. Anyone violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1983, § 8-1-10; Ord. of 4-8-1974)  
Sec. 36-29. - Boarding and alighting vehicle while in motion. 
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while the vehicle is in motion, and no operator of any vehicle shall load or unload passengers except when the vehicle is stopped at the curb or other stopping area, and then only when this movement can be made with safety. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1983, § 8-1-11; Ord. of 4-8-1974)  
Sec. 36-30. - Special regulation or prohibition of specified classes or sizes of vehicles; posting of notices. 
No truck with more than six wheels or more than two axles shall be operated on Murray Drive between Berkeley Street and Railroad Avenue except those trucks having an origin or destination on the street or which origin or destination can be reached only by using the street or parts thereof. The notice shall be posted at conspicuous places at cross roads and road junctions with the section of highway or street to which such notice shall apply. After any such notice shall have been posted, the operation of any motor vehicle or combination contrary to its provisions shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-2013, 1-14-2014) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-4210, Penalty § 56-5-6190.  
Secs. 36-31—36-46. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OPERATION OF VEHICLE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— General rules as to maximum speed limits, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-1520; alteration of speeds by local authorities, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-1580. 
 
Sec. 36-47. - Speed restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall drive or ride a vehicle on a street at a speed greater or less than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided, no vehicle shall be operated at a speed in excess of 30 miles per hour in any urban district of the city. 
(c)  The speed limit for the streets or portions of streets within the city shall be as indicated by signs giving notice thereof that are erected upon the street or portion thereof with approval of the council. 
(Code 1983, § 8-1-21)  
Sec. 36-48. - Obedience to no-turn signs and turning markers. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left turn or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of the sign. When authorized marks, buttons or other indicators are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the direction of these indicators. 
(Code 1983, § 8-1-22)  
Sec. 36-49. - Zone of quiet. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, and in the vicinity of hospitals, schools during school hours or churches during hours of worship, no person operating a motor vehicle shall sound the horn or other warning device of the vehicle, except in an emergency. 
(Code 1983, § 8-1-23)  
Sec. 36-50. - Stop signs at intersections. 
When stop signs are erected upon streets, every driver of a vehicle shall stop at every sign or at a clearly marked stop line before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal. 
(Code 1983, § 8-1-24)  
Sec. 36-51. - Stop before entering a through street. 
When stop signs are erected upon streets intersecting a through street, at the entrances of a through street or at the entrance to any intersection, every driver of a vehicle shall stop at every sign or at a clearly marked stop line before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal. 
(Code 1983, § 8-1-25)  
Sec. 36-52. - Driving across private property; U-turns prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person driving a vehicle to use the driveway of any filling station or service station as a roadway or thoroughfare. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person driving a vehicle to make any U-turn or other turn prohibited at any point where the turn is prohibited, and it shall be unlawful to accomplish a U-turn by deviously going into or through private property adjoining the street where the turn is prohibited. 
(Code 1983, § 8-1-26)  
Sec. 36-53. - One-way streets. 
Upon those streets and parts of streets where the direction for traffic is designated by signs, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained. 
(Code 1983, § 8-1-27)  
Sec. 36-54. - Regulations for parades or processions. 
No parade or procession, except the forces of the United States Army or Navy, the military forces of the state and the forces of the police and fire department, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the clerk-treasurer's office and approved by the chief of police and any other regulations as are set forth in this article which may apply. 
(Code 1983, § 8-1-28)  
Sec. 36-55. - Vehicles not to be driven on sidewalk. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive a vehicle within a sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway, and then shall not block the driveway or sidewalk provided for the use of pedestrians. 
(Code 1983, § 8-1-29)  
Sec. 36-56. - Careless operation of a motor vehicle. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle without care and caution and full regard for the safety of persons and property. Any person failing to do so shall be guilty of careless driving or riding. The operation of any vehicle when the same or any of its appliances is not in proper or safe condition shall be prima facie evidence of careless driving or riding. Careless operation may be a lesser included offense of reckless driving. 
(Code 1983, § 8-1-30; Ord. of 6-14-1983)  
Secs. 36-57—36-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local authority to regulate standing or parking of vehicles, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-710(1); municipalities with marked parking spaces must designate spaces for disabled persons, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-3-1965. 
 
Sec. 36-86. - Parking prohibited on certain streets. 
No person shall park a vehicle where signs prohibiting parking are erected on streets. 
(Code 1983, § 8-2-1)  
Sec. 36-87. - No stopping or parking near hazardous or congested places. 
When signs are erected upon approach to hazardous or congested places, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any designated place. 
(Code 1983, § 8-2-2)  
Sec. 36-88. - Parking as to obstruct street prohibited. 
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic; except that a driver shall stop when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations, traffic signs, signals or a police officer. 
(Code 1983, § 8-2-3)  
Sec. 36-89. - Parking prohibited during certain hours in designated places. 
When signs are erected in a block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle between the hours and on the days so designated. 
(Code 1983, § 8-2-4)  
Sec. 36-90. - Parking time limited in designated places. 
When signs are erected in a block giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for longer than the period and between the hours so designated. 
(Code 1983, § 8-2-5)  
Sec. 36-91. - Parking for loading only. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place designated as a passenger zone. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of material in any place designated as a loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to loading zones are in effect. 
(Code 1983, § 8-2-6)  
Sec. 36-92. - Bus stops and taxicab stands. 
(a)  The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park upon any street at any place other than at a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively; except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed; except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when this stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the zone. 
(Code 1983, § 8-2-7)  
Sec. 36-93. - Standing or parking close to curb. 
No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within one foot of the edge of the roadway; except that upon those streets which have been marked or signed for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at an angle to the curb indicated by the mark or signs. Vehicles shall park on the right side of the street, except where regulations restrict parking to one side only. Whenever lines have been painted to indicate the parking area, vehicles shall be parked entirely within those lines. 
(Code 1983, § 8-2-8)  
Sec. 36-94. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying it for sale; 
(2)  Advertising of any nature whatsoever; or 
(3)  Washing, greasing, storing or repairing any vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(Code 1983, § 8-2-9)  
Sec. 36-95. - Parking on Swale/SCDOT right-of-way—Residential areas. 
(a)  No person shall drive, operate or park a motor vehicle in the swale area or upon any unpaved right-of-way adjacent to a paved street, avenue, or roadway, whether public or private, within the city which swale area or unpaved right-of-way abuts the property of another, without the permission of the owner, lessee or occupant of the property abutting the swale area or unpaved right-of-way. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the operation of a city vehicle, emergency vehicle on an emergency service call, or vehicle owned by a utility which is in the course of official business, to park upon the swale area anywhere within the city. 
(c)  Nothing contained herein shall prohibit any individual from driving or parking upon the swale area abutting the property owned, leased, or occupied by that individual within the city limits. 
(d)  This section shall not be applicable if it is otherwise allowed within a planned unit development or condominium association that by its rules, regulations, or bylaws permit such vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1-2013, 2-12-2013)  
Secs. 36-96—36-116. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WRECKERS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 36-117. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Class means a wrecker capability based upon size and weight handling characteristics. The term "class" is synonymous with the term "category" and shall be used interchangeably. 
Fee means a monetary amount charged for a service provided. The term "fee" is synonymous with the terms "rate" and "charge" and shall be used interchangeably. 
Night service means wrecker service operations which commence in the hours between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Commencement of operations shall be considered as the time a call for service is requested. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. A; Ord. of 6-14-2005, § 3)  
Sec. 36-118. - Financial interest of police officers or city employees. 
No city police officer or other city employee shall hold any financial interest or any form of ownership interest in any wrecker service utilized by the city. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. B, § 8-3-1)  
Sec. 36-119. - Choice of service. 
Unless the owner or driver of a vehicle is incapacitated or unavailable, the owner or driver of a wrecked or disabled vehicle shall have the wrecker service of his choice called. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. B, § 8-3-2)  
Sec. 36-120. - Recommending services. 
No city police officer or other city employee will recommend any wrecker service to the owner or driver of a wrecked or disabled vehicle during the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. B, § 8-3-3)  
Sec. 36-121. - Complaints. 
(a)  Complaints from or about wrecker services regarding an incident involving the police department or its operation of the wrecker rotation list must be received, in writing, within 15 business days of the alleged incident. All written complaints shall be directed to the chief of police. 
(b)  The complaint will be reviewed regarding its validity and the chief of police or a designee will determine a reasonable and fair solution to the complaint. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. G, § 8-3-27)  
Sec. 36-122. - Suspension or removal procedures; penalties. 
(a)  A wrecker service may be suspended or removed from the list in the following manner: 
(1)  The violation of any traffic laws while responding to or returning from a call may result in the immediate removal of that wrecker service from the wrecker rotation list. 
(2)  Any actions by any wrecker driver that adversely affects the reputation of the police department may result in the immediate removal of that wrecker service from the wrecker rotation list. 
(3)  If the police department has reason to believe that a wrecker service has failed to remain in compliance with the qualification criteria set out in division 2 of this article, that the noncompliance continues, and that the noncompliance will be detrimental to the public may result in the immediate removal of that wrecker service from the wrecker rotation list. 
(4)  The failure of any wrecker service to notify the police department of its unavailability, in a timely manner, may result in its suspension from the wrecker rotation list for a period of up to 90 days. Three suspensions from the rotation list in a two-year period shall result in a permanent removal from the list. 
(b)  Penalties for violations of this article that do not directly affect the safety of the public shall be as follows: 
(1)  First offense: warning letter. 
(2)  Second offense: 90-day suspension from rotation. 
(3)  Subsequent offense: removal from the list. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. G, § 8-3-28)  
Secs. 36-123—36-138. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - QUALIFICATION CRITERIA 
 
Sec. 36-139. - Licensing. 
The wrecker service must hold a valid business license from the city. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. C, § 8-3-4)  
Sec. 36-140. - Responsiveness and availability. 
(a)  The wrecker service must be able to safely respond from the time of notification to any given location within the city within 20 minutes between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and 30 minutes between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(b)  The wrecker service offices and storage location must be within a reasonable distance from the corporate limits of the city in order to be able to respond within the time specified in subsection (a) of this section and to be convenient for the owner or driver of the wrecked or disabled vehicle. The chief of police or a designee will make the determination of a reasonable distance. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. C, § 8-3-5; Ord. of 6-14-2005, § 1)  
Sec. 36-141. - Storage area and fee. 
The wrecker service shall maintain a safe storage area for all vehicles towed. This may be a locked building or a secured, fenced-in area where the stored vehicle and other property shall not be accessible to the public. A wrecker service may charge a fee for storage. Such fees shall not commence prior to 24 hours after the tow is completed, and only if the vehicle is actually placed in storage. Fees shall be determined in accordance with division 5 of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. C, § 8-3-6)  
Sec. 36-142. - Basic equipment and identification. 
(a)  All wreckers shall have appropriate safety equipment, fire extinguishers, warning devices, flashlights and all other equipment necessary to protect the motoring public and shall be equipped with amber flashing lights visible in all directions for a distance of 500 feet in normal sunlight. Such equipment shall be maintained in good working order. All authorized amber flashing lights shall be activated and wrecker operators shall wear reflective traffic safety vests while performing recovery operations or when circumstances are such that the vehicles being transported create a potentially hazardous condition for other motorists. 
(b)  Each wrecker service on the rotation list must place a sign on the driver and front passenger door of each of its wreckers indicating the company name, address, and telephone number of the zone to which it is assigned. This sign shall be painted on the doors of the wrecker or otherwise permanently affixed to the doors. The letters of the sign must be no less than two inches high. If the wrecker is registered in a name other than that of the wrecker service, the owner's name must also appear on the doors in letters no less than one inch high. All lettering on wreckers shall be plainly visible and shall be in a color in contrast to that of the wrecker. 
(c)  Each wrecker service on the rotation list must place a sign on the exterior of its business location clearly visible indicating the company name, telephone number, and business hours. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. C, § 8-3-7)  
Sec. 36-143. - Insurance. 
(a)  Each wrecker service on the rotation list shall carry liability insurance on its wreckers and its premises in an amount not less than $300,000.00 for a class A wrecker, $500,000.00 for a class B wrecker and $750,000.00 for a class C wrecker. 
(b)  Each wrecker service on the rotation list shall carry insurance that covers vehicles, cargo, and other property in or on the vehicle during transit in an amount of not less than $75,000.00 for a class A wrecker, $150,000.00 for a class B wrecker and $250,000.00 for a class C wrecker. 
(c)  Each wrecker service on the rotation list shall carry garage keeper's liability insurance covering customer's vehicles in an amount not less than $100,000.00 for a class A wrecker, $200,000.00 for a class B wrecker and $200,000.00 for a class C wrecker. 
(d)  Each wrecker service on the rotation call list shall show proof that worker's compensation insurance is provided for its employees in accordance with S.C. Code 1976, title 42, Worker's Compensation. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. C, § 8-3-8; Ord. of 6-14-2005, § 2)  
Sec. 36-144. - Towing log. 
(a)  Each wrecker owned by any wrecker service on a rotation list shall be equipped with a towing log. The towing log shall be maintained by the wrecker service and shall accurately reflect all towing done by the wrecker service at the request of the police department. Each wrecker service owner shall be responsible for producing this towing log upon request by a city police officer. 
(b)  The police department communications center shall maintain a towing log of all vehicles towed and the wrecker company conducting the tow. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. C, § 8-3-9)  
Sec. 36-145. - Application to provide service. 
(a)  A new rotation list will be created each calendar year. A wrecker service currently on the list and desiring to be on the rotation list in the next year must apply in writing by October 1 and be inspected and qualified prior to December 31. On December 31 of each year, the police department will publish the wrecker rotation list to be effective January 1 of the following year. 
(b)  A wrecker service not currently on the police department wrecker rotation list and desiring to be added may apply in writing at any time but must first be inspected and qualified. 
(c)  A wrecker service that fails to pass inspection and qualification as prescribed by regulation will be notified of the deficiencies. When the wrecker service corrects the deficiencies, it may request a new inspection. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. C, § 8-3-10)  
Secs. 36-146—36-173. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WRECKER SERVICE ROTATION LIST AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
Sec. 36-174. - Conduct of wrecker operators. 
Wrecker operators must display professional behavior when conducting business at the request of the police department. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. D, § 8-3-11)  
Sec. 36-175. - Solicitation. 
Wrecker services and operators shall be familiar with and shall comply with the laws regarding solicitation for the highway. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. D, § 8-3-12) 
State Law reference— Pedestrians soliciting rides or business, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-3180.  
Sec. 36-176. - Response to police request/motorist preference. 
Wreckers shall respond only upon the request of the proper police authority. Response under any other condition may result in the removal of the wrecker service from the rotation list. Unless the owner or driver of a vehicle is incapacitated or unavailable, the investigating officer at the scene will make a determination of the owner's or driver's preference of a wrecker service. The investigating officer will use his discretionary authority to deny request for a specific wrecker service whenever the request will impair the timely restoration of safe traffic movement. In the event the owner or driver of the vehicle does not have a preference or preference cannot be determined, the investigating officer will utilize a wrecker from the rotation list. The wrecker service responding to such call shall provide the vehicle operator with a card containing the wrecker service name, address, telephone number and business hours. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. D, § 8-3-13)  
Sec. 36-177. - Rotation lists for categorized wrecker service. 
Separate rotation lists will be maintained for each category of wreckers. When the services of a categorized wrecker are needed and when the owner or driver of the vehicle to be towed has no preference as to which wrecker service he desires, a wrecker will be called from the appropriate wrecker rotation list. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. D, § 8-3-14)  
Sec. 36-178. - Administration and order of calls. 
The wrecker rotation list shall be administered fairly and in a manner designed to ensure that all wrecker services on the list have an equal opportunity for the towing business arising from the city rotation list. As such, the following will apply: 
(1)  Subject to the provisions of section 36-119, wrecker services shall be called from the rotation list in the order in which they appear on the list. If a particular wrecker service is unavailable when called, it shall be passed over and the next wrecker service on the list shall be called to the scene. 
(2)  Wrecker services shall be available to the city and the public on a 24-hour basis. When a wrecker service or wrecker driver is unable to answer a call, the police dispatcher shall be promptly notified of that fact and the reason for unavailability. 
(3)  Per section 36-140(a), a wrecker service shall respond, under normal conditions, in a timely manner. Failure to respond in a timely manner may result in a second rotation wrecker being requested. If the second wrecker is requested before the arrival of the first rotation wrecker, the initially requested wrecker will forfeit the call and will immediately leave the collision/incident scene. 
(4)  Motorists utilizing the police department wrecker rotation list will have the option of paying by major credit card. The wrecker service may request, prior to dispatching, if the motorist intends to pay by major credit card. If the wrecker service does not accept major credit cards, the next wrecker or towing service that does accept credit cards will be utilized. Any wrecker or towing service called that does not accept credit cards will remain on the top of the rotation list. 
(5)  The wrecker service must have a wrecker of sufficient size and strength to handle the job. The police department will have the right not to call a wrecker service that, in its opinion, fails to meet this qualification for a specific job. Under these conditions, the wrecker service not called will remain on the top of the rotation list. 
(6)  A wrecker service may respond with a wrecker of a higher class than requested. However, the wrecker service call is limited to the rates of the requested classification. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. D, § 8-3-15)  
Sec. 36-179. - Assistance. 
A wrecker service may secure assistance from another wrecker service when necessary to complete the recovery; however, this does not supersede section 36-120 nor does it permit wrecker services to accept a rotation call and dispatch the call to secondary wrecker services. Only one bill is to be submitted to the owner or operator for the work performed. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. D, § 8-3-16)  
Sec. 36-180. - Release of vehicle and personal effects. 
The wrecker service location shall have an agent present during business hours and at the request of the owner of the towed vehicle or his designee, the wrecker service must immediately release personal items such as medicines, medical equipment, keys, clothing, and tools of the trade, child restraint systems and perishable items. The wrecker service shall also be available for the release of the towed vehicle to the vehicle owner or vehicle owner's designee on a reasonable after-hours basis, including weekends. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. D, § 8-3-17)  
Sec. 36-181. - Cleanup. 
It shall be the responsibility of the wrecker service to perform a general cleanup of the accident area before leaving the scene of any accident. This responsibility requires the wrecker service to remove all debris such as broken glass, liquids, and materials from an accident area by sweeping up such debris and removing this material from the scene in a garbage can type container on each wrecker. All wreckers shall be equipped with brooms, shovels, commercial absorbent and all other equipment necessary to fulfill this responsibility. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. D, § 8-3-18)  
Secs. 36-182—36-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - WRECKER CLASSIFICATION 
 
Sec. 36-201. - Application to conform to standard. 
The wrecker rotation lists will be generated and maintained for each category of wreckers. Any wrecker service making application to provide service shall classify its wreckers and towing assets in accordance with the standards of section 36-203. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. E, § 8-3-19)  
Sec. 36-202. - Application for multiple classes. 
A wrecker service that only has heavier class wreckers may make application to provide service for the lighter class rotation lists as well. For example, a wrecker service that has class B wreckers only may make its application for both the class A and class B rotation lists. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. E, § 8-3-20)  
Sec. 36-203. - Wrecker classes/categories. 
Wreckers shall be divided into the following classes and categories: 
(1)  Class A: light duty wrecker. Class A wreckers, for towing vehicles weighing 7,000 pounds or less (passenger cars, pickup trucks, motorcycles, small trailers, and similar vehicles), shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Conventional wrecker. For conventional wreckers: 
1.  Minimum gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of not less than 10,000 pounds. 
2.  Individual boom capacity of not less than 8,000 pounds as rated by the manufacturer. 
3.  Individual PTO or hydraulic power winch capacity of not less than 8,000 pounds as rated by the manufacturer with at least 100 feet of three-eighths-inch cable drum. 
4.  A manufactured wheel-lift with a retracting lifting capacity of not less than 3,500 pounds as rated by the manufacturer, with safety chains. 
5.  Come-A-Longs, chains, or other similar devices shall not be used as substitutes for winch and cable. 
6.  Dual rear wheels. 
7.  Additional safety equipment as specified by the regulations. 
b.  Rollback wrecker. For rollback wreckers: 
1.  Minimum gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of not less than 11,000 pounds. 
2.  Must have at least an 8,000-pound winch as rated by the manufacturer with at least 50 feet of three-eighths-inch cable or larger. 
3.  Come-A-Longs, chains, or other similar devices shall not be used as substitutes for winch and cable. 
4.  Additional safety equipment as specified by the regulations. 
(2)  Class B: medium duty wrecker. Class B wreckers, for towing vehicles weighing between 7,001 and 17,000 pounds or multiple vehicles weighing 7,000 pounds, respectively (medium-sized trucks, road tractors/trailers and similar vehicles), shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The tow truck chassis shall have a minimum gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of not less than 22,000 pounds. 
b.  Must have at least a 12-ton boom assembly as rated by the manufacturer. 
c.  Must have two winches, each of 10,000-pound capacity or more, as rated by the manufacturer. 
d.  A manufactured wheel-lift with a retracting lifting capacity of not less than 6,500 pounds as rated by the manufacturer, with safety obtains. 
e.  Come-A-Longs, chains, or other similar devices shall not be used as substitutes for winch and cable. 
f.  Additional safety equipment as specified by the regulations. 
(3)  Class C: heavy duty wrecker. Class C wreckers, for towing vehicles in excess of 17,000 pounds (large trucks, road tractor/trailers and similar vehicles), shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Truck chassis having a minimum gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of not less than 46,000 pounds. 
b.  Tandem axles or cab to axle length of not less than 102 inches. 
c.  A single or double boom with a capacity of not less than 50,000 pounds as rated by the manufacturer. 
d.  A single winch with a capacity of 50,000 pounds as rated by the manufacturer or an individual power winch capacity of not less than 25,000 pounds as rated by the manufacturer and a total rating with both winches of 50,000 pounds. 
e.  A manufactured wheel-lift with a retracting lifting capacity of not less than 12,000 pounds as rated by the manufacturer, with safety chains. 
f.  One hundred fifty feet of five-eighths-inch cable or larger, plus 50 feet of five-eighths-inch drop cable. 
g.  Airbrakes constructed so as to lock wheels automatically upon failure. 
h.  Light and air brake hookups. 
i.  Come-A-Longs, chains, or other similar devices shall not be used as substitutes for winch and cable. 
j.  Additional safety equipment as specified by the regulations. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. E, § 8-3-21)  
Secs. 36-204—36-229. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - FEES, RATES AND CHARGES 
 
Sec. 36-230. - Applicability of fees. 
Only wrecker services on the police department wrecker rotation lists shall be subject to the regulations of this division governing fees. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. F, § 8-3-22)  
Sec. 36-231. - Determination of fees. 
Fees charged for rotation list calls shall be reasonable and not in excess of those rates charged for similar services provided in response to requests initiated by any other public agency or private person. The reasonableness of the fees charged will be determined in the following manner: 
(1)  A wrecker service shall submit proposed fees along with its annual application. Separate fee schedules shall be submitted for each class of wrecker, and, for each class, the fee for standard towing, heavy-duty towing, storage, and special operations. 
a.  A standard tow is defined as responding to the scene, hooking up the vehicle, performing a general cleanup if the call involves responding to a collision scene and providing responsible assistance to the owner to get to a safe location. 
b.  Special operations are operations involving the process of uprighting an overturned vehicle or returning a vehicle to a normal position on the roadway which requires the use of auxiliary equipment due to the size or location of the vehicle and/or the recovery of a load which has spilled, or the offloading and reloading of a load from an overturned vehicle performed to right the vehicle. 
(2)  The chief of police or a designee will determine the reasonableness of the fees based upon the average of the proposed fees submitted and a comparison of the police department's industry standards, within the city, for similar operations. 
(3)  Separate fees, including but not limited to fuel charges and insurance, may not be charged. Exceptions to this will be the allowance of a fee for special operations as outlined in subsection (1)b of this section and the allowance of a fee for night service. 
(4)  A wrecker service shall submit proposed fees with the annual application. 
(5)  The fees that a wrecker service may charge shall comply with the classification of the type of service required, regardless of the class of wrecker used in the application or to complete the tow. For example, if a wrecker service uses a class B wrecker for class A towing requirements, then its fee structure shall be in accordance with the class A standard fees. 
(6)  Failure to submit proposed fees with the annual application will result in utilizing the last proposed fees submitted. 
(7)  Wrecker services that submit fees that are determined to be excessive or unreasonable will be notified and allowed to resubmit fees within five business days of notification. A wrecker service will be allowed to resubmit fees once. Failure to resubmit reasonable fees will disqualify the wrecker service from the police department rotation list until January 1 of the following year. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. F, § 8-3-23; Ord. of 6-14-2005, § 4)  
Sec. 36-232. - Review of fees. 
The chief or a designee will complete a review of the fees for the police department rotation wrecker services during inspection and qualification to determine its validity and reasonableness. Validity will be based upon telephone quotes, posted rates, charges to retail customers, comparison with other public safety offices, etc. Reasonableness will be determined as compared to other rates. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. F, § 8-3-24)  
Sec. 36-233. - Raising or lowering rates. 
Wrecker services may lower rates at any time and may raise rates for non-police department calls at any time. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. F, § 8-3-25)  
Sec. 36-234. - Towing of seized vehicles. 
(a)  The city police department at times will seize vehicles pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, § 44-53-520. Wrecker services on the current police department wrecker rotation lists may enter into an agreement regarding these towed vehicles. The written signed agreement shall be entered into by the wrecker services and the following terms shall apply: 
(1)  The police department will pay no tow fees for court-awarded vehicles. 
(2)  The wrecker company will receive no compensation for these vehicles from the previous owner or the person from which the vehicle was seized. 
(3)  Vehicles returned to the titled owner will not be released by the police department until the titled owner pays the tow bill. 
(4)  Seized vehicles will be stored at the police department's impound facility until forfeiture is complete with no storage fees. 
(b)  Under the terms of this agreement, a special wrecker rotation list will be created for the specific towing of seized vehicles. The special rotation list will be created each calendar year with a signed written agreement. Any wrecker service that wishes to be added to the special wrecker rotation list can be added by a written request and a signed wrecker rotation agreement. 
(Ord. of 4-12-2005, art. F, § 8-3-26)  
Chapter 38 - UTILITIES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 38-1—38-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SEWERAGE SYSTEM[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal utilities generally, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-31-610; municipality may purchase or construct utility systems and plants, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-21-50; "system" defined, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-21-40; authority to establish municipal sewerage system, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-31-810; authority to enact relevant ordinances concerning sewerage system, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-31-900; enumerated municipal powers regarding schedule of sewer service and connection fees, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-31-2030. 
 
Sec. 38-21. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be placed or deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any sewage or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for disposal of sewage, where public sewers are available. 
(d)  The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there shall be located a public sanitary sewer of the city is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with provisions of this article within 180 days after the completion of the sewer system, provided that said public sewer shall be within 100 feet of the property line. 
(Code 1983, § 4-1-2; Ord. of 11-9-1982)  
Sec. 38-22. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under provision of section 38-21(d), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Before a commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, septic tank, privy, privy vault, or cesspool for a single-family dwelling, the owner shall first obtain approval and a written permit signed by the building official; the application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the city. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid in accordance with the fee schedule adopted as part of the International Plumbing Code, Appendix H at the time the application for permit is filed. 
(c)  A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city. The city shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the inspector. 
(d)  The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of health and environmental control. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. 
(f)  At such time as a public sewer comes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in subsection (d) of this section, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned, cleaned of sludge, and filled with clean, bank-run gravel or dirt within 30 days of notification to do so by the city in accordance with the adopted International Plumbing Code. 
(g)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed to nullify any additional requirements that may be imposed by the appropriate state or county health officer. 
(Code 1983, § 4-1-3; Ord. of 11-9-1982) 


ZONING ORDINANCE AND LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS OF THE CITY OF HANAHAN, SOUTH CAROLINA 
____________ 
Published in 2010 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
HANAHAN, SOUTH CAROLINA 
____________ 
The Honorable Minnie N. Blackwell 
Mayor 
____________ 
Jeffery C. Chandler 
Mayor Pro-Tem 
____________ 
Timothy A. Baker 
C. Kevin Cox 
J. Mike Dyson 
Joel E. Hodges 
D. Mark Stokes 
City Council 
____________ 
John P. Cribb 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Paul Trouché 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kim Peters 
Clerk of Council 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
  
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 1-2008  3-11-2008 Omit 1 3-2008  3-11-2008 Omit 1 9-2008  8-12-2008 Omit 1 7-2010 11- 9-2010 Omit 1 4-2011  6-14-2011 Omit 1 5-2011  6-14-2011 Include 1 9-2011 11- 8-2011 Omit 1 11-2011 12-13-2011 Include 1 1-2012  3-13-2012 Include 1 5-2013  4- 9-2013 Include 1 7-2012  1- 8-2013 Include 1 4-2014  6-10-2014 Include 1 10-2014  1-13-2015 Include 1 1-2015  3-10-2015 Include 1 2-2016  4-12-2016 Include 2  
PART I - ZONING ORDINANCE 
1. - PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY 

1.1. - Title. 
    This ordinance is officially titled "City of Hanahan Zoning Ordinance" and shall be known as and referred to herein as the Zoning Ordinance. The map accompanying this ordinance, designating and depicting the various zones described herein, is officially titled "City of Hanahan Official Zoning Map" and shall be known as and referred to herein as the Zoning Map. 
1.2. - Authority. 
    This ordinance is hereby adopted under the authority and provisions of the South Carolina Local Government Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act of 1994 - Title 6, Chapter 29 of the South Carolina Code of Laws. 
1.3. - Jurisdiction. 
    The regulations set forth in this ordinance govern the development and use of all land and structures - built and natural environments - within the corporate limits of the City of Hanahan. 
1.4. - Purpose. 
(A)	Through the adoption of its 2002 Comprehensive Plan, as amended, the City of Hanahan expressed the need to update its Zoning and Land Development ordinances to allow for the protection and promotion of the health, safety, and general welfare - consisting of the following issues - of its present and future citizens and landowners: 
(1)	High quality of life and community; 
(2)	Property values and privacy; 
(3)	Natural as well as built environment; 
(4)	Efficient use of public infrastructure and services; 
(5)	Stormwater run-off management; 
(6)	Calm vehicular traffic and pedestrian accessibility; and 
(7)	City identity and character. 
(B)	The Zoning Ordinance shall ensure that future development and land uses coalesce with existing conditions in Hanahan to yield the highest and best possible benefits in each and every one (1) of these issues. 
1.5. - Severability. 
    In the event that any portion of this ordinance is found illegal by a court of law of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the ordinance shall remain in full effect. 
1.6. - Applicability. 
    In the event that this ordinance contains contradictory standards or comes into conflict with the standards imposed by another city code or ordinance or another agency of competent jurisdiction, those higher or stricter standards shall take effect. 
2. - ZONING ADMINISTRATION 

2.1. - Responsibility for administration. 
2.1.1.   City administrator to assign.
    Except as otherwise specifically provided, primary responsibility for the city administrator may assign one (1) or more individuals to administer and enforce the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance. This ordinance refers to the person or persons to whom these functions are assigned as the "zoning administrator" or "city planner." the terms "staff," "administrator," and "planner" may be used interchangeably with the positions "zoning administrator" and "city planner" for the purposes of this ordinance. The city administrator shall determine the departmental assignments of these positions. 
2.1.2.   Duties of the zoning administrator.
    The position of "zoning administrator" shall entail the following duties: 
(1)	Interpreting and enforcing the Zoning Ordinance; 
(2)	Investigating and resolving complaints pertaining to the ordinance; 
(3)	Administering permits and certificates, including collecting fees for permits and certificates; 
(4)	Processing applications for variances, special exceptions, and appeals to the board of zoning appeals and preparing the record for appeal to circuit court; 
(5)	Processing applications for design review and appeals to the design control committee and preparing the record for appeal to circuit court; 
(6)	Maintaining a current official zoning map and public records related to zoning; and 
(7)	Other duties, as may be assigned. 
2.2. - Planning commission. 
(A)	Establishment of planning commission. A planning commission has been established for the City of Hanahan (See City of Hanahan Code of Ordinances, ordinance dated 10/8/1973.) as a board that has the powers and duties as provided in the South Carolina Code § 6-29-310 et seq. 
(B)	Powers and duties of the planning commission. The planning commission shall be assigned the duty to develop and carry out a continuing planning program for the physical, social, and economic growth, development, and redevelopment of the City of Hanahan. The following steps constitute this duty. 
(1)	Comprehensive Plan. Prepare and periodically revise development and/or redevelopment plans and programs. 
(2)	Implementation. Prepare and recommend to city council measures for carrying out the plan. Such measures include the following: 
(a)	Zoning Ordinance. Text, map, and any necessary revisions. 
(b)	Regulations for land subdivision and development. The commission is responsible for overseeing administration of land development standards of the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance upon adoption by council. 
(c)	Official map. Map showing the exact location of existing or proposed public streets, highways, utility rights-of-way, and public building sites. The official map and zoning map may be the same document. The commission is responsible for developing regulations and procedures for administering the official map. 
(d)	Landscaping ordinance. Provide required standards for planting, tree preservation, and other aesthetic considerations. 
(e)	Capital improvements program. List required projects to carry out the adopted plans. The commission submits an annual list of priority projects to council for consideration when annual capital budgets are prepared. The commission should take these priority projects from the adopted Comprehensive Plan. 
(f)	Policies and procedures. Implement the adopted comprehensive plan. These could cover such things as expanding the corporate limits, extending the public water and sewer systems, accepting dedicated streets, accepting drainage easements, and offering economic development incentive packages. 
2.3. - Board of zoning appeals (BZA). 
    Establishment of board of zoning appeals. A board of zoning appeals is hereby established for the City of Hanahan as a quasi-judicial board that has the powers and duties as provided in the South Carolina Code § 6-29-780 et seq. 
2.3.1.   Membership.
(A)	The board shall consist of five (5) members. 
(B)	Members shall be citizens of Hanahan. 
(C)	Members shall be appointed by city council for overlapping terms of four (4) years. 
(D)	Members may continue to serve until a successor is appointed. 
(E)	Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. 
(F)	Members shall serve without pay but may be reimbursed for expenses incurred while part of the board. 
(G)	Members cannot hold any other public office or position in the city. 
2.3.2.   Proceedings of the board of zoning appeals.
(A)	The board of zoning appeals shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman from its membership, who shall serve for one (1) year or until re-elected or until their successors are elected. 
(B)	The board shall appoint a secretary, who may be a city officer, a city employee, a member of the planning commission, or a member of the board of zoning appeals. The secretary shall keep the records and minutes of the board meetings, cause proper notice to be made of cases for board review, and shall conduct correspondence for the board. The secretary shall not participate in the meeting proceedings as a voting member unless he/she is appointed to the board. 
(C)	The board shall adopt rules and by-laws in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and South Carolina Code § 6-29-790. 
(D)	Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. 
2.3.3.   Powers of the board of zoning appeals.
    All questions arising in connection with the enforcement of the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance shall be presented first to the zoning administrator, after which, such questions may be presented to the board of zoning appeals, but only on appeal of the written decision of the zoning administrator. 
(A)	Administrative review. The board may hear and decide appeals where it is alleged the zoning administrator erred in an order, requirement, decision, or determination. In such cases, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, the zoning administrator's actions. The board shall have all the powers of the zoning administrator in such cases and may direct the issuance of a permit. 
(B)	Variances. The board shall have the power to hear requests for variances and decide as to their validity when strict application of zoning standards would cause unnecessary hardship. 
(1)	The following standards must apply for finding of an unnecessary hardship. 
(a)	Extraordinary conditions. There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property, which could exist due to topography, street widening, or other conditions making economically feasible use of the property difficult or impossible. 
(b)	Utilization. Because of these extraordinary conditions, the application of the ordinance to a particular piece of property would effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property. 
(c)	Detriment. The authorization of a variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property or the public good, and the character of the district will not be harmed by granting of the variance. 
(d)	Other property. Extraordinary conditions generally do not apply to other property in the vicinity. 
(2)	Conditions. In granting a variance, the board may attach to it standards in the ordinance specifically stated and applicable to the variance request that address the location, character, or other features of a proposed building, structure, or use as conditions of approval to protect established property values in the surrounding area and to promote the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
(3)	Use variances. The board shall not grant use variances. A use variance involves the establishment of a use not otherwise permitted in a zoning district, extends physically a non-conforming land use, or changes the zoning district boundaries shown on the zoning map. 
(4)	Special exceptions. The board may grant special exceptions, as outlined in Section 2.5.3 of this chapter, for land uses specified in the Zoning Ordinance and allowable only by special exception. 
2.3.4.   Procedure for administrative review, variances, and special exceptions.
(A)	Type of appeal sought. 
(1)	Administrative review. Any person believing to have found error in the written decision of the zoning administrator may appeal it to the board of zoning appeals. Such appeals shall be filed with the city within thirty (30) days of the date of written notice of the decision or order of the zoning administrator. 
(2)	Variance. Any person seeking relief from the strict application of zoning standards in accordance with subsection 2.3.3(B), above, shall apply for a variance from the board of zoning appeals. 
(3)	Special exception. Any person seeking a zoning permit for a land use allowable only by special exception in the zoning district in which the property is located shall apply for a special exception from the board of zoning appeals. 
(B)	Application to the City of Hanahan. The applicant appealing to the board of zoning appeals shall undertake the following procedure. 
(a)	A completed application, together with the application fee for administrative review or variance, shall be filed with the zoning administrator at least twenty-five (25) days prior to the board of zoning appeals meeting at which the request will be considered. 
(b)	Required information. The applicant shall set forth a detailed description of the request on an application form provided by the zoning administrator. The completed application shall include the following information: 
(i)	A legal description and street address of the subject property, together with a property boundary map if subject property is not explicitly delineated on the zoning map; 
(ii)	Six (6) copies of the site development plan or building plans submitted as part of a zoning permit application reviewed and disapproved by the zoning administrator, where applicable, for the property for which relief is sought. 
(iii)	Name, address, and phone number of applicant; 
(iv)	Name of property owner(s) and applicant's interest in the property if not the owner in fee simple title; 
(v)	Filing date of application; 
(vi)	Any other information deemed relevant by the zoning administrator; and 
(vii)	Applicant and property owner's signature(s). 
(C)	Stay of proceedings. Filing an appeal to the board stays all legal proceedings to enforce the appealed action unless the appealed officer certifies that a stay would cause imminent peril to life and property. In such cases, a board or court restraining order may stay the action. 
(D)	Hearings. The board of zoning appeals shall hold a public hearing within sixty (60) days of receiving written application for appeal or variance, giving public notice thereof at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing by placing notice in a general circulation newspaper in the community. 
(E)	Posting property. In cases involving variances, city staff must post conspicuous notices, (sign with dimensions of at least eighteen (18) inch × twenty-four (24) inch) on or next to the affected property at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. At least one (1) notice must be visible from each street that borders the property. 

(F)	Record keeping. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examination and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the zoning administrator and shall be public record. On all appeals, applications, and other matters brought before the board, it shall inform in writing all the parties involved of its decision(s) and the reason(s) heretofore. 
(G)	Decisions of the board of zoning appeals. The concurring majority vote of present members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the zoning administrator or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter that it is required to consider under this ordinance or to affect any variation of this ordinance. 
(H)	Order on decision. The board of zoning appeals shall, upon decision of approval or denial, submit to the applicant its decision in writing within thirty (30) days and shall notify the zoning administrator of such decision. If the board of zoning appeals finds in favor of the developer, the zoning administrator shall process the application for zoning permit for the reviewed property. 
(I)	Appeals of decisions of the board of zoning appeals. Any person who may have a substantial interest in any decision of the board of zoning appeals may appeal that decision to circuit court, filing with the clerk of such court a petition in writing setting forth plainly, fully, and distinctly wherein such decision is contrary to law. Such appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the rendering of the decision of the board. 
2.4. - Amendments. 
(A)	Intent. The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this ordinance may, from time to time, be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed by city council, provided that no such action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties of interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(B)	Initiation of amendment. Revision of the text or map of the Zoning Ordinance or the Land Development Ordinance may be initiated within the planning commission or by city council. Additionally, a landowner may request a revision to the Zoning Ordinance or the Land Development Ordinance, provided such affects solely his property, through application to the City of Hanahan submitted to the zoning administrator. The procedure to amend the ordinance is as follows. 
(1)	Application to the City of Hanahan. In the event that a landowner requests from the city a rezoning of his/her parcel(s) or other amendment to an ordinance that would solely affect his/her parcel(s), he/she shall undertake the following procedure. 
(a)	A completed application, together with the application fee for zoning or land development ordinance amendment shall be filed with the zoning administrator at least twenty-five (25) days prior to the planning commission meeting at which the amendment request will be considered. 
(b)	Required information. The applicant shall set forth a detailed description of the amendment on an application provided by the zoning administrator. When the amendment involves a change in the zoning map, the applicant shall submit the following information: 
(i)	A legal description and street address of the subject property, together with a property boundary map if subject property is not explicitly delineated on the zoning map; 
(ii)	Name, address, and phone number of applicant; 
(iii)	Name of property owner(s) and applicant's interest in the property if not the owner in fee simple title; 
(iv)	Filing date of application; 
(v)	Zoning of adjacent properties; 
(vi)	Any other information deemed relevant by the zoning administrator; and 
(vii)	Applicant's and property owner's signature. 
(c)	Planned Development Districts. The applicant proposing a Planned Development District (Type "B") shall comply with the requirements set forth in Section 4.7, which shall be in addition to these requirements. 
(2)	Any amendments, changes (including rezoning), or supplements to the Zoning Map, Zoning Ordinance, or Land Development Ordinance must first be submitted to the zoning administrator for review and recommendation. Upon receipt of a complete amendment application from a landowner, the zoning administrator shall transmit the application and recommendation to the planning commission for consideration. 
(C)	Planning commission review. All proposed amendments must be submitted to the Hanahan Planning Commission for its review and recommendation. The planning commission shall have thirty (30) days within which to submit a report to the city council. In reviewing any petition for a Zoning or Land Development Ordinance amendment, the planning commission shall identify and evaluate all factors relevant to the request. These facts shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)	Whether or not the requested amendment is justified by a change in conditions since the ordinance was adopted or by an error in the ordinance; 
(2)	Whether or not the requested amendment is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan; 

(3)	The precedents and the possible effects of such precedents that might result from approval or denial of the petition; 
(4)	The capability of the city or other government agencies to provide any services, facilities, and/or programs that might be required if the petition is approved; 
(5)	Effect of approval of the petition on the condition and/or value of property in city; and 
(6)	Effect of approval of the petition on adopted plans and policies of the City of Hanahan. 
(D)	Public hearing. 
(1)	The planning commission shall hold a public hearing for all Zoning and Land Development Ordinance amendments proposed in which the affected landowner(s) speaks or writes to the planning commission on behalf of the amendment. The purpose is to allow interested parties, including neighbors and adjacent landowners, the opportunity to comment in similar fashion. 
(2)	No public hearing or notice (except for inclusion in the publicly posted agenda) shall be required at the planning commission for Zoning and Land Development Ordinance amendments in which an affected landowner does NOT speak or write on behalf of the amendment. 
(E)	Notice of public hearing. The zoning administrator shall perform the following duties in the event a public hearing is required. 
(1)	Newspaper notice. A notice shall be placed in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. The notice shall include the hearing time and place. 
(2)	Mail notice. Written notice shall be mailed to all interested groups requesting notice. Written notice shall also be mailed to all adjacent landowners and tenants, where applicable. The mailing shall occur at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. Certified mail shall not be required; the zoning administrator shall use discretion in determining the best type of mailing, which shall be at a minimum, first class U.S. postal mail. 
(3)	Posting property. In rezoning cases, conspicuous notices (sign with dimensions of at least eighteen (18) inch × twenty-four (24) inch) shall be posted on or adjacent to the affected property by the zoning administrator. One (1) notice must be visible and readable from each public street that borders the property. Such sign(s) shall be posted at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. 
(F)	Passage by resolution. 
(1)	If the planning commission finds by majority vote that the proposed amendment is in accordance with the above considerations, it shall pass a resolution to city council that such amendment be made to the Zoning Ordinance, the Land Development Ordinance, and/or zoning map. 
(2)	If the planning commission fails to submit a report within the required thirty (30) day period, it shall be deemed to have recommended approval of the requested amendment. 
(G)	Adoption by ordinance. The city council shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with its ordinance amendment requirements. City council shall review the planning commission report and comments made at the public hearing, as available, before taking action to either adopt or reject the amendment to the ordinance. Adoption of the amendment shall be by ordinance by majority vote. After adoption, the zoning administrator shall make the necessary changes to the text of the Zoning Ordinance or Land Development Ordinance and/or to the official zoning map. 
(H)	Amendment of the official zoning map. The zoning administrator shall revise the official zoning map to reflect an amendment adopted by ordinance within seven (7) days of the date of adoption. 
2.5. - Type of allowable uses. 
2.5.1.   By-right uses.
    Each zoning district includes land uses allowed by right within the district. In order to receive a zoning permit, the proposed land uses shall meet all standards and conditions that apply uniformly throughout the zoning district. 
2.5.2.   Conditional uses.
    Such uses must meet conditions, restrictions, and/or limitations in order to be permitted, as outlined in this ordinance. These are in addition to standards that apply to all land in the zoning district. This technique is used to allow uses generally compatible with the district but that may generate externalities adversely impacting nearby property or uses unless conditions are imposed to protect those properties or uses. If the zoning administrator deems that these conditions have been met, he shall issue a zoning permit for the use. Otherwise, the zoning permit is denied. 
2.5.3.   Special exception uses.
    Some uses are generally incompatible in some zoning districts but may be allowed by special exception upon review by the board of zoning appeals. The BZA may attach conditions, provided in this ordinance, to the zoning permit to correct or mitigate any non-conformities it foresees, to ensure the compatible development of the proposed site with the zoning district as well as the community as a whole. The procedure for appeals shall apply, per Section 2.3.4. 
2.6. - Zoning permit. 
2.6.1.   Purpose.
(A)	A Zoning permit shall be required for any developer prior to any change in land use, receipt of a new business license or building permit, construction or expansion of any building or other facility for which a building permit is required, erection or any signage for which a permit is required per Section 8.2.1, construction or expansion of a parking area numbering more than six (6) stalls, or any alteration of existing grade by heavy machinery. 
(B)	The developer shall demonstrate upon application for a zoning permit the ability and intent to meet all Hanahan Zoning Standards via submittal of a site development plan. 
(C)	A zoning permit shall not be required for those activities specifically authorized by a land disturbance permit or a tree removal permit. The following public improvements shall be completed prior to application for a zoning permit in a major land development: potable water and sanitary sewerage unless private on-site systems are proposed and approved, stormwater management, electrical power, and enough of the road system to accommodate construction traffic without significant wear (i.e., the base course typically and minimally). In the event of a phased land development, each of these systems shall be completed within the current phase all previous phases. 
(D)	Receipt of a zoning permit authorizes the developer to clear, grade, excavate, and fill in preparation for site development but shall not exempt the developer from the requirement of a tree removal permit. 
2.6.2.   Procedure.
(A)	The developer shall submit a completed application for a zoning permit to the zoning administrator, who shall date and stamp the application "received." 
(B)	A completed application for a zoning permit includes those items specified in the following section, which include, but are not limited to a site development plan and an application form and fee. 
(C)	The zoning administrator shall have no more than fifteen (15) days in which to review the completed application and either issue the zoning permit or submit to the developer in writing reasons for disapproval. The zoning administrator shall be authorized to inspect natural resource protection measures proposed as part of the site development, as applicable. The fifteen (15) day time limit may be extended by mutual agreement between the developer and the zoning administrator. 
(1)	If the proposed site development is within the jurisdiction of the Hanahan Design Control Committee, then its process for review and approval shall apply, per Chapter 3 of this ordinance. 
(D)	The developer shall post an approved zoning permit on the development site at a location easily visible and accessible from the adjacent transportation right-of-way until receipt of a certificate of occupancy. 
2.6.3.   Application for zoning permit-Site development plan required.
(A)	Application requirements. The following constitute a completed application for a zoning permit. 
(1)	An application form available from the zoning administrator. The form shall include the Berkeley County parcel identification number(s) and the address, where available, of the property proposed for development. 
(2)	An application fee in the amount set by Hanahan City Council. 
(3)	Three (3) copies of the site development plan printed on bond paper or material of equivalent durability. Data sets appearing in the site development plan shall be those below. 
(a)	For a single-family detached residential home site or manufactured home site, construction drawings submitted for a building permit may be provided in lieu of a site development plan. 
(b)	The site development plan shall include elevation drawings of any structure, sign, or other facility erected vertically to demonstrate compliance of the proposal with height restrictions and appearance standards. The elevation drawings may be attached or illustrated as insets on the plan. 
(4)	One (1) copy of the traffic study, where required. Standards and content requirements for the traffic study appear in Section 3.3 of the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance. 
(B)	Documentation requirements. The completed application for a zoning permit shall include a site development plan meeting the following standards. 
(1)	Scale. The site development plan shall be legibly drawn at a scale that clearly communicates the information required, typically no smaller than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet on a sheet twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches. If the site development plan necessitates more than one (1) sheet, a key diagram drawn at a smaller scale shall show and reference each portion of the plan. The city planner may approve alternate scale and sheet sizes at his sole discretion. 
(2)	General information. 
(a)	Title block, including the following: 
(i)	Proposed name of development, which shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically or otherwise, the name of any development within the jurisdiction; 
(ii)	Names, signatures, and seals of applicant, owner, surveyor, engineer and other professionals involved in plan preparation; 
(iii)	North arrow, graphic scale, and written scale; 
(iv)	Space for city officials' signatures necessary for approval; and 
(v)	The month, day, and year that the original drawing was completed and the month, day, and year for each revision of the original drawing. 
(b)	A vicinity map, for the purpose of locating the property being developed, drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals two thousand (2,000) feet and showing the relation of the property to surrounding properties, differentiated by tone or pattern, to adjoining property and roads, municipal boundaries, and landmarks existing within two thousand (2,000) feet of any part of the property. 
(3)	Existing site information. 
(a)	The distance and bearing from one (1) corner of the boundary of the development to the nearest intersection of existing streets or roads. 
(b)	Total parcel boundaries of the property being developed, showing bearing and distances, and a statement of total acreage of the property. 
(c)	Existing parcel identification numbers (tax map numbers). 
(d)	Location, ownership, and parcel identification numbers of adjoining properties, including those across rights-of-way. 
(e)	Location, ownership, parcel identification numbers, zoning classifications, and land uses of adjoining properties, including those across rights-of-way. 
(f)	All existing municipal boundaries, property lines, rights-of-way, easements, railroads, water and sewer lines, fire hydrants, utility transmission lines, culverts, bridges, storm drainage infrastructure, water courses, and buildings and other structures. 
(g)	All existing roads, including roads of record but not constructed, and bicycle/pedestrian infrastructure, including sidewalks, on or abutting the tract, labeled with names, right-of-way widths, facility widths, and materials. 
(h)	All trees required to be protected, with species and size at diameter at breast height, including graphic indication as to whether Landmark Trees and Protected Trees are proposed to be preserved or removed. Tree survey and protection standards shall be those found in Chapter 7 of this ordinance. 
(i)	Type and location of ground cover samples, if required, per Chapter 7 of this ordinance. 
(j)	Topography: one- or two-foot contours. 
(k)	Flood hazard areas delineated and labeled by type and flood map panel number. Flood hazard information shall be in accordance with the flood hazard ordinance adopted by Hanahan City Council, as amended. 
(l)	Critical lines of jurisdictional and isolated wetlands in accordance with state and federal standards as well as any buffers expected to be required by state and federal agencies. The city planner should advise the developer during the pre-application conference about meeting such requirements. 
(m)	Endangered species habitat areas, where required by state and federal standards. 
(4)	Proposed site development information. 
(a)	Proposed land uses. 
(b)	Easements, including locations, dimensions, and purposes. 
(c)	Plans for utilities (i.e. - sewerage, potable water, electricity, site lighting, cable, telephone, and gas lines, and stormwater drainage). 
(d)	Exact footprints of all proposed structures, labeled with function, heated and total floor areas, dimensions, and building setbacks from property boundaries or other features, as may be required in this ordinance. 
(e)	Bicycle and pedestrian facilities and widths and materials thereof. 
(f)	Extent of all parking areas with indication of stalls, including handicap-accessible and loading stalls. 
(g)	Extent of impervious surfaces in square feet and as a ratio of the parcel. 
(h)	Any required landscaped areas, vegetative buffers, tree protection areas, and tree planting requirements such as street trees and roadside trees, including labeling of species of plants and groundcover type. 
(i)	Location, type, and elevation drawings of signage. 
(5)	Platting information. The total tract boundary lines of the area being developed shall be in accordance with the most recent edition of the Minimum Standards Manual for the Practice of Land Surveying in South Carolina, as promulgated by the Code of Laws of South Carolina, Title 40, Chapter 21. 
(6)	Supplemental data. Any other information considered pertinent by the applicant, the planning commission, or the city planner to the review of the site development plan shall be submitted with or on the plan 
2.6.4.   Appeals.
    The developer may appeal the decision of the zoning administrator to the board of zoning appeals in accordance with the appeals process specified in Section 2.3.4. 
2.7. - Building permit. 
    The developer in receipt of a zoning permit shall be eligible to apply for a building permit. All standards for review and approval shall be found in the building code adopted by the City of Hanahan, as amended. 
2.7.1.   Applicability and purpose.
(A)	Proposals of construction and reconstruction shall secure a Building Permit from the City of Hanahan where such is required by the building code adopted by the City of Hanahan, as amended, except that public utilities installing and repairing transmission lines, poles, and substations shall be exempt. 
(B)	The purposes of building code administration shall be those found in the building code adopted by the City of Hanahan, as amended. 
2.7.2.   Procedure.
(A)	The developer shall submit a completed application for a building permit to the building official, who shall date and stamp the application "received." 
(B)	If the proposed construction is within the jurisdiction of the Hanahan Design Control Committee, then the building plans shall conform to the design approved by the design control committee. Review and approval by the building official shall not relieve the applicant from meeting the standards for design control, per Section 3 of the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance. 
(C)	The building official will be responsible for transmitting any documents needed to determine compliance with zoning standards to the zoning administrator. 
(D)	The building official and the zoning administrator shall have no more than fifteen (15) days in which to review the completed application and either issue the building permit or submit to the applicant in writing reasons for disapproval. A valid building permit shall include the signatures of the building official and the zoning administrator. 
(E)	The building official and the zoning administrator shall be authorized to inspect the construction project, as needed. The fifteen (15) day time limit may be extended by mutual agreement between the applicant and the building official. 
(F)	The developer shall post an approved building permit on the construction site at a location easily visible and accessible from the adjacent transportation right-of-way until receipt of a certificate of occupancy. 
2.8. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    A developer or other applicant in receipt of a building permit and/or zoning permit shall obtain a certificate of occupancy prior to taking residence or commencing business in the structure for which the permit is received. 
2.8.1.   Purpose.
(A)	All public improvements, including those financially guaranteed, in a major land development shall be completed to the satisfaction of the City of Hanahan prior to application for a certificate of occupancy for any structure within the major land development. In the event of a phased land development, each of these systems shall be completed within the current phase and all previous phases. 
(B)	Application for a certificate of occupancy signals to the building official and the zoning administrator that construction and site improvements specified in applications for a building permit and a zoning permit are complete or, where allowed, are financially guaranteed. 
2.8.2.   Procedure.
(A)	The developer shall submit a completed application for a certificate of occupancy with the required fee to the building official, who shall date and stamp the application "received." 
(B)	Those materials required for certificate of occupancy review and approval shall be those submitted in application for a building permit and a zoning permit, plus any documentation of field changes necessitated during development or construction. 
(1)	If the developer proposes to install landscaping specified for the approved zoning permit after issuance of a certificate of occupancy, then the developer shall financially guarantee those improvements per Section 6.9 of this ordinance upon application for a certificate of occupancy. 
(C)	The building official will be responsible for transmitting any documents needed to determine compliance with zoning standards to the zoning administrator. 
(D)	The building official and the zoning administrator shall have no more than fifteen (15) days in which to review the completed application and either issue the certificate of occupancy or submit to the applicant in writing reasons for disapproval. A valid certificate of occupancy shall include the signatures of the building official and the zoning administrator. The fifteen (15) day time limit may be extended by mutual agreement between the applicant and the building official. 
(E)	The building official and the zoning administrator shall be authorized to inspect the site, as needed. 
2.8.3.   Appeals.
    The developer may appeal the decision of the building official to the board of examiners in accordance with the appeals process specified in the building code, as adopted by the City of Hanahan. The developer may appeal the decision of the zoning administrator to the board of zoning appeals in accordance with the appeals process specified in Section 2.3.4 of the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance. 
2.9. - Enforcement. 
2.9.1.   Limit on re-application.
    Except for requests which are continued with the mutual consent of the applicant and the zoning administrator, an applicant shall not initiate duplicate action for an appeal, variance, special exception, or Zoning Ordinance amendment affecting the same parcel of property or any part thereof more often than once in twelve (12) months. 
2.9.2.   Fees and fines.
    The city council shall establish a schedule of fees, which shall be posted in the office of the zoning administrator and the city planner and may be altered or amended as needed by city council. Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. 
2.9.3.   Violations.
(A)	Applicability. Any violation of the Zoning Ordinance and/or the Land Development Ordinance is unlawful and shall be a misdemeanor per SC Code of Laws § 6-29-950(A). Each day in which the violation occurs or exists shall constitute a separate offense where the zoning administrator determines that the situation places the public in imminent danger or creates an emergency situation. In a situation that does not place the public in imminent danger or create an emergency situation, if, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, no substantial progress is made toward correcting the violation by the end of the seventh calendar day, each day the violation continues thereafter shall be constitute a separate offense. 
(B)	Enforcement tools. The following steps may be taken by the zoning administrator to ensure compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and/or the land Development Ordinance of the City of Hanahan. 
(1)	Permits. The zoning administrator may withhold any or all zoning permits, building permits, other approvals, or certificate of occupancy for any development that does not comply with the provisions of the zoning and land development ordinances. Such approvals will not be granted to the applicant until the development is brought into compliance with these ordinances. Such denial may be appealed to the board of zoning appeals per Section 2.3 of this chapter and shall remain in effect until overturned by the board, if so voted. 
(2)	Stop order. If the zoning administrator finds that any of the provisions of the zoning and land development ordinances are being violated or has received reliable information indicating that a violation of these ordinances is occurring or about to occur, he may issue a stop order, per SC Code of Laws § 6-29-950. A stop order requires that all activities in violation of these ordinances cease. Such action may be appealed to the board of zoning appeals per Section 2.3 and shall remain in effect until overturned by the board, if so voted. The stop order shall cite the activities in violation and the provision of local code being violated. The following steps shall be taken by the zoning administrator to serve a stop order. 
(a)	Posting. The zoning administrator shall post a copy of the stop order at a conspicuous location on the site of the violation (e.g., the front door of the temporary on-site construction office or on the posted permit being violated). 
(b)	Serving. The zoning administrator shall serve the offending party with a copy of the stop order. If available, the construction foreman on-site shall be served. Another copy of the stop order shall be mailed to the address given on the application for permit being violated. The zoning administrator is also encouraged to mail a copy to the property owner. 
(c)	Failure to cease activities for which a stop order is served is unlawful and each day during which such activities persist shall be a separate violation of this ordinance. The zoning administrator shall issue a uniform ordinance summons to the violator. 
(3)	Selection of remedial action. In order to correct a violation of the Zoning Ordinance and/or the Land Development Ordinance or to mitigate the adverse impacts resulting from a violation of this ordinance, the zoning administrator has the discretion to select among the following courses of action, as appropriate under the circumstances. The intent of these steps is to allow the non-compliance to be eliminated or mitigated without necessitating legal action by the city or citizens with standing against the violator. Such decision by the zoning administrator may be appealed to the board of zoning appeals; however, during such appeal process, the developer may not proceed in any manner in violation of these ordinances. 
(a)	Require the developer or owner to take specific actions to bring the construction or activity in question into compliance with the Zoning and Land Development Ordinances. 
(b)	Require the developer or owner to take specific actions that will minimize the extent and impacts of the non-compliance or mitigate the adverse impacts caused by or associated with the violation, so long as undue hardship on adjoining or nearby properties or uses is not created. 
(4)	Uniform ordinance summons. The zoning administrator, upon witnessing a violation of the Zoning Ordinance or the Land Development Ordinance, may issue a Uniform Ordinance Summons, per Hanahan City Code Section 6-4-1 and enabled by South Carolina Code § 56-7-80. The Uniform Ordinance Summons shall cite the activity in violation and the provision of local code being violated. Each violation shall require a separate Uniform Ordinance Summons. The offender cannot appeal the issuance of an ordinance summons to the board of zoning appeals. 
(5)	Affidavit. Any person with knowledge of the facts of a violation of the Zoning Ordinance or Land Development Ordinance may file an affidavit for a uniform ordinance summons for the violator. The zoning administrator shall serve the uniform ordinance summons on the violator, if authorized. 
(6)	Injunction. Per SC Code of Laws § 6-29-950(A), the zoning administrator, other local government officer, a local government attorney, or a neighboring property owner specifically damaged by a Zoning or Land Development Ordinance violation can start an action for injunction in circuit court. Such prohibits property uses contrary to zoning standards and can require the removal of unauthorized structures. 
(7)	Civil enforcement. Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken in law or in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations; to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, to restrain, correct, or abate a violation; and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure, or premises. These remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described above. 
3. - DESIGN CONTROL COMMITTEE 

3.1. - Organization and creation. 
(A)	Pursuant to Title 6, Chapter 29 of the South Carolina Code of Laws, there is hereby created a design control committee, to be composed of five (5) members appointed by the city council. 
(B)	It is the declared policy of the city council that it will consider and approve only those persons who: 
(1)	Are residents of the city and have been so for a period of at least one (1) year prior to the appointment; and 
(2)	Have demonstrated their general knowledge of the community and concern for the welfare of the total community and its citizens. 
(C)	Members shall have a demonstrated interest in, and/or competence and knowledge of, architecture, landscape architecture, and urban design. 
(D)	The membership of the committee shall be composed of five (5) members, three (3) of whom shall have special expertise. Those with special expertise shall be registered or licensed to practice their profession in the State of South Carolina. 
(1)	Architect; 
(2)	Landscape architect or horticulturist; 
(3)	Contractor or engineer; and 
(4)	Two (2) at-large members of the community. 
(5)	The zoning administrator shall serve as an ex-officio, non-voting member. 
(E)	Any vacancy in membership shall be filled by city council. The council shall fill each so designated seat with professionals to the extent practical. In the event that a professional seat remains vacant for at least two (2) consecutive regularly scheduled monthly meetings, the council may appoint a layperson to the professional seat, so as to pre-empt prolonged vacancies on the board. 
3.2. - Duties and powers. 
(A)	It shall be the duty and power of the design control committee to: 
(1)	Protect and promote the appearance, character, and economic value of the built environment within specifically designated districts by the city council; 
(2)	Review, and approve or deny, all applications for proposed new developments to be located within specifically designated corridors by the city council; 
(3)	Review, and approve or deny, all applications for major alterations and/or additions to existing developments to be located within specifically designated corridors by the city council; 
(4)	Review, and approve or deny, architectural and landscape plans proposed for public or private property located within specifically designated corridors by the city council; 
(5)	Review, and approve or deny, architectural and landscape plans proposed by the city or any other public or state agency to construct facilities to be located within specifically designated corridors by the city council; 
(6)	Foster civic beauty; and 
(7)	Strengthen the local economy. 
(B)	The design control committee shall not have jurisdiction over routine maintenance and repair of property that returns the appearance of the property to its original condition. 
3.3. - Design standards and review criteria. 
    The DCC shall review the plans, drawings, sketches, and other documents required in this chapter for compliance with the following standards. These standards are intended to provide a frame of reference for the applicant in the preparation of site and building plans as well as a method of review for the design control committee. These standards shall neither be regarded as inflexible nor intended to discourage creativity, invention, or innovation. 
(A)	Preservation of landscape. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, in so far as practicable, by minimizing tree and soil removal, and any grade changes shall be in keeping within the general appearance of neighboring developed areas. 
(B)	Relation of proposed buildings to environment. Proposed structures shall be related harmoniously to the terrain and to existing buildings in the vicinity that have a visual relationship with the proposed buildings. 
(C)	Drives, parking and circulation. With respect to vehicular and pedestrian circulation, including walkways, interior drives, and parking, special attention shall be given to location and number of access points, general interior circulation, separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and arrangement and placement of parking areas that are safe and convenient and do not dominate or detract from the design of proposed buildings and structures and neighboring properties. 
(D)	Utility service. Whenever feasible, onsite electric, telephone and other utility lines shall be located underground; otherwise, lines shall be screened to the extent practical. 
(E)	Special features. Outdoor storage areas, expanse of parking, exposed machinery installations, service areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings and structures, and similar accessory areas and structures shall be subject to such setbacks, vegetative buffering, or other screening methods so as to prevent incongruity with the existing or contemplated environment and surrounding properties. 
(F)	Maintenance of consistent policy. 
(1)	Retention of materials submitted to the DCC. In order to provide guidance and insight into desirable design objectives and for the maintenance of consistent policies in guiding the building public toward better standards of design, the DCC shall have maintained a file containing records of all application brought before the DCC for review, the actions taken by the DCC, drawings submitted and amendments of drawings approved pertaining thereto, and drawings and photographs or reproductions thereof showing structures in the city character which, in its opinion, may serve as general guides to appropriateness or as expression of objectives to a prospective developer or property owner. Such documents shall remain the property of the city and be held in the custody of the zoning administrator. 
(2)	Files. The zoning administrator shall seek to maintain files in an orderly manner that will facilitate access by members of the general public seeking guidance and insight into the desirable goals and objectives of the committee under this subchapter. The design control committee should collect for its permanent files copies of guidelines or design criteria developed in other communities and should seek to share copies of its guidelines or design criteria with other communities. 
3.4. - Conceptual design review. 
    A conceptual review shall be strongly encouraged by the zoning administrator, but not required, to discuss conceptual drawings prior to preparing hard-line drawings. The purpose of this review shall be to acquaint the developer with standards and appropriateness of design applicable to the proposed development. 
(A)	Consultation with zoning administrator. 
(1)	The zoning administrator shall seek to work with prospective applicants to ensure a productive and informative process toward the accomplishment of mutual goals. 
(2)	The zoning administrator may advise the applicant to review files on similar applications for information contained therein. 
(B)	Submission of documents. Six (6) copies of documentation, preferably eleven (11) inches by seventeen (17) inches in size, shall be submitted. 
(1)	Schematic site plan, illustrating: 
(a)	Proposed footprint(s) of building(s); 
(b)	Parcel boundaries; 
(c)	Proposed access and exterior circulation; and 
(d)	Approximate basic dimensions 
(2)	Basic, sketch elevation(s) of the proposed buildings(s). 
(3)	Conceptual drawings will normally be reviewed at the next scheduled meeting after submission provided that submission to the zoning administrator occurs at least five (5) working days prior to the scheduled meeting date. 
(C)	Action by DCC. The DCC shall review the conceptual design for achievement of general design guidelines for the City of Hanahan, Section 3.3, and guidelines specific to the zoning district in which the project is proposed. The DCC may approve, disapprove, or conditionally approve the conceptual design. The DCC may request additional information, in which case, the DCC may defer conceptual design discussion to its next meeting. 
3.5. - Post-conceptual/pre-application review; conference with zoning administrator. 
(A)	Prior to preliminary design review, the zoning administrator shall seek to work with the prospective applicant to ensure that proposed projects would likely achieve approval. Toward this end, the developer shall schedule a conference with the zoning administrator prior to or upon formal application to the DCC for preliminary design review. 
(B)	No indication by the zoning administrator that an application is likely to be approved shall be binding, but each application to be heard by the DCC shall be accompanied by a recommendation from the zoning administrator regarding the project's conformity with any conceptual review and compatibility with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is proposed. 
(C)	At such a meeting, the zoning administrator will review the application and all submitted materials with the applicant to ensure that all information required by the DCC at conceptual review is included at time of submission for preliminary review. The zoning administrator will also explain the scheduling of subsequent submissions and the requirements for each. 
3.6. - Preliminary design review. 
    The developer seeking a zoning permit for a project subject to design review shall apply for preliminary design review and approval from the design control committee. 
(A)	Review by DCC. The developer shall apply to the design control committee for preliminary design review at the office of the zoning administrator at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the next scheduled DCC meeting. Incomplete applications shall not be scheduled for review. 
(B)	Application requirements. The applicant shall submit a completed application for preliminary design review, together with the fee set by city council, and required documentation to the zoning administrator. Submitted materials shall reflect design development of any conceptual plans approved by the design control committee. Documentation requirements are as follows. 
(C)	Submission of documents. Six (6) copies of all documentation shall be submitted to the zoning administrator meeting the following requirements. 
(1)	A site plan drawn at a minimum scale of 1/32 -inch = one (1) foot shall show the existing and proposed structure(s) on the lot with the dimensions relative to the property line; existing neighboring building(s) adjacent to the property line; exterior pedestrian and vehicular circulation, including driveways, parking areas, sidewalks, boardwalks, porticos, patios, galleries, and other open-air spaces and routes accessible or integral to exterior circulation; location of circulation lighting fixtures; tree survey, depicting all protected trees on the site, indicated for protection or removal; graded and landscaped areas, including structural elements integral to engineering or designing, such as walls and gates; location, size, and type of signage and inhabitable accessory buildings. 
(2)	Building elevations shall be drawn at a minimum scale of 1/16 -inch = one (1) foot; showing the following vertical dimensions: (a) existing grade, (b) proposed grade, (c) finish floor elevations, and (d) building height; and roof slopes; fenestration, entrances, and other voids in the building envelope; indication of cladding materials; and exterior protrusions and spaces, including but not limited to, stoops, stairs, cupolas, awnings and canopies, porches and balconies, railings, and chimneys. 
(3)	One (1) or more panoramic photographs shall include a general view of the street showing the building, site and adjacent property (streetscape), and shall supplement individual photographs of the buildings immediately adjacent to and across from the site; and a frontal view of the buildings site from the street. 
(4)	Contextual model showing new building in existing environment may be required by the DCC for complex projects. 
(D)	The zoning administrator or the DCC may require documentation supplementary to or at a larger scale than that required, or in the event of an unusually large site, the zoning administrator may approve documentation at a smaller scale, provided areas of importance are illustrated at the scale specified in this section. 
(E)	Action by DCC. The design control committee shall review the preliminary design for achievement of general design guidelines for the City of Hanahan, Section 3.3, and guidelines specific to the zoning district in which the project is proposed. The DCC may approve, disapprove, or conditionally approve the preliminary design. The DCC may request additional information, in which case, the DCC may table preliminary design review and continue discussion at its next meeting. If the DCC fails to take final action upon any case within forty-five (45) days of the submittal of a completed application for preliminary design review to the zoning administrator, then the application shall be deemed to be approved, and the zoning administrator shall issue a certificate of appropriateness to the developer, except where mutual agreement has been made for an extension of time limit. 
(F)	Action by the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall submit to the developer a written report of the design control committee's decision, with any attached conditions of approval or reasons for disapproval, within ten (10) days of the decision. 
3.7. - Final design review. 
    After approval of preliminary design, the developer shall apply for final design review and approval from the DCC. Such approval is required prior to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness, which shall be requisite for receipt of a zoning permit. 
(A)	Review by DCC. The developer shall apply to the design control committee for preliminary design review at the office of the zoning administrator at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the next scheduled DCC meeting. Incomplete applications shall not be scheduled for review. 
(B)	Application requirements. The applicant shall submit a completed application for final review, together with the fee set by city council and published by the zoning administrator for such review, and required documentation to the zoning administrator. Documentation requirements are those specified below. Submitted materials shall, at a minimum, show elements required for preliminary approval, in addition to all elements listed in the requirements below, and reflect refinement of design of the preliminary plans approved by the DCC. Incomplete submittals will be considered for partial and/or informative feedback from the DCC. 
(C)	Application requirements. The applicant shall submit a completed application for final design review, together with the fee set by city council, and required documentation to the zoning administrator. Submitted materials shall reflect refinement of the preliminary design approved by the design control committee. Documentation requirements are as follows. 
(D)	Submission of documents. Six (6) copies of all documentation shall be submitted to the zoning administrator meeting the following requirements. 
(1)	A site plan drawn at a minimum scale of one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet, shall show the proposed structure(s) on the lot with the dimensions relative to the property line; existing neighboring building(s) adjacent to the property line; demolition of existing site features; and location of all proposed site features such as parking, driveways, walls, gates, location and size of mechanical equipment, landscaped areas, and accessory buildings. 
(2)	Floor plans drawn at a minimum scale of 1/8 inch equals one (1) foot depicting the arrangement of the interior spaces of the first floor plan shall show the relationship between the first or ground floor with the site as well as the location of windows and doors, mechanical equipment, electrical meter location, and electrical service access. 
(3)	Building elevations and typical building cross section through all elevations drawn at a minimum scale of 1/8 inch equals one (1) foot, shall include vertical dimensions; existing grade; proposed grade; finish floor elevations; roof slopes; mechanical vents and equipment; location and type of outdoor lighting fixtures; design and location of signage; and proposed material selections and textures, indicated by hatching where appropriate, including those for wall cladding, roofs, chimney flues, gutters and downspouts, and porches and railings. 
(4)	A landscape plan drawn to a minimum scale of one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet shall show the location of existing trees to be retained or removed on the site; the locations, varieties, and sizes of trees and plant materials (graphically indicated) to be planted on the site; and other pertinent landscape requirements per Section 6; and indication of the type of irrigation system to be installed, where applicable. 
(5)	Typical construction details and typical wall section shall be provided. 
(6)	Materials specification outline with samples, brochures, and/or photographs of all exterior materials, colors, finishes, and fixtures shall be provided. 
(7)	Drawings of proposed signs illustrating the proposed lettering and graphics, drawn to scale, colors of the proposed sign shall be indicated on the drawing, and actual color samples shall also be furnished. Any proposed illumination techniques shall be indicated on the drawing. 
(8)	One (1) or more panoramic photographs shall include a general view of the street showing the building, site and adjacent property (streetscape), and shall supplement individual photographs of the buildings immediately adjacent to and across from the site; and a frontal view of the buildings site from the street. 
(9)	A contextual model showing new building in existing environment may be required by the DCC for complex projects. 
(E)	Action by DCC. The design control committee shall review the final design for achievement of general design guidelines for the City of Hanahan, Section 3.3, and guidelines specific to the zoning district in which the project is proposed. The DCC may approve, disapprove, or conditionally approve the final design. The DCC may request additional information, in which case, the DCC may table final design review and continue discussion at its next meeting. If the DCC fails to take final action upon any case within forty-five (45) days of the submittal of complete documentation for final design review to the zoning administrator, then the final design shall be deemed to be approved, and the zoning administrator shall issue a certificate of appropriateness to the developer, except where mutual agreement has been made for an extension of time limit. 
(F)	Action by the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall submit to the developer a written report of the design control committee's decision, with any attached conditions of approval or reasons for disapproval, within ten (10) days of the decision. 
3.8. - Certificate of appropriateness; seeking a zoning permit. 
(A)	A certificate of appropriateness shall indicate that the developer's design for a proposed project meets or exceeds the general design guidelines for the City of Hanahan, Section 3.3, and guidelines specific to the zoning district in which the project is proposed. The certificate shall be required for receipt of a zoning permit for any project subject to design review. 
(B)	Upon approval of the design proposal, the design control committee shall ensure preparation of a report, which may be prepared by the DCC chairperson or the zoning administrator, stating the basis upon which such approval was made and cause a certificate of appropriateness to be issued to the developer. 
(1)	If the design control committee approved the final design with no conditions, a certificate of appropriateness shall accompany the written report to the developer regarding the DCC decision. 
(2)	In the event of conditions for approval of final design review, the developer shall submit documents revised to reflect the required conditions to the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall have ten (10) days from receipt of revised documents to submit to the developer a certificate of appropriateness, provided the revised documents adequately illustrate compliance with the conditions for approval. 
(C)	Application for zoning permit. The developer may apply for a zoning permit before or after final design review. 
(1)	The developer may apply for a zoning permit upon receipt of a report from the zoning administrator indicating final design approval or conditional approval. Revised documents illustrating compliance with conditions of approval shall be submitted as part of a completed application for a zoning permit. 
(2)	Accelerated permitting. The developer may apply for a zoning permit after receiving preliminary design approval or conditional approval; however, the application shall not be considered completed until the final design receives approval from the design control committee and any conditions for approval have been met, as illustrated by revised documents. The site development plan submitted for a zoning permit shall be revised as needed to reflect compliance with any conditions for final approval. Only at this point will the zoning administrator stamp the application for zoning permit "received." 
(D)	When a certificate of appropriateness has been issued, a copy will be transmitted to the building official, who should from time to time inspect the alteration or construction approved by such certificate and make a report of such inspection(s) to the design control committee listing all work inspected and reporting any work not in accordance with such certificate. 
3.9. - Minor projects; accelerated design review. 
In	the case of very minor projects involving alterations resulting from maintenance, repair, or updating of existing property to meet current building codes, as adopted by the City of Hanahan, the design control committee may grant both preliminary and final approval at the same review session if the drawings and other data submitted for preliminary review are sufficiently clear and explicit. 
(A)	Application and documentation requirements. The developer (who may be the landowner, business owner, or agent thereof properly empowered) shall indicate to the zoning administrator that he seeks accelerated review upon application for preliminary design review. The procedures shall be identical except as specified herein. 
(1)	The developer shall submit illustrative documentation of proposed alterations necessary to convey essential information. The zoning administrator shall be authorized to adjust required preliminary design documentation according to the scope of the proposed project. 
(2)	The developer shall be eligible for a reduced fee set by Hanahan City Council for accelerated design review. 
(B)	Action by DCC. The design control committee shall review the preliminary design for achievement of general design guidelines for the City of Hanahan, Section 3.3, and guidelines specific to the zoning district in which the project is proposed. The DCC shall determine whether the proposed design is eligible for accelerated review. 
(1)	If the design control committee finds that the project is not eligible for accelerated review, then it shall approve, disapprove, or conditionally approve the design proposal as preliminary. Alternatively, the DCC may request additional information, in which case the DCC may table preliminary design review and continue discussion at its next meeting. 
(2)	If the design control committee finds that the project is eligible for accelerated review, then it may approve, disapprove, or conditionally approve the proposed design as final and instruct the zoning administrator to proceed with issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Alternatively, the DCC may request additional information, in which case the DCC may table design review and continue discussion at its next meeting. 
(C)	Action by the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall submit to the developer a written report of the design control committee's findings, with any attached conditions of approval or reasons for disapproval, within ten (10) days of the decision. If the DCC found the project ineligible for accelerated review, then the zoning administrator shall indicate this in the report, which shall instruct the developer to seek final design approval and pay to the city the difference between the accelerated design review fee and the preliminary design review fee upon submittal of documentation for final design approval. 
3.10. - Consideration of project design; partial approval. 
(A)	The approval of an application for the use, development, or subdivision of land by the zoning administrator, planning commission, or board of zoning appeals shall not deprive the design control committee the power granted to it in this chapter or in any manner diminish such powers. 
(B)	At the conclusion of each review, the design control committee shall move to approve, conditionally approve, disapprove, or defer decision on the project in question. 
(1)	In case of conditional approval or disapproval, the DCC Chairperson or the zoning administrator shall state the reasons therefor in a written statement within ten (10) days of the action to the developer. The notification may include a summary of recommendations in regard to appropriateness of design, arrangement, texture, material, color and the like or the property involved, as expressed at the review. 
(2)	Among other grounds for conditionally approving or disapproving a design are the following considerations: 
(a)	Arresting and spectacular effects; appearance; 
(b)	Violent contrasts of materials or colors and intense or lurid colors; 
(c)	A multiplicity or incongruity of details resulting in a restless and disturbing appearance; 
(d)	The absence of unity and coherence in composition not in consonance with the dignity and character of the present structure in case of repair, alteration, or expansion; 
(e)	Remodeling or enlargement of an existing building or with the prevailing character of the surrounds in the case of a new building; 
(f)	Overbearing massing; and/or 
(g)	Excessive repetition of design elements, treatments, or module. 
(C)	Partial approval. The design control committee may opt to approve or conditionally approve one (1) or more portions of a project submitted for review. The effect may be to allow the developer to progress with that portion of the project to the next phase of design review or to allow that portion of the project to gain a certificate of appropriateness and authorize the developer to seek zoning or land development approval. 
3.11. - Appeals. 
(A)	Appeal to design control committee. The developer or any person aggrieved by a decision of the zoning administrator regarding the application of design standards in a zoning district over which the design control district has jurisdiction may appeal the decision to the DCC. The appeal must be filed within thirty (30) days of written notice of the decision. 
(B)	Application to the City of Hanahan. The applicant appealing to the design control committee shall undertake the following procedure. 
(a)	A completed application, together with the application fee for appeal to the design control committee, shall be filed with the zoning administrator at least twenty-five (25) days prior to the DCC meeting at which the request will be considered. 
(b)	Required information. The applicant shall set forth a detailed description of the request on an application form provided by the zoning administrator. The completed application shall include the following information: 
(i)	A legal description and street address of the subject property, together with a property boundary map if subject property is not explicitly delineated on the zoning map; 
(ii)	Six (6) copies of the site development plan or building plans submitted as part of a zoning permit application reviewed and disapproved by the zoning administrator, where applicable, for the property for which relief is sought, as well as any documentation specified for design review necessary to illustrate conditions pertinent to the appeal. 
(iii)	Name, address, and phone number of applicant; 
(iv)	Name of property owner(s) and applicant's interest in the property if not the owner in fee simple title; 
(v)	Filing date of application; 
(vi)	Any other information deemed relevant by the zoning administrator; and 
(vii)	Applicant and property owner's signature(s). 
(C)	Stay of proceedings. Filing an appeal to the design control committee stays all legal proceedings to enforce the appealed action unless the appealed officer certifies that a stay would cause imminent peril to life and property. In such cases, a court restraining order may stay the action. 
(D)	Hearings. The design control committee shall hold a public hearing within sixty (60) days of receiving written application for appeal, giving public notice thereof at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing by placing notice in a general circulation newspaper in the community. 
(E)	Posting property. City staff must post conspicuous notices on or next to the affected property at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. At least one (1) notice must be visible from each street that borders the property. 
(F)	Record keeping. The design control committee shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examination and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the zoning administrator and shall be public record. On all appeals, applications, and other matters brought before the board, it shall inform in writing all the parties involved of its decision(s) and the reason(s) heretofore. 
(G)	Decisions of the design control committee. The concurring majority vote of present members of the DCC shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the zoning administrator or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to consider under this ordinance. The DCC decision shall be based upon for comparison of the completed application to general design guidelines for the City of Hanahan, Section 3.3, and guidelines specific to the zoning district in which the project is proposed. 
(H)	Order on decision. The design control committee shall, upon decision of approval or denial, submit to the applicant its decision in writing within thirty (30) days and shall notify the zoning administrator of such decision. If the DCC finds in favor of the developer, the zoning administrator shall process the application for a certificate of appropriateness for the reviewed property. 
(I)	Appeals of decisions of the design control committee. Any person who may have a substantial interest in any decision of the DCC may appeal that decision to circuit court, filing with the clerk of such court a petition in writing setting forth plainly, fully, and distinctly wherein such decision is contrary to law. Such appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the rendering of the decision of the DCC. 
4. - LAND USE 

4.1. - Intent. 
    This chapter of the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance seeks to implement the future land use element of the Hanahan Comprehensive Plan, as amended. The plan provides for several zones to accommodate varying land uses best suited to the existing natural and built environments and available levels of infrastructure and services. These zones are then mapped as districts within Hanahan, as depicted on the zoning map. The zoning districts that appear on the map are described herein. 
4.1.1.   Conventional zones.
(A)	Conservation/Preservation (CP). This zone intends to preserve and protect land, marsh, and waters of Hanahan that (1) serve as wildlife refuges, (2) possess great natural or historical significance, (3) serve recreational purposes, and (4) provide needed green space for the health and general welfare of the city's inhabitants. The zone further intends to prevent encroachment of land uses that would adversely impact areas of these four (4) types. 
(B)	Single-Family Residential-Low-density (RSL). This zone intends to foster, preserve, and protect existing low-density neighborhoods in which the principal uses of land are detached, single-family dwellings and related accessory and support facilities, so as to protect established communities from overdevelopment. The zone should be mapped to encompass those areas of Hanahan that constitute suburban, bedroom communities within the city. 
(C)	Single-Family Residential (RS). This zone intends to foster, preserve, and promote neighborhoods in which the principal uses of land are detached, single-family dwellings and related accessory and support facilities. The zone also provides opportunities for diverse housing choices in planned developments, which shall be held to high standards necessary for compatibility with the surrounding community. The zone should be mapped to encompass those areas of Hanahan that constitute suburban, bedroom communities within the city as well as existing traditional neighborhoods. 
(D)	Single-Family Residential-Moderate-density (RSM). This zone intends to foster, preserve, and promote neighborhoods in which the principal uses of land are detached, single-family dwellings and related accessory and support facilities. The zone also provides opportunities for diverse housing choices in planned developments, which shall be held to high standards necessary for compatibility with the surrounding community. This zone should be mapped on a limited basis and is best suited as a transitional area between RS or RSL zoning districts and higher intensity zoning districts, such as CG (General Commercial). 
(E)	Multi-Family Residential (RM). This zone intends to accommodate existing medium- to high-density residential development and a variety of housing types on small lots or in planned developments. 
(F)	Residential Mobile Home (RT). This zone intends to accommodate manufactured housing development in concert with site-built single-family homes and duplexes in planned developments and cooperative communities. 
(G)	Residential/Office (RO). This zone intends to accommodate office, institutional, and residential uses in areas along collector or arterial roads that will not sustain more intense uses or to transition between more intense zoning districts and residential areas. 
(H)	General Commercial (CG). This zone intends to foster and advance opportunities for economic development, employment, and sales of goods and services in Hanahan in locations with good access to infrastructure on arterial roads or commercial parks where impacts to lower-intensity uses can be successfully mitigated. 
(I)	Industrial (ID). This zone intends to accommodate wholesaling, distribution, storage, processing, and manufacturing in locations with good access to infrastructure on arterial roads or industrial parks where impacts to lower-intensity uses are unlikely. 
4.1.2.   Redevelopment zones.
(A)	Town Residential (TR). This zone intends to provide housing in attached and detached units in a highly interconnected, pedestrian-scale environment near shops, schools, recreation, emergency services, and other public and private services typically provided in a full service community. This district is to provide opportunities for development and redevelopment that contributes to neighborhood and town atmospheres without unduly burdening public infrastructure. To further this intent, very light commerce may also occur in or adjacent to housing units to provide additional services to residents and guests of the Town Residential District. 
(B)	Town Center (TC). This zone intends to promote and protect the economic growth and vitality of the Yeamans Hall Road commercial corridor by encouraging the convenient and coordinated land use and development between the Hanahan Municipal Complex and Remount Road, a major gateway to the city. It is the intent that regulations for land use and development within this district will: 
(1)	Enhance the viability of local businesses by coordinating land uses and site planning in a harmonious, interconnected environment that reduces the need for vehicular transportation to and between establishments; 
(2)	Provide opportunities for medium-density residential development that houses a market for commercial uses in the traditional center of Hanahan and carefully balances the impacts of commerce with the needs of residents-especially those in existing houses-in the district by mitigating negative externalities on site; 
(3)	Create a sense of place in Hanahan cultivated by high-quality outdoor public spaces by using buildings to form an appealing, safe environment that functions for pedestrians, cyclists and motorists; and 
(4)	Build over time a mixed-use built environment that uses land efficiently and generates significant positive revenue for the City of Hanahan. 
4.1.3.   Overlay and Floating Zones.
(A)	Planned developments. 
(1)	Type "A" PD-Conservation Development. The purpose of this tool is to encourage creative and flexible site design that is sensitive to the land's natural features and adapts to the natural topography; protect environmentally sensitive areas of a development site and preserve on a permanent basis green space, natural features, and prime agricultural lands; decrease or minimize non-point-source pollution impacts by reducing the amount of impervious surfaces in site development; promote cost savings in infrastructure installation by reducing the size, length and impact on infrastructure; provide opportunities for social interaction in park space and pedestrian-friendly areas; and promote higher aesthetic standards in land development similar in use and intensity to the standards of the existing zoning district. The planning commission shall have the authority to modify zoning and land development standards as specified in Section 4.6 to further the intent. 
(2)	Type "B" PD-Planned Development District. The purpose of the Planned Development District tool in the City of Hanahan is to encourage variety and flexibility in the use and development of land in order to promote its most appropriate use; to improve design, character and quality of new development; to facilitate the provision of streets and utilities; to preserve natural and scenic features in open space; to allow the developer to meet changes in technology and demand; to provide a maximum choice in types of housing, shopping, and community environment; and to promote higher aesthetic standards for land development in the City of Hanahan. The developer shall own the responsibility to propose alternate zoning and land development standards that further these objectives and, furthermore, to illustrate the envisioned land development that necessitates alternate standards as an official master plan for review by the planning commission and approval of the city council. The proposed text and master plan shall identify all community facilities necessitated by the development to meet the intent of the Hanahan Zoning and Land Development ordinances, including but not limited to roads and parking, parks and open space, natural and cultural resources, and education and public safety facility sites. 
(B)	Naval Weapons Station compatibility. This zone intends to ensure that the development of land adjacent to the U.S. Naval Weapons Station (NWS) coexists with its military neighbor, an important employer in the Hanahan area as well as a vital component of national defense. The base commander shall be notified and have the opportunity to comment on rezoning and major land development in this federal military installation overlay zone in accordance with Title 6, Chapter 29, Article 13 of South Carolina Code. 
(C)	Design control. The planning commission may recommend and the city council may approve overlay districts within the City of Hanahan in which the developer must propose buildings and land developments to the design control committee for review and approval. A design control overlay district does not modify the zoning standards of the underlying zoning district; rather, it requires the proposal to meet objectives specified by the text of that specific overlay district through qualitative review of the functionality and aesthetic quality of the building or land development design. At a minimum, the proposal shall be reviewed with the considerations specified in Section 3.9 of this ordinance. 
4.2. - Official zoning map. 
(A)	Designation of zoning districts. All land within the corporate limits of the City of Hanahan is hereby divided into districts as described herein and as depicted on the accompanying document, the City of Hanahan Official Zoning Map. The Zoning Map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared part of this ordinance. 
(B)	Zoning map to be made official. The zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the zoning administrator, and shall bear the words, "Official Zoning Map, City of Hanahan, SC," together with the most recent date of amendment. The zoning map shall be located in the city hall and be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land, water areas, and buildings and other structures in the City of Hanahan. No changes of any nature shall be made on the official zoning map except in conformity with the procedures set forth in Section 2.4 of this ordinance. Any unauthorized change shall be considered a violation of this ordinance and shall be punishable as provided by law. 
(C)	Interpretation of district boundaries. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zoning districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)	Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, railroads, utility easements, and alleys shall be construed as following such centerlines; 
(2)	Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines and town limits of incorporation shall be construed as following such lines; and 
(3)	Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(D)	Change of city boundaries. All territory hereafter annexed to the City of Hanahan shall be zoned conservation/preservation unless the petitioner for annexation and the Hanahan City Council agree that another zone may apply upon annexation by ordinance and that such alternative proposed zoning is in compliance with the Hanahan Comprehensive Plan. The process for zoning amendment, Section 2.4, shall apply. 
(E)	City of Hanahan Official Map. The zoning map may be a component of an Official Map, provided for in South Carolina Code § 6-29-340-B-2-c, which the Hanahan Planning Commission may prepare for adoption by city council to illustrate locations of existing and future community facilities. 
4.3. - Land use table. 
    The table beginning on the following page indicates land uses allowed by district. Uses and their function codes (as designated by the American Planning Association) are listed in the two (2) left columns. All unlisted uses that do not fall under a broader category are prohibited. Hanahan zones appear at the table head. One (1) of the following symbols corresponds with each listed use and zone. 
(A)	"-" indicates that the corresponding use is not allowed in the zone. 
(B)	"P" (permitted) indicates that the corresponding use is allowed as the primary use by right in the zone. Only one (1) primary use shall be allowed per tax map number. 
(C)	"C" (conditional) indicates that the corresponding use is allowed with conditions in the zone that are unique to the use. Those conditions are specified in the standards of the zone. 
(D)	"A" (accessory) indicates that the corresponding use may occur only in conjunction with a primary use on a parcel. 
(E)	"SE" indicates that the corresponding use may be allowed by special exception in the zone. The applicant proposing the use must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City of Hanahan Board of Zoning Appeals that, in developing the use, potential negative impacts of the use will be mitigated. 
Land Uses Allowed by Zone 
Land 

Use 

Code Uses CP RSL RS RSM RM RT RO CG ID TR TC 1000 Residence or Accommodation Functions  1110 Single-family detached residence - P P P P P P P - P P   1111 Row house - - C C C C - - - P P   1112 Patio house - - C C C C - - - - -  1120 Duplex - - - - P P - - - P P  1130 Accessory dwelling unit - - - - - - - - - A A  1140 Townhouse - - C C C C - - - P P  1150 Manufactured home - - - - - C - - - - -  1160 Multi-family residence - - - - P - - - - - P  1170 Manufactured housing community - - - - - C - - - - - 1200 Housing services for the elderly - - - - P P P P - P P 1300 Hotels, motels, or other accommodations services - - - - - - - P - - P  1310 Bed and breakfast inn - - - - - - P P - P P  1320 Rooming and boarding - - - - P - P - - P P 2000 General Sales, Services, Rental, & Leasing  2110 Automobile sales or service establishment - - - - - - - P P - -   2116 Gasoline service - - - - - - - P P - P   2119 Self-service car wash - - - - - - - C C - -   2121 Furniture or home furnishings - - - - - - - P - - P   2122 Hardware, home centers, etc. - - - - - - - P - - P   2123 Lawn and garden supplies - - - - - - - P - - -   2124 Department store, warehouse club or superstore - - - - - - - P - - -   2125 Electronics and appliances - - - - - - - P - - P   2126 Lumber yard and building supplies - - - - - - - P P - -   2127 Heating and plumbing equipment - - - - - - - P P - -  2130 Durable consumer goods sales or service - - - - - - - P - - P  2140 Consumer goods, other - - - - - - - P - P P   2145 Flea market - - - - - - - P P P P   2149 Fireworks - - - - - - - - - - -  2150 Grocery, food, beverage, dairy, etc., retail sales or service - - - - - - - P - - P  2160 Health and personal care - - - - - - - P - P P  2210 Bank, credit union, or savings institution - - - - - - - P - - P  2220 Credit and finance establishment - - - - - - P P - - P  2230 Investment banking, securities, and brokerages - - - - - - P P - - P  2240 Insurance-related establishment - - - - - - P P - P P  2250 Fund, trust, or other financial establishment - - - - - - P P - P P  2310 Real estate services - - - - - - P P - P P  2320 Property management services - - - - - - P P - P P   23219 Mini-warehouses - - - - - - C C - - -  2330 Rental and leasing - - - - - - - P - - -   2335 Consumer goods rental - - - - - - - P - - P   2336 Intellectual property rental (video, music, software, etc.) - - - - - - - P - P P  2410 Professional services - - - - - - P P P - P   2418 Veterinary services - - - - - - - C C - C   2420 Administrative offices - - - - - - P P P - P   2453 Landscaping services - - - - - - - P P - - 2500 Food services - - - - A A A P P A P  2540 Tavern - - - - - - - P P - P  2560 Caterer - - - - - - - P P P P 2600 Personal services - - - - - - - P - P P   2689 Tattoo parlors - - - - - - - SE - - -   2696 Cleaning and dyeing plants - - - - - - - - P - -   2697 Rug and upholstery cleaning - - - - - - - - P - -   2698 Cooperative hospital laundries, linen supply services - - - - - - - - P - -   2699 Industrial launderers - - - - - - - - P - - 2700 Pet and animal sales or service (except veterinary) - - - - - - - P - - P   2999 Adult businesses - - - - - - - SE - - - 3000 Manufacturing & Wholesale Trade 3100 Manufacturing-Food, textiles, and related products - - - - - - - - C - - 3200 Manufacturing-Wood, paper, and printing products - - - - - - - - C - -  3320 Manufacturing-Chemicals, plastics, and rubber products - - - - - - - - C - -  3330 Manufacturing-Non-metallic mineral products - - - - - - - - C - -  3350 Machinery manufacturing - - - - - - - - C - -  3360 Electrical equipment, appliance, and component manufacturing - - - - - - - - C - C  3370 Manufacturing-Transportation equipment, automobiles, etc. - - - - - - - - C - - 3400 Manufacturing-Jewelry and silverware; dolls, toys, games, and musical instruments; office supplies, inks, etc.; and signs - - - - - - - - C - - 3500 Wholesale trade - - - - - - - - P - - 3600 Warehouse and storage services - - - - - - - - P - - 4000 Transportation, Communication, Information, & Utilities 4100 Transportation services - - - - - - - P P - -  4170 Postal services - - - - - - - P P - P 4200 Communications and information - - - - - - - P P - -  4210 Publishing - - - - - - - P P - P  4220 Motion pictures and sound recording - - - - - - - P P - P   4222 Movie theater - - - - - - - P - - P  4230 Telecommunications and broadcasting - - - - - - - P P - -   42339 Wireless communications tower C/SE - - - - - C/SE C/SE C/SE - C/SE  4240 Information services and data processing industries - - - - - - - P P - P   4242 Libraries and archives - - - - - - P P - - P 4300 Utilities and utility services - - - - - - - - - - -  4310 Electric power - - - - - - - - P - -  4320 Natural gas, petroleum, fuels, etc. - - - - - - - - P - -   4331 Drinking water P - - - - - - - P - -   4332 Irrigation and industrial water supply P - - - - - - - P - -   4333 Air conditioning and steam supply - - - - - - - P P - -   4343 Solid waste collection - - - - - - - - P - -   4347 Septic tank and related services - - - - - - - - P - -   4399 Utilities substation C C C C C C C C C C C 5000 Arts, Entertainment, & Recreation 5100 Performing arts or supporting establishment - - - - - - - P - - P  5140 Promoter of performing arts, sports, and similar events - - - - - - P P - P P  5150 Agent for management services - - - - - - P P - P P  5160 Independent artist, writer, or performer - - - - - - P P - P P 5200 Museums or other special purpose recreational institutions - - - - - - - P - P P 5300 Amusement, sports, or recreation establishments - - - - - - - P - - P   5375 Swimming pool - P P P P P P P - P P   5376 Tennis club facilities - P P P P P P P - P P   5377 Community clubhouse - P P P P P P P - P P   5378 Golf and country clubs - P P P - - - - - - -   5379 Shooting ranges and skeet shooting facilities - - - - - - - - - - - 5400 Camps, camping, and related establishments P - - - - - - - - - - 5500 Natural and other recreational parks P P P P P P P P P P P 6000 Education, Public Administration, Health Care, & Other Institutions 6100 Educational services - P P P P P P - - P P  6130 Colleges and universities - - - - - - P P - - P  6140 Technical, trade, and specialty schools - - - - - - P P - - P 6200 Public administration - - - - - - P P - - P   6222 Correctional institutions - - - - - - - P P - P 6300 Other government functions - - - - - - P P - - P  6310 Military and national security - - - - - - - P P - - 6400 Public safety - P P P P P P P P P P  6510 Ambulatory or outpatient care services - - - - - - P P - P P   6513 Medical and diagnostic laboratories - - - - - - - P P - P   6514 Blood and organ banks - - - - - - - P P - -  6520 Nursing, supervision, and other rehabilitative services - - - - P P P P - P P  6530 Hospital - - - - - - P P - - -  6560 Social assistance, welfare, and charitable services - - - - - - - P - P P   6562 Child day care - - - - P P P P - P P   6566 Services for elderly and disabled - - - - - - P P - P P 6600 Religious institution - P P P P P P P - P P 6700 Death care services - - - - - - P P P - P  6720 Cremation services - - - - - - - - P - - 6800 Associations, non-profit organizations, etc. - - - - - - P P - P P 7000 Construction-Related Business 7100 Building, developing, and general contractor - - - - - - - P P - - 7200 Machinery related - - - - - - - - P - - 7300 Special trade contractor - - - - - - - P P - P 7400 Heavy construction - - - - - - - - P - - 8000 Mining and Extraction Establishments 9000 Agriculture 9100 Crop production P - - - - - - P P - - 9200 Support functions for agriculture - - - - - - - P - - - 9300 Animal production including slaughter - - - - - - - - - - - 9400 Forestry and logging P - - - - - - - - - - 9500 Fishing, hunting and trapping, game preserves P - - - - - - - - - -  
(Ord. No. 3-2010, § 1, 5-11-2010; Ord. No. 5-2013, § 1, 4-9-2013; Ord. No. 2-2016, § 1, 4-12-2016) 
4.4. - Accessory uses and structures. 
4.4.1.   In general.
(A)	Accessory uses. Uses customary and incidental to the function of the primary use-that for which a zoning permit is sought or in hand-are allowed by right, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(B)	Accessory structures. One (1) or more structures accommodating accessory uses shall be no larger in total floor area than half that of the primary structure (the structure occupied by the primary use), shall occupy no more than one-third ( 1/3 ) of the total lot area, and shall not exceed the height of the principal structure on the parcel by more than fifty (50) percent. Structures in excess of these limitations shall be considered primary structures occupied by primary land uses. 
(C)	Accessory vehicle parking. All vehicle parking provided for use by patrons, occupants, or other users of structures on the same parcel of land shall be considered incidental. Parking for a structure located on another parcel shall be considered an accessory use to the structure only when a legal agreement or easement exists that specifies the parking area is for the exclusive use of the structure to which the parking is accessory. Vehicle parking as a primary land use is a personal service (Land Use Code 2600) and is allowed according to the land use table. 
(Ord. No. 5-2010, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
4.4.2.   Accessories for single-family detached residences.
(A)	Accessory structures shall be no larger than fifty (50) percent of the house in gross floor area. Any non-residential use of the structure shall comply with Section 9.4. 
(B)	Pools and tennis courts and their appurtenant or integral structures-including but not limited to walls, equipment rooms, cabanas, decks, and skirts-shall not encroach required yards, except as provided herein. Pools and tennis courts shall be fenced or otherwise protected from human intrusion; such fencing or other screening need not meet setback requirements provided it is not integral to the pool, tennis court, or appurtenant structure. 
(Ord. No. 5-2010, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
4.4.3.   Accessory dwelling unit.
(A)	A dwelling unit accessory to a single-family detached home shall be a permanent structure no larger than six hundred (600) square feet in heated floor area. 
(B)	A dwelling unit accessory to a non-residential use shall be located above the primary use and shall be no larger in heated floor area than the primary use or twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet, whichever is less. 
4.5. - Standards by zone. 
4.5.1.   Administration of standards.
    This section specifies building and lot standards applicable to each zone in the City of Hanahan. All standards found herein are specific to the zone and shall be applied in addition to or, rarely, in place of standards that apply to all property in the city. Each zone includes basic standards, which shall be interpreted and enforced as follows. 
(A)	Minimum lot area: Lots proposed in a zoning district shall meet or exceed the minimum land area required. Non-residential lots may be required to be larger than residential lots in a zoning district. A non-residential land use shall not be proposed on an existing lot smaller in area than that required for a non-residential use. Naturally occurring surface water, wetlands, and land within rights-of-way and ingress/egress easements shall not count toward area required to meet minimum lot size. 
(B)	Minimum lot width: Lots proposed in a zoning district shall meet or exceed the minimum width required from the front boundary of the lot to the rear of the primary structure. The planning commission may allow a reduction in minimum lot width by one-third ( 1/3 ) at the road frontage on the outside of a curved right-of-way boundary, provided the side lot lines are oriented radial to the right-of-way boundary. 
(C)	Minimum setbacks: All structures on a lot shall be sited a distance equal to or greater than the minimum required setbacks from property boundaries for the district, except for the following which may protrude a maximum of twenty-four (24) inches into required setback: an unenclosed, unscreened front porch, portico, or gallery; patios, decks, and balconies; roof eaves, overhangs, and gutters; and stoops and stairs. Other structures not attached to the primary structure, including but not limited to garages, sheds, and other accessory structures shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from a side or rear property line; provided however that this provision shall neither exempt the builder from meeting the fire code administrated by the City of Hanahan nor allow encroachment of easements on the property. All pools shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet, with decking no closer than five (5) feet, from side and rear property lines. 
(D)	Maximum impervious surface ratio: The high ground of the site or land development shall not be covered by structure, paving, and other surfaces impervious to water at a greater proportion than the maximum specified for the zone. Wetlands within a surveyed critical line shall not count toward the pervious proportion of the parcel. 
(E)	Maximum floor/area ratio: The gross floor area of structure shall not exceed the maximum proportion of high ground area specified for the zone in which the site or land development is located. For example, a lot measuring twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area occupied by structure five thousand (5,000) square feet in gross floor area has a floor/area ratio of twenty-five (25) percent. Wetlands within a surveyed critical line shall not count toward land area for this calculation. 
(F)	Maximum height: The maximum height of structure on the lot shall be measured from mean finished grade to the highest point of structure, with the following exceptions. 
(1)	So as not to penalize a builder proposing a pitched roof, the maximum height shall be measured to the mean height of the roof (mid-span between the roof ridge and eaves). 
(2)	Roof vents, chimneys, cupolas, steeples, belfries, spires, antenna, smokestacks, HVAC equipment, satellite dishes, flagpoles, elevator and stairwell penthouses, an railings required by building code shall be exempt from maximum height limitations. 
(3)	Telecommunications towers shall meet the requirements of Section 5.14. 
(G)	Maximum residential density: The number of dwelling units on a site or land development shall not exceed the maximum per acre of high ground. Wetlands within a surveyed critical line shall not count toward land area for this calculation, except where a permit has been obtained to fill the wetlands. 
(Ord. No. 5-2010, § 1, 7-13-2010; Ord. No. 5-2011, § 1, 6-14-2011) 
4.5.2.   Conservation/preservation.
(A)	Basic zoning standards. 
Requirement Standard Minimum Lot Area 43,560 square feet Minimum Lot Width 200 feet Minimum Setbacks 25 feet Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio 5% Maximum Floor/Area Ratio (non-residential) 5% Maximum Height 35 feet Maximum Residential Density 0  
(B)	Each land use shall include parking in accordance with Section 5.9 of the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance. 
4.5.3.   Single-Family Residential-Low-density (RSL).
(A)	Basic zoning standards. 
Requirement Standard Minimum Lot Area-Residential/other 10,000/25,000 square feet Minimum Lot Width 70 feet Minimum Setbacks  Front, Street Frontage 25 feet  Side-Residential/other (B)/25 feet  Rear-Residential/other 15/30 feet Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio 35% Maximum Floor/Area Ratio (non-residential) 25% Maximum Height 35 feet Maximum Residential Density 4 units per acre  
(B)	Residential site yards shall occupy at least twenty-five (25) percent of the width of the lot in sum. No side setback shall be less than five (5) feet. 
(C)	Each land use shall include parking in accordance with Section 5.9 of the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance. 
4.5.4.   Single-Family Residential (RS).
(A)	Basic zoning standards. 
Requirement Standard Minimum Lot Area-Residential/other 8,000/20,000 square feet Minimum Lot Width 60 feet Minimum Setbacks  Front, Street Frontage 25 feet  Side-Residential/other (B)/20 feet  Rear-Residential/other 15/25 feet Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio 45% Maximum Floor/Area Ratio (non-residential) 25% Maximum Height 35 feet Maximum Residential Density 5 units per acre  
(B)	Residential site yards shall occupy at least twenty-five (25) percent of the width of the lot in sum. No side setback shall be less than five (5) feet. 
(C)	Each land use shall include parking in accordance with Section 5.9 of the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance. 
4.5.5.   Single-Family Residential-Moderate-density (RSM).
(A)	Basic zoning standards. 
Requirement Standard Minimum Lot Area-Residential/other 6,000/20,000 square feet Minimum Lot Width 50 feet Minimum Setbacks  Front, Street Frontage 25 feet  Side-Residential/other 5/20 feet  Rear-Residential/other 15/25 feet Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio 55% Maximum Floor/Area Ratio (non-residential) 25% Maximum Height 35 feet Maximum Residential Density 8 units per acre  
(B)	Each land use shall include parking in accordance with Section 5.9 of the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance. 
4.5.6.   Multi-Family Residential (RM).
(A)	Basic zoning standards. 
Requirement Standard Minimum Lot Area-Residential/other (c) Minimum Lot Width 50 feet Minimum Setbacks  Front, Street Frontage 25 feet  Side 20 feet (B)  Rear-Residential/other 15/25 feet Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio 65% Maximum Floor/Area Ratio (non-residential) 45% Maximum Height 35 feet Maximum Residential Density 12 units per acre  
(B)	Residential side yards shall occupy at least twenty-five (25) percent of the width of the lot in sum, up to forty (40) feet. No residential side setback shall be less than five (5) feet. 
(C)	Minimum lot area. 
(1)	Residential minimum lot area shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet for the first residential unit plus three thousand three hundred (3,300) square feet per additional unit. (e.g., the minimum lot area for a duplex shall be nine thousand three hundred (9,300) square feet.) 
(2)	Non-residential minimum lot area shall be fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
(D)	Each land use shall include parking in accordance with Section 5.9 of the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance. 
4.5.7.   Residential-Manufactured Housing (RT).
(A)	Basic zoning standards. 
Requirement Standard Minimum Lot Area-Residential/other 5,000/15,000 square feet Minimum Lot Width 50 feet Minimum Setbacks  Front, Street Frontage 25 feet  Side-Residential/other 7.5/20 feet  Rear-Residential/other 15/25 feet Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio 55% Maximum Floor/Area Ratio (non-residential) 45% Maximum Height 35 feet Maximum Residential Density 8 units per acre  
(B)	Each land use shall include parking in accordance with Section 5.9 of the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance. 
4.5.8.   Residential/Office (RO).
(A)	Basic zoning standards. 
Requirement Standard Minimum Lot Area-Residential/other 6,000 square feet Minimum Lot Width 60 feet Minimum Setbacks  Front, Street Frontage 25 feet  Side-Residential/other 5 feet  Rear-Residential/other 15 feet Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio 75% Maximum Floor/Area Ratio (non-residential) 65% Maximum Height 35 feet Maximum Residential Density 7 units per acre  
(B)	Each land use shall include parking in accordance with Section 5.9 of the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance. 
4.5.9.   General Commercial (CG).
(A)	Basic zoning standards. 
Requirement Standard Minimum Lot Area-Residential/other 6,000 square feet Minimum Lot Width 50 feet Minimum Setbacks  Front, Street Frontage 25 feet  Side-Residential/other 5 feet  Rear-Residential/other 15 feet Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio 85% Maximum Floor/Area Ratio (non-residential) 75% Maximum Height 35 feet Maximum Residential Density 7 units per acre  
(B)	Each land use shall include parking in accordance with Section 5.9 of the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance. 
4.5.10.   Industrial (ID).
(A)	Basic Zoning Standards. 
Requirement Standard Minimum Lot Area 6,000 square feet Minimum Lot Width 100 feet Minimum Setbacks  Front, Street Frontage 25 feet  Side 20 feet  Rear 20 feet Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio 85% Maximum Height* 
*Note: Additional height limitations may be applied to building sites or lots in areas designated as APZ zones of Joint Base Charleston in accordance with applicable Federal Aviation Administration regulations. Forty-five (45) feet, however this maximum may be increased to fifty-five (55) feet provided that: 

One (1) foot is added to each of the required yard setbacks for each additional one (1) foot of building height up to a maximum of fifty-five (55) feet total height.  
(B)	Each land use shall include parking in accordance with Section 5.9 of the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 5-2013, § 2, 4-9-2013) 
4.5.11.   Town Residential (TR).
(A)	Expanded Basic Zoning Standards. Due to the array of parcel boundary configurations possible within attached residential housing, conventional lot and bulk requirements are not necessarily based on the lot proposed for construction, but to the structure proposed, neighboring structures, neighboring lots, streets, and rights-of-way. 
Standard Single-family 

detached, incl. 

row houses Townhouses Institutional Other 

non-residential 

(incl. live/work) Min.-max. block length (street centerline) 200-800 feet 200-800 feet none 200-600 feet Min.-max. block area (bounded by street centerlines) 60,000-300,000 SF 60,000-300,000 SF none 60,000-300,000 SF Minimum lot area 1,500 SF 600 SF 4,000 SF 2,500 SF Minimum lot width 25 feet 18 feet 40 feet 25 feet Maximum residential density 4 units per 100 feet of street frontage 4 units per 100 feet of street frontage Minimum front setback 7 feet 15 feet from edge of roadway 1 foot of depth per one foot of height none Maximum front setback None 35 feet from edge of roadway none 35 feet from edge of roadway Minimum side setback none none 2 feet of depth per one foot of height None Minimum rear setback 15 feet 25 feet from neighboring unattached structures & parcels 2 feet of depth per one foot of height 15 feet Minimum garage setback from primary street 20 feet 27 feet from edge of roadway 40 feet 20 feet Minimum garage setback from alley 15 feet from edge of roadway 15 feet from edge of roadway 40 feet 15 feet from edge of roadway Maximum building height 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet Maximum impervious surface ratio 0.75 (See C-1 below.) 0.75 0.75  
(B)	Design standards. The applicant who has not met these design standards, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, may appeal the decision to the design control committee, which shall be charged with upholding the intent of the Town Residential Zone. 
(1)	All parcels, except those on which educational and religious institutions are located, shall be limited to four thousand (4,000) heated square feet and one thousand (1,000) unheated square feet. 
(2)	All non-residential uses, except accommodations functions, park space, and uses in live/work units and home occupations, shall occur on corner lots. The primary public entrance to the use shall occur within forty (40) feet of the parcel corner at the road intersection. 
(3)	Live/work units on interior lots shall accommodate one (1) of the following land uses: Finance and insurance; real estate, and rental and leasing; arts, entertainment, and recreation; and social assistance, welfare, and charitable services. 
(4)	The façade and primary entrance as well as the more public spaces of a structure, such as retail shopping area or studio, shall be oriented to the transportation right-of-way and not an alley or interior parking area. The façade and primary entrance shall be directly accessible to pedestrian circulation and shall orient as nearly as possible to perpendicular to the transportation right-of-way. 
(5)	On-site parking shall not be located between the transportation right-of-way and the primary structure. No portion of a private garage or carport, where proposed, shall be placed forward of the façade of the primary structure with reference to the road (alleys not included). 
(6)	Each land use shall include parking in accordance with Section 5.9 of the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance. 
(C)	Town Residential District Land Development Standards. The applicant who has not met these design standards, in the opinion of the city planner, may appeal the decision to the planning commission, which shall be charged with upholding the intent of the town residential zone and the land development standards of the City of Hanahan. 
(1)	Because townhouses are often located on parcels that align closely with their building footprints, the maximum impervious surface ratio for townhouse and patio home land developments shall be seventy-five (75) percent, measured per block, bound by back of curb. 
(2)	Primary vehicular access shall not be provided via single-terminus roads or loop roads, except where approved by the planning commission to further natural resource protection. Two (2) or more routes of access within the development shall exist to each unit inasmuch as practical, as determined by the planning commission. 
(3)	Each land use shall provide motor vehicle parking in accordance with Section 5.9 of the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance. 
(4)	Bicycle parking, in the form of a rack or similar fixed structure, shall be provided at a ratio of one (1) place per twenty (20) required vehicle stalls. Land uses with fewer than twenty (20) vehicle stalls shall not be required to provide bicycle parking. 
(5)	Active park space for community recreation land shall be dedicated, one-quarter (1/4) acre per ten (10) units in a major land development plan; such space may include amenity structures, athletic facilities, and formal parks and shall be adjacent to vehicular transportation routes; such space may be allocated throughout the development, including pocket parks and plazas, provided they are defined by structures (gazebo, garden wall, etc.), landscaping (hedges, pavers, etc.), park furniture (bench, fountain, public art, playground equipment, etc.), and circulation infrastructure; stormwater management features are encouraged to be incorporated into active park space; otherwise, the features count toward open space only. 
4.5.12.   Town Center (TC).
(A)	Lot requirements. 
(1)	Area. Nine hundred (900) square feet, minimum. 
(2)	Width. Eighteen (18) feet, minimum, for the depth of the lot. 
(3)	Depth/width ratio. The width of the parcel shall be at least one-fifth ( 1/5 ) the depth throughout the parcel. 
(B)	Building requirements. 
(1)	Front setbacks. The average front setback of the primary building shall not be greater than the height of the primary building. 
(2)	Side setbacks. No side yard shall be required for buildings shorter than three (3) stories and thirty-five (35) feet. 
(3)	Rear setbacks. Twenty-five (25) feet, minimum, unless a rear access alley is provided, in which case the minimum depth of the rear yard shall be regulated by vehicular access, as follows: 
(a)	The rear yard shall be five (5) feet if parking is located in the alley right-of-way or easement. 
(b)	In the event of perpendicular parking stalls on private property, the rear yard shall be thirty (30) feet, minimum, including parking stalls. 
(c)	In the event of angled parking on private property, the rear yard shall be twenty-five (25) feet, minimum, including parking stalls. 
(C)	Building height limitations. 
(1)	All buildings shall be a maximum of four (4) stories in height. The maximum building height shall be forty-five (45) feet. The maximum height of all artificial improvements shall be sixty (60) feet. 
(2)	Building step back. All structure equal to or taller than three (3) stories and thirty-five (35) feet shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet, on average, from all lot lines. 
(D)	Design standards. 
(1)	Façade. The façade is the exterior wall of the building that incorporates primary and public entrances, behind which is the most publicly accessible space in the building. In the TC District, the façade shall always be the front of the building and shall face the property boundary along the road right-of-way. In the event that the property abuts two (2) road rights-of-way, the façade shall face the road with the higher classification ("A" through "D"). 
(a)	At least one (1) public entrance shall be provided in the building façade accessible directly from the public right-of-way by means of a walkway vertically separated from adjacent parking surfaces. 
(b)	The ratio of solids to voids in the façade shall not exceed three (3) to one (1) (seventy-five (75) percent) in area. For multi-story buildings, this standard shall apply on each story. Windows and doors, including their mullions, muntins, sashes, and glazing, shall be considered void for the purpose of this standard, except that faux windows and glass that is at least ninety (90) percent reflective shall be considered solid. 
(c)	The building façade shall be stone, brick, wood, cementitious building materials, or stucco, or any combination thereof. Exposed or painted walls of concrete masonry units and metal shall be prohibited. 
(d)	Porches, porticos, piazzas, and the like, together with the wall behind, compose layered façades. The exterior wall within a layered façade, such as that behind a colonnade, shall meet the 3:1 solid-to-void ratio (seventy-five (75) percent). In other words, the archways between the columns of a portico, the posts of a porch, or the piers of a piazza shall not be considered façade voids. 
(2)	Corner lots. In the TC District, the front yard shall be that between the primary structure and the road with the higher classification ("A" through "D"). The side yard adjoining the secondary road shall meet the following criteria: 
(a)	The wall shall have a solid-to-void ratio no greater than 4 to 1 on the exterior wall of the first storey. The same constraints defining façade solids and voids shall apply. 
(b)	The exterior wall of the first storey shall be stone, brick, wood, cementitious building materials, or stucco, or any combination thereof. Painted or exposed walls of concrete masonry units or metal shall be prohibited. 
(3)	Color scheme. At least ninety (90) percent of exterior colors, measured in surface area, of artificial elements shall be selected from the following palette. Black, gray, white, and exposed concrete shall not count toward or against calculating compliance with the color scheme requirement. The rear elevation of the building shall be exempt. 
(a)	The natural colors of brick, stone, and finished wood; 
(b)	All shades and tints of brown (e.g., sand, tan, beige, cream, umber, sienna); and 
(c)	Shades of all colors at least one (1) part black to three (3) parts color. 
(4)	Requirements for certain building elements. 
(a)	Drive-through windows shall face an interior lot line. 
(b)	Canopies for automobile service areas, including drive-through services, shall not be located between the primary building and a Type "A" or Type "B" road right-of-way, as described in subsection 4.5.12(E), below. 
(c)	All automobiles, trucks, and trailers parked or stored outdoors overnight shall be encircled by a six (6) foot (min.) privacy fence and buffered from adjacent property by a landscaped buffer per Section 6. 
(d)	Where provided, on-site commercial truck parking and loading facilities shall be located to the side or rear of the primary building such that the loading door is in the back half of the building and faces an interior lot line or alley. 
(e)	Commercial overhead doors shall not face a Type "A" or Type "B" road right-of-way. 
(f)	All mechanical equipment shall be installed behind or atop buildings they serve. 
(g)	All fences and exterior walls within thirty (30) feet of the public right-of-way shall be constructed so that iron, brick, and/or stucco are the only materials visible from the road right-of-way. Chain-link fencing shall be prohibited. 
(5)	Landscaping. 
(a)	A front yard, where provided, shall not be covered with asphalt except to provide for on-street parking. The front yard shall include one (1) tree and four (4) shrubs per two hundred (200) square feet. The front yard may be landscaped or treated as a patio or plaza, or any combination thereof. Required vegetation may be planted or potted. Patio and plaza materials shall not consist of asphalt. 
(b)	A side yard abutting a public-right-of-way, where provided, shall be landscaped with permeable surfaces with appropriate groundcover, one (1) tree, and four (4) shrubs per one hundred (100) square feet, except for areas constructed and designated for pedestrian access or outdoor sales and dining. 
(c)	The planning commission and the design control committee, for projects under the purview of each, may require low-impact development (LID) or green building practices to slow the rate of outflow and filtrate stormwater before it enters road rights-of-way. 
(6)	Signage standards. 
(a)	Portable signs shall be prohibited, except for sandwich boards with faces no larger than two (2) feet by three (3) feet. 
(b)	Freestanding pole-mounted signs and billboards shall be prohibited. All permanent signage shall be attached to buildings, except as allowed by the design control committee. The design control committee may allow monument signs in the TC District in accordance with Section 8.3.3. 
(c)	All signage except wall signs and monument signs shall be less than twenty (20) square feet in display area. 
(7)	Site lighting. The following standards apply to all illumination of exterior circulation, parking, and service areas, including those covered by an awning or canopy. 
(a)	Site lighting sources shall not be more than twenty (20) feet above finished grade, except for security lighting of rear and side yards and illumination of flags required by law. 
(b)	Rear-yard security lighting higher than twenty (20) feet above finished grade shall be buffered along parcel boundaries per Section 6. 
(c)	Light sources illuminating automobile service areas under awnings and canopies shall be fully recessed so that motorists on the adjoining road right-of-way are shielded from glare. 
(8)	Parking and access standards. 
(a)	Each land use shall provide motor vehicle parking in accordance with Section 5.9 of the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance. 
(b)	Bicycle parking, in the form of a rack or similar fixed structure, shall be provided at a ratio of one (1) place per twenty (20) required vehicle stalls. 
(c)	On-site pedestrian circulation shall be clearly differentiated from vehicular circulation and parking areas by material and vertical separation. Asphalt may be used as a material for vehicular parking and circulation only and shall not be used for pedestrian circulation. 
(d)	No vehicular circulation or parking shall be permitted between the façade and the road right-of-way, except that designed as angled or parallel on-street parking. 
(i)	In the case of site redevelopment utilizing existing structure, the design control committee shall be authorized to modify this standard, provided the developer proposes a suitable alternative, consisting of a garden wall with foundation plantings, at minimum, to screen vehicular parking from the road right-of-way. 
(ii)	On-street parking may span between the right-of-way and the front yard so as to avoid right-of-way expansion. Drainage shall be provided between parking stalls and travel lanes to prevent ponding. The planning commission shall be authorized to approve modifications to this standard, provided the developer proposes suitable alternate measures to manage stormwater. 
(e)	Vehicular access to off-street parking shall be limited to one (1) two-way or two (2) one-way driveways accessing Type "A" and "B" roads. Additional access may be provided from Type "C" and "D" roads. One-way driveways shall be twelve (12) to sixteen (16) feet wide. Two-way driveways shall be twenty-two (22) to twenty-eight (28) feet wide. Edge-of-pavement or curb radii shall be ten (10) to twenty (20) feet so as to allow slow, safe traffic movements while protecting pedestrians. 
(f)	Any outdoor storage or overnight parking of commercial vehicles shall be screened from adjoining properties by a landscaped buffer per Section 6.5. 
(E)	Road types. Roads in Town Center zoning districts shall be classified by level and mode of public activity. The purpose is to control the type and frequency of access to the road by motor vehicles and to prioritize the road to be addressed by building façades. Those roads with higher levels of pedestrian activity (existing and planned) must offer greater protection and higher levels of service to pedestrians through restricted access and multi-modal design. Other roads are thus more appropriate for service vehicle access. Roads shall be mapped by type on the official zoning map. New roads proposed in a major land development shall indicate road types in each stage of land development review. Roads shall be classified as follows: 
(1)	Type "A" is the most public road, with heavy traffic, both residential and commercial. It is a central artery of the district and serves as a gathering place within the district. Commercial and institutional uses are most appropriate along this road type. Pedestrian access, mobility, and safety shall be prioritized over vehicular mobility. 
(2)	Type "B" roads are moderately trafficked, primarily by residents and prospective patrons of the district. Office and residential uses are most appropriate along this road type. Pedestrian access, mobility, and safety shall be prioritized over vehicular mobility. 
(3)	Type "C" roads prioritize vehicular access for commercial uses. This road type typically functions in tandem with a Type "A" road to separate needed truck access from the pedestrian environment of the district's gathering place. 
(4)	Type "D" roads are alleys, intended for immediate access to and parking "for all uses. Parcels with alley frontage typically have frontage on a Type "A" or Type "B" road as well. 
(F)	Town Center-A Design District. The Hanahan Design Control Committee, as provided in Chapter 3 of this ordinance, shall have the authority to issue certificates of appropriateness to projects that successfully meet design criteria. In the Town Center zoning districts, many projects are eligible for administrative review and shall conform to a set of quantitative design standards specified. Design review will apply to projects of or greater than a certain size, scale, or use that necessitates higher scrutiny through qualitative consideration, according to the following table: 
Eligible for Administrative Review Design Control Committee (DCC) 
Purview • All projects with a building footprint larger than five thousand (5,000) square feet • Most projects with a building footprint of five thousand (5,000) square feet or less • All projects with more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor space • Most projects with ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor space or less • All projects on more than an acre of land • Most projects on an acre or less of land • Any residential project with more than one (1) dwelling unit • Proposed land uses not specifically assigned to DCC • Motor vehicle rental, sales or service establishments • Any renovation or improvement project worth less than fifty (50) percent of the structure's appraised value • Wholesale trade establishments • Signage with twenty (20) square feet or less of display area • Any establishment with outside sales covering more than two thousand (2,000) square feet • Signage more than fifty (50) square feet of display area  
(G)	Design control committee objectives for the Town Center Zone. 
(1)	Objectives of principle. In addition to those objectives set forth in provisions establishing the design control committee, the committee shall promote the following in Town Center districts: 
(a)	A safe, interconnected transportation system in which motorists, cyclists, and pedestrians can freely and leisurely travel to, from, and within a TC district; 
(b)	Adequate and safe access for commercial vehicles, which may be accomplished via rear alleys to improve the public realm of Yeamans Hall Road in accordance with objective (a), above; 
(c)	An integrated built environment where aesthetics, circulation, and private property frame a cohesive public space, which consists of but is not dominated by Yeamans Hall Road; 
(d)	A comprehensive outdoor environment that is complimented, not dominated or diluted by signage, illumination, landscaping, and stormwater management features; 
(e)	A unified whole whereby the aesthetics of a TC district combine to create a sense of place, as opposed to a disorderly assortment of individual establishments, through coordinated building and landscaping materials; smooth transitions in building scale; and visually expressed arrival points; 
(f)	A quality mixed use environment where land uses are arranged in complimentary fashion so as to reduce conflicts caused by the negative externalities light, noise, odor, and vibration; and 
(g)	A district of Hanahan that not only meets the letter of zoning code but the intent as well. 
(2)	Objectives of practice. In addition to those objectives set forth in provisions establishing the design control committee, the committee shall promote the following in a Town Center district. 
(a)	Pedestrian facilities shall be connected across property boundaries and are not interrupted or rendered uncomfortable or unsafe by design or automobile traffic. 
(b)	Automobile parking shall not dominate the landscape and contribute to visual blight in the district. Parking should appear as well as function as ancillary to the primary use of land on a given parcel. 
(c)	A Town Center district shall be a place people are traveling to rather than through. Streets, driveways, and parking stalls shall be designed around buildings, walkways, and people. 
(d)	Buildings, landscaping, signage, and other improvements shall be in scale with their surroundings and at a scale intended for the pedestrian, not the automobile. Those buildings, which by monolithic or monotonous size or appearance, dominate nearby properties in scale shall be fit into the district with buffers and setbacks that soften the disparity with adjacent conditions. 
(e)	Those land uses generating negative externalities shall be buffered and/or enclosed inasmuch as possible to reduce conflicts with neighboring properties. The use and enjoyment of residential and retail property shall be safeguarded against truck traffic, light, noise, and vibration. 
(Ord. No. 3-2009, § 1, 5-12-2009; Ord. No. 11-2011, § 1, 12-13-2011) 
4.6. - Type "A" Planned Developments (PDs)-Conservation Development. 
4.6.1.   General Provisions.
(A)	The minimum land area on which a Conservation Development may be proposed shall be two (2) acres, exclusive of wetlands and existing rights-of-way. 
(B)	The land proposed for development shall adjoin and have full access to all public infrastructure and services available in the City of Hanahan - roads, water and sewer service, stormwater drainage, etc. The responsibility of providing the improvements necessary to the development shall be applicant's. The proposal shall, where possible, enhance connectivity of infrastructure and minimize dead-end infrastructure lines (roads, water and sewer lines, etc.) by accessing infrastructure networks available along road frontages and adjoining land developments. 
(C)	At least fifteen (15) percent of buildable land shall be dedicated as green space for purposes of natural and cultural resource conservation and/or recreation and social interaction in order to meet the intent of the Type "A" PD-Conservation Development. The planning commission shall be authorized to require a greater percentage of land to be conserved to further the purposes of this planned development tool and the Zoning Ordinance as a whole. The greater percentage of green space shall be commensurate with increased deviation from base zoning standards. 
(D)	The land for which a Type "A" Planned Development is proposed shall retain the underlying zoning district(s). All principal and accessory uses allowed in the zoning district(s) shall be allowed in proposed planned developments. 
(E)	The maximum impervious surface ratio, floor area ratio, and residential density (units per acre), all of which regulate the intensity of development, shall be applied to the entire Land Development rather than to any individual lot. Other standards specific to the zoning district shall remain in effect for each proposed lot. 
(F)	The planning commission shall be authorized to modify or waive the following standards insofar as they further the objectives of conservation of natural and cultural resources and provision of meaningful recreational and social gathering spaces: 
(1)	Minimum lot size; 
(2)	Minimum lot width; 
(3)	Minimum setbacks; and 
(4)	Required screening and buffering. 
4.6.2.   Procedure for review.
(A)	A Type "A" Planned Development shall be submitted to the planning commission as a major land development per Section 2.3 of the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance. No additional steps or materials are required. 
(B)	Modification and waiver of standards shall be considered only for the phase of the development submitted for review. 
(C)	Any changes to the Type "A" PD during development shall be made in accordance with Chapter 2 of the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance. Re-subdivision of land after completion of the Conservation Development shall comply with the requirements of the zoning district. No modifications and waivers afforded the original planned development shall apply. 
(D)	The developer proposing a conservation subdivision shall make adequate provisions for ownership and maintenance of conserved green space to reasonably ensure that it cannot be re-subdivided in the future. At a minimum, a deed restriction preventing further subdivision of green space shall be noted on the final plat. The planning commission may initiate rezoning of the green space to a conservation/preservation district upon final plat approval. 
4.6.3.   Conservation development architectural design provisions.
(A)	The developer proposing a Type "A" Planned Development shall meet design criteria intended to minimize monotony in development, which is potentially more acute in a development with smaller lots. 
(1)	The applicant shall be encouraged to submit a narrative regarding the originality and innovation of the development, including architectural guidelines, subdivision master planning, and natural and recreational amenities. The narrative should include plans and façade elevations or renderings of prospective structures in the development. The narrative should also illustrate or discuss variations in cladding colors and materials of prospective structures. The narrative, where submitted shall not be a regulatory instrument, but provided to the planning commission for information only. The preliminary land development plan, as approved by the planning commission, shall dictate. 
(2)	The developer shall be encouraged to submit covenants and restrictions proposed for the property owners association that include the design regulations specified herein; although, these shall also be considered for information only. Building design regulations shall be enforced upon application to the City of Hanahan for zoning and/or building permits. 
(B)	Front yards provided in a conservation development shall not be uniform. 
(1)	Façades of multi-unit structures, such as townhouses, offices, and retail spaces, shall fluctuate by a minimum of two (2) feet forward or backward from unit to unit so as to articulate each unit as individual and independent. 
(2)	Front yards of single-family detached residences and duplexes should vary as well. At a minimum, homebuilders should be encouraged to include front porches or porticos to accomplish variation. 
(C)	Garage doors facing the right-of-way shall not be forward of the primary entrance (i.e., "front") door of a residential unit in relation to the right-of-way. This standard shall not apply to alleys. 
(D)	Single-family residential lots less than forty (40) feet wide shall be provided with access via alley to the rear or by shared driveways meeting Hanahan Land Development Ordinance standards. 
(E)	Front and side elevations of all primary buildings shall be at least ten (10) percent void, except where disallowed by fire code, as adopted and enforced by the City of Hanahan. Hinged doors (i.e., not overhead) and windows, including dormer and gable-end windows, shall be employed to meet this requirement. 
(F)	Buildings clad with vinyl, wood, or cementitious siding shall include trim, at least three and one-half (3.5) inches wide, around wall openings, beneath eaves, and along wall corners. Brick-clad buildings shall be encouraged to include arches (typically jack arches) over wall openings and quoins at corners for articulation. Buildings with traditional appearances shall be encouraged to include window shutters where appropriate. 
(G)	All buildings with pitched roofs shall include eaves that overhang the exterior wall at least ten (10) inches. 
(H)	For multi-unit structures with pitched roofs and eaves, ridges and eaves shall not continue uninterrupted from unit to unit. 
4.7. - Type "B" PD--Planned Development Districts. 
4.7.1.   General provisions.
(A)	A Planned Development District is a zoning district proposed by the developer in place of existing zoning classifications applied to the land proposed for development. This Type "B" PD differs from a Type "A" PD in that existing zoning standards are replaced rather than modified. The developer may therefore propose alternative land uses and development intensities. Rezoning-legislative action taken by Hanahan City Council-is therefore necessary for final approval of a Type "B" PD, a Planned Development District. 
(B)	The applicant proposing a Planned Development District in the City of Hanahan shall achieve all of the standards of this section in good faith and shall demonstrate intent of achieving such standards and document how they will be achieved in writing and through illustration. 
(C)	It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate why zoning and land development standards of the City of Hanahan otherwise applicable should be modified or replaced by the provisions of the proposed Planned Development District. The applicant shall document exceptions or variations to existing zoning and land development regulations essential to the project in terms of site, design, or dimensional requirements. 
(D)	The proposed land uses, development intensities, and associated standards shall be consistent with all policies and goals of the City of Hanahan Comprehensive Land Use Plan. 
(E)	The proposal shall efficiently and effectively program the use of land in a manner that preserves natural amenities and environmentally sensitive features to the greatest extent possible. 
(F)	The proposal shall not negatively alter the existing prevailing character of an adjacent neighborhood or district by initiating a high concentration of intense uses, a high volume of heavy truck traffic, a scale of the development that dwarfs neighboring properties or disrupts community aesthetics, or degradation and loss of natural resources in and adjacent to the city. 
(G)	The proposed development shall not create any externalities-obtrusive, disruptive, intrusive, or excessive light, odor, noise, or vibration-beyond the boundaries of the Planned Development District. 
(H)	The proposed Planned Development District with residential and/or retail components shall include pedestrian-friendly circulation, building scale, and aesthetics and for future occupants to allow the opportunity to walk within the City of Hanahan and to preempt the necessity of driving within the built-out Planned Development District. 
(I)	The land proposed for development shall adjoin and have full access to all public infrastructure and services available in the City of Hanahan-roads, water and sewer service, stormwater drainage, etc. The responsibility of providing the improvements necessary to serve the development shall be that of the applicant. The proposal shall, where possible, enhance connectivity of infrastructure and minimize dead-end infrastructure lines (roads, water and sewer lines, etc.) by accessing infrastructure networks available along road frontages and adjoining land developments. 
4.7.2.   Minimum requirements for Planned Development Districts.
(A)	the following shall be required for consideration of a tract of land for a Type "B" Planned Development. 
(1)	Minimum district size: Two (2) acres. A Planned Development District may need to be larger than two (2) acres to meet the next standard, "district location." 
(2)	District location. So as to avoid illegal spot zoning, a Planned Development District shall be located in an area that can be justified as a distinct district based on the characteristics of the land, access to infrastructure, and juxtaposition of zoning districts in the vicinity. 
(3)	Minimum public infrastructure. The area proposed for a Planned Development District shall have direct access to public infrastructure systems-roads, potable water, sewer, stormwater drainage, etc.-in a location where the infrastructure systems can adequately accommodate increases in demand reasonably expected to be generated by development within the PDD. Alternatively, the developer shall propose to upgrade the infrastructure systems accordingly. Proposed improvements need not be limited to infrastructure segments abutting the property; the broader system shall be upgraded to offset negative impacts to surrounding districts. 
(B)	The following minimum requirements shall be met by the approved development upon completion. 
(1)	The Planned Development District shall include setbacks and/or buffering from adjoining districts of significantly lower development intensity. Specific dimensions of setbacks and buffering shall be proposed by the applicant and reviewed by the planning commission. 
(2)	The Planned Development District shall include provisions to protect natural and cultural resources, provide adequate buffering thereof, and designate adequate park space for recreation and social interaction as appropriate for the land uses and development intensities proposed. Specific dimensions, acreages, and locations shall be proposed by the applicant and reviewed by the planning commission. 
(C)	Improvements required by the City of Hanahan shall be limited to capital projects necessary to ensure preservation of pre-existing levels of service in Hanahan. In the event that the proposed planned development can be expected to create a proportional need for upgraded capital facilities, Section 5.18 of the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance: "Adequate, Oversized, and Off-site Improvements" shall prevail. 
4.7.3.   Procedures for review and Approval.
(A)	The developer proposing a Type "B" Planned Development is encouraged to prepare a sketch plan per Section 3.1 of the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance. 
(B)	The Developer shall submit a district name (e.g., Crossroads Planned Development District), statement of intent, illustration of existing conditions, Master Development Plan, and set of regulatory provisions for the proposed Planned Development District suitable for adoption by ordinance by the City of Hanahan. These materials shall be submitted to the Hanahan Zoning Administrator as components of the completed application for rezoning per Section 2.4 of this ordinance. 
(C)	The Planned Development District (PDD) shall be reviewed and approved or disapproved as rezoning for the affected property according to the process set forth in Section 2.4. If the Hanahan City Council approves the PDD and adopts it by ordinance, the Master Development Plan shall be considered part of the Hanahan Official Zoning Map by reference. The statement of intent and regulatory provisions shall be the zoning standards for the district and a subsection of the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance. 
(D)	Failure of the applicant to gain approval from the city council as a Planned Development District shall result in the property under consideration remaining in the zoning district existing at the time of application. 
4.7.4.   Requirements for illustration of existing conditions.
    The applicant shall submit ten (10) copies of an illustration of existing conditions for the proposed development, legibly drawn at a scale that clearly communicates the information required, typically no smaller than one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet (one (1?) = two hundred (200 ')), that includes the following information: 
(A)	General information. 
(1)	Title block, including the following: 
(a)	Proposed name of development; 
(b)	Names, signatures, and seals of applicant, owner, surveyor, engineer and other professionals involved in plan preparation; 
(c)	North arrow, graphic scale, and written scale; and 
(d)	The month, day, and year that the original drawing was completed and the month, day, and year for each revision of the original drawing. 
(B)	A vicinity map, for the purpose of locating the property being developed, drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals two thousand (2,000) feet (one (1?) = two thousand (2,000')) and showing the relation of the property to surrounding properties, differentiated by tone or pattern, to adjoining property and roads, municipal boundaries, and landmarks existing within two thousand (2,000) feet of any part of the property. 
(C)	Existing site information. 
(1)	The distance and bearing from one (1) corner of the boundary of the development to the nearest intersection of existing streets or roads. 
(2)	Total tract boundaries of the property being developed, showing bearing and distances, and a statement of total acreage of the property. 
(3)	Existing parcel identification numbers (tax map numbers). 
(4)	Location, ownership, and parcel identification numbers of adjoining properties, including those across rights-of-way. 
(5)	Existing zoning classifications and uses of land within the proposed Planned Development District and on adjoining properties, including those across rights-of-way. 
(6)	Existing character of the land, such as approximate locations of natural resources including wetlands, floodplains, forests, and any previously known endangered species habitat, which may be illustrated via aerial photography; 
(7)	Existing landmarks, especially those related to infrastructure, such as roads, railroads, bridges, culverts, and utility substations in the vicinity of the proposed district; and 
(8)	All existing political boundaries, parcel boundaries, rights-of-way, and easements on or adjacent to the proposed Planned Development District. 
4.7.5.   Master development plan requirements.
    The applicant shall submit ten (10) copies of a master development plan for the proposed development, legibly drawn at a scale that clearly communicates the information required, typically no smaller than one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet (one (1?) = two hundred (200')), that includes the following information: 
(A)	General information. 
(1)	Title block, including the following: 
(a)	Proposed name of development-for which the Planned Development District will be named in the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance and on the official zoning map-which shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically or otherwise, the name of any development within the jurisdiction; 
(b)	Names, signatures, and seals of applicant, owner, surveyor, engineer and other professionals involved in plan preparation; 
(c)	North arrow, graphic scale, and written scale; 
(d)	Space for the zoning administrator's signature and date thereof, which shall indicate adoption as an extension of the official zoning map; and 
(e)	The month, day, and year that the original drawing was completed and the month, day, and year for each revision of the original drawing. 
(B)	Existing site information. 
(1)	The distance and bearing from one (1) corner of the boundary of the development to the nearest intersection of existing streets or roads. 
(2)	Total tract boundaries of the property being developed, showing bearing and distances, and a statement of total acreage of the property. 
(3)	Existing parcel identification numbers (tax map numbers). 
(4)	Approximate locations of significant natural resources expected to be preserved in the Type "B" Planned Development, such as wetlands, any previously known endangered species habitat, and groups of landmark trees. 
(C)	Proposed land development information. 
(1)	Proposed land uses throughout the development. Land uses may be individual or grouped to provide increased flexibility in anticipation of the maturation of the Planned Development District. Grouped land uses should be similar in intensity so that externalities generated by potentially incompatible neighbors can be avoided or mitigated. 
(2)	Tentative road and bicycle/pedestrian infrastructure network layout, with approximate widths or number of lanes. 
(3)	Tentative lot arrangement showing approximate average lot size and the number of lots. 
(4)	Sites and tentative footprints of structures other than single-family residences with approximate acreages and rough estimates of expected gross floor area. 
(5)	Approximate locations for schools, public safety stations, parks, common areas and other facilities intended for public use, as applicable. 
(6)	Green space, natural resource protection areas, buffers, tree protection areas, or other green infrastructure necessary to meet the minimum requirements of this section. 
(D)	Supplemental data. 
(1)	A traffic study meeting the requirements of Section 3.3 of the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance. 
(2)	Written statements from all affected public infrastructure and service providers, including SC Department of Transportation, Berkeley County Engineering, Berkeley County Water and Sanitation Authority, Hanahan Fire Department, and other utility and public safety providers. The statements shall indicate the feasibility of the proposed development with regard to availability of infrastructure and services available to the development. The statements should indicate any existing shortcomings or inadequacies and offer recommendations as to how they might be rectified. 
(3)	Any other information required by ordinance or considered pertinent by the applicant, the planning commission, or the city planner to the review of the preliminary land development plan shall be submitted with or on the plan. 
4.7.6.   Requirements of statement of intent and regulatory provisions.
(A)	The statement of intent shall indicate to the planning commission the broader objectives of the Planned Development District, such as the character of the district, the role of the proposal in the economic development of the broader area, the contribution of the development to quality of life and access to or protection of natural resources for current and future Hanahan residents, and an approximate timeline for phasing and build-out of the development. The statement of intent shall indicate to the planning commission why existing zoning districts available to the developer in the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance cannot accommodate the proposed development. The statement of intent shall also be an important guide the city planner and planning commission will consider in their review of proposed amendments to the PDD. 
(B)	The regulatory provisions shall be zoning language and shall carry the force of law upon adoption. For conditions in the development for which the regulatory provisions of the district are mute, standards set forth in the Hanahan Zoning and Land Development ordinances shall prevail. The regulatory provisions set forth for the Planned Development District should address the following: 
(1)	Land uses programmed or reasonably expected for the development; 
(2)	Intensity, lot, and building standards; 
(3)	Building design standards; 
(4)	Landscaping and signage standards; 
(5)	Parking and access standards; 
(6)	Road and bicycle/pedestrian infrastructure standards; 
(7)	Natural resource protection and green space standards; 
(8)	Any other zoning and land development standards deemed desirable or necessary by the developer or the planning commission to the success of the Type "B" Planned Development; and 
(9)	Provisions for capital improvements to infrastructure and public services necessary to ensure adequate levels of service to the Planned Development District at build-out. Omission of capital improvements necessary to serve the development in the regulatory provisions shall not relieve the developer of the responsibility to provide them in full or in part as a condition of a future preliminary land development plan approval. 
4.7.7.   Amendments to Type "B" PDs (Planned Development Districts).
    Amendments to Planned Development Districts may be proposed by the original or future developers. Amendments shall be classified as "minor" or "major" at the sole discretion of the zoning administrator, who is charged with interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance, per the criteria stated below. 
(A)	A major amendment shall be a zoning amendment per Section 2.4 of this ordinance. The original developer, any future landowner, or the City of Hanahan may initiate an amendment. The following changes to the Planned Development District shall qualify as zoning amendments. 
(1)	Any change to the text of the statement of intent or regulatory provisions, except those that clarify the text or correct errors. 
(2)	Any change that would result in a ten (10) percent increase in floor area of structures illustrated on the master development plan. 
(3)	Any change to the PDD that would result in a ten (10) percent increase in the number of residential units in the development. 
(4)	Any change in the PDD that would result in a ten (10) percent increase or decrease in area programmed for one (1) land use or group of similar land uses. 
(5)	Any change to the PDD that reduces the number of vehicular access points to the development. 
(6)	Any substantial relocation of buildings, parking, roads, or bicycle/pedestrian infrastructure illustrated on the master development plan that would unduly negatively impact circulation, access, and safety of the traveling public. 
(7)	Any findings of natural and cultural resources substantially at odds with their illustration on the master development plan. 
(8)	Any other change significantly at odds with the PDD's statement of intent. 
(B)	The City of Hanahan may initiate an amendment to the PDD that would decrease its number of residential units or non-residential square footage without infringing on vested rights if the city determines and documents that infrastructure has not been upgraded or provided as required or if a significant error in depiction of natural and cultural resources must be corrected to preserve those resources. 
(C)	All amendments to the PDD not classified as major amendments shall be minor amendments. The zoning administrator, city planner, or planning commission may approve the minor amendment in conjunction with review and approval of a preliminary land development plan, final plat, or site development plan. 
4.8. - Naval Weapons Station Compatibility Overlay Zone. 
(A)	This overlay zone shall apply to all property contiguous with the U.S. Naval Weapons Station, which shall include land directly across a right-of-way. 
(B)	The NWS-COZ does not alter any zoning standards of the underlying district. The only additional requirement of this overlay zone is that the City of Hanahan shall notify the commander of the Naval Weapons Station, as required by the Federal Defense Facilities Utilization Integrity Protection Act, as amended, prior to any public hearing regarding zoning and land development within the overlay zone. The City shall supply public notice to the commander thirty (30) days prior to the public hearing along with a written report with the findings required in the Act. 
4.9. - Design Control Overlay Districts (Reserved). 
5. - SUPPLEMENTAL REVIEW, DESIGN, AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL AND SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES 

5.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to ameliorate the impact and improve the citing of certain land uses, buildings and project whose character could adversely affect surrounding property and environmental conditions. Toward this end, standards criteria over and above those set forth elsewhere by this ordinance are imposed herein. Uses, building, projects and areas affected by this chapter are those allowable as conditional and special exception uses only. 
5.2. - General development standards and criteria for conditional and special exception uses. 
(A)	The following guidelines and criteria shall be considered by the zoning administrator in his review of any "conditional" uses or uses allowable by special exception identified in the Land Use Table, per Section 4.3. Additionally, certain "conditional uses" identified therein must comply with the more specific requirements of Section 5.3. 
(1)	Ingress and egress to the proposed use shall be provided with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic generated flow and control, and access in case of fire or catastrophe, such as not to be detrimental to existing or anticipated uses, either, adjacent to or in the vicinity of the proposed use. 
(2)	The off-street parking and loading areas, where required or proposed by the applicant, shall be designed and provided in harmony with adjacent properties. 
(3)	The refuse and service areas shall be adequately screened so as not be visible from adjacent property or public rights-of-way and located in such a way that nuisances to adjacent properties are not created. 
(4)	Screening, buffering or separation of any nuisance or hazardous feature shall be provided with reference to type, dimensions and character, and be clearly represented on the submitted plans, to protect adjacent properties. 
(5)	The proposed use, building or project shall not hinder development of nearby vacant property for a permitted use in the affected zone or area. 
(6)	The affected site shall be suitable in terms of size, shape and topographic conditions to accommodate the proposed use, building or project and to ensure compatibility with adjacent properties. 
(B)	If the zoning administrator finds that compliance with these conditions is uncertain or impractical, he may forward the application for zoning permit to the board of zoning appeals for consideration as a special exception, per Section 2.5.3. The board shall impose development restrictions and/or conditions necessary to preserve and protect safety and welfare of persons affected by the proposed use in accordance with the above criteria. 
5.3. - Uses affected by this chapter. 
    The following land uses shall adhere to specific conditions of approval specified in this chapter, in addition to the general standards above. The stricter of conflicting standards shall apply, unless the board of zoning appeals rules otherwise. 
(A)	Manufacturing (Section 5.4). 
(B)	Certain public service uses in residential zones (5.5). 
(C)	Adult uses (5.6) 
(D)	Mini-warehouses (5.7). 
(E)	Manufactured homes on separate lots (5.8). 
(F)	Manufactured home parks, courts, and communities (5.9). 
(G)	Veterinary service (5.10). 
(H)	Self-service car wash (5.11). 
(I)	Townhouse project (5.12). 
(J)	Patio and zero lot line housing project (5.13). 
(K)	Communications tower and antenna (5.14). 
5.4. - Performance standards and criteria for manufacturing and processing plants. 
    The purpose of this section is to prevent land or building from being used or occupied in any manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable or hazardous condition. Toward this end, the operational characteristic of all manufacturing and processing uses shall be measured for conformance with the provisions of this section. 
5.4.1.   Vibration.
    No vibration shall be produced which is transmitted through the ground and is discernible without the aid of instruments at any point beyond the lot line; nor shall any vibration produced exceed the following particle velocity levels, measured with a vibration monitor in inches per second at the nearest; 
(A)	Residential property line: 0.02 
(B)	Non-residential property line: 0.10 
(C)	Vibration emanating from construction activities between 7:00 am and 9:00 pm. shall be exempt from these regulations. 
5.4.2.   Fire and explosive.
    All activities and all storage of flammable and explosive material shall be provided with the adequate safety devices against the hazards of fire and explosion including adequate fire fighting and fire suppression equipment, as prescribed by the National Fire Protection Association (which standards are hereby incorporated by reference and made part of this ordinance). 
5.4.3.   Air pollution.
(A)	The emission of visible smoke, dust, dirt, fly ash, particulate matter from any pipes, vents, or other openings, or from any other source into the air, shall comply with the regulation of the South Carolina Pollution Control Authority. 
(B)	Air pollution emanating from construction activities between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. shall be exempt from these requirements. 
5.4.4.   Odor.
    There shall be no emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive at the property line. Any process, which may involve the creation, or emission of any such odor, shall be provided with both a primary and a secondary safeguard system so that control may be maintained in the event of failure of the primary safeguard system. 
5.4.5.   Glare.
    There shall be no direct or sky reflected glared, whether from floodlights, high temperature processing, and combustion, welding or otherwise, so as to be visible in any residence. 
5.4.6.   Noise.
(A)	All noise shall be muffled so as not to be objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency or shrillness. In no event shall the sound pressure level of noise radiated continuously from a facility exceed at the lot line the values given in tables below, "Nighttime Schedule" and "Daytime Schedule" in any octave band or frequency. South pressure level shall be measured with a sound level meter and an octave band analyzer that confirms to specifications published by the American Standards Association. 
(B)	Noise emanating from construction activities between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. shall be exempt from these requirements. 
(C)	Nighttime schedule. Maximum permissible sound pressure levels at the lot line for noise radiated continuously from a facility between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
Frequency Band 

(In Cycles 

per Second) At Non-Residential 

Lot Line At Residential 

Lot Line 20-75 69 decibels 65 decibels 75-150 60 50 150-300 56 43 300-600 51 38 600-1,200 42 33 1,200-2,400 40 30 2,400-4,800 38 28 4,800-10,000 35 20  
(D)	Daytime schedule. Maximum permissible sound pressure levels at the lot line for noise radiated from a facility between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. shall not exceed the limits of the preceding table except as specified and corrected below. 
Type of Operation in 

Character of Noise >Correction 

(In Decibel) Daytime Operation only Plus 5 Noise source operated less than 20% of any one-hour period Plus 5 Noise source operated less than 5% of any one-hour period Plus 10 Noise source operated less than 1% of any one-hour period Plus 15 Noise of impulsive character (hammering, etc) Minus 5 Noise of periodic character (hum, speech, etc.) Minus 5  
  
5.4.7.   Fumes and vapors.
    There shall be no emission of any fumes or vapors of a noxious, toxic, or corrosive nature, which can cause damage or irritation to health, animals, vegetation, or to any form of property. 
5.4.8.   Heat, cold, dampness or movement of air.
    Activities which could produce any adverse affect on the temperature, motion, or humidity of the atmosphere beyond the lot line shall not be permitted. 
5.4.9.   Toxic matter.
    The release of any airborne toxic matter shall not exceed the quantities permitted for those materials currently listed in Threshold Limit Values, adopted by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists. If a toxic substance is not contained in said listing, the applicant shall satisfy the planning commission that the proposed levels will be safe to the general population. The measurement of toxic matter shall be at ground level or habitable elevation and shall be the average of any twenty-four-hour sampling period. 
5.4.10.   Exterior illumination.
    All operations, activities, and uses shall be conducted so as to comply with the performance standards governing exterior illumination prescribed below. In general, the pattern of light pooling from each light source shall be carefully considered to avoid throwing light onto adjacent properties. Light sources visible in residential or medical areas comply with the light intensities indicated in Column A below. 
5.4.11.   Maximum intensity of light sources.
    Illumination shall be measured from any point outside the property. Illumination levels shall be measured with a photoelectric having a special response similar to that of the human eye, following the standard luminous efficiency curve adopted by the International Commission of Illumination. 
Column A >Column B Bare incandescent bulbs 15 watts 40 watt Illuminated buildings 15 ft. candles 30 ft. candles Back lighted or luminous background signs 150 ft. lamberts 250 ft. lamberts Outdoor illuminated signs & poster panels 25 ft. candles 110 ft. candles Any other unshielded sources, intrinsic Brightness 50 candela per sp. 
Centimeter 50 candela per sq. 
Centimeter  
5.4.12.   Waste matter and storm drainage.
(A)	No use shall accumulate or discharge beyond the lot lines any waste matter, whether liquid or solid, in violation of the applicable standards and regulations of the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control, or in such a manner as to endanger the public health, safety, or general welfare; or cause injury to property. 
(B)	Plans and specifications for all proposed industrial waste treatment and disposal facilities shall be submitted to and written approval obtained from the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control prior to the issuance of a zoning permit. 
5.4.13.   Compliance guarantee.
    The applicant of a permit for a manufacturing or processing plant which would produce any of the above "objectionable elements" shall acknowledge in writing his understanding of the performance standards applicable to the proposed use and shall submit with the permit application, an agreement to conform with such standards at all times. Any violation of the agreement shall constitute a violation of this ordinance and shall be treated accordingly. 
5.5. - Certain public service uses in residential zones. 
    Due to the potential impact of the following uses in residential areas, their location shall be guided by the additional requirements of this chapter. 
(A)	Utility substations. 
(B)	Sewage treatment plans. 
(C)	Electrical transformers. 
(D)	Water towers. 
5.6. - Adult use. 
    It is the purpose of this ordinance to regulate sexually oriented businesses and tattoo parlors to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Hanahan and to establish reasonable uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses and tattoo parlors within the City of Hanahan. The provisions of this ordinance have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of this ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent or effect of this ordinance to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
5.6.1.   Classification.
    Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(A)	Adult arcades; 
(B)	Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
(C)	Adult cabarets; 
(D)	Adult motels; 
(E)	Adult motion picture theaters; 
(F)	Adult theaters; 
(G)	Escort agencies; 
(H)	Nude model studios; and 
(I)	Sexual encounter centers. 
5.6.2.   Zoning permit and business license required.
(A)	A person commits a misdemeanor if he/she operates a sexually oriented business or tattoo parlor without a valid zoning permit and business license, issued by the City of Hanahan for the particular type of land use and business. 
(B)	The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the health department, fire department, zoning administrator, and building official. They shall complete their inspection and certify same to the zoning administrator within twenty-one (21) days of receipt of the application by the zoning administrator. 
(C)	If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business or tattoo parlor is an individual, he/she must sign the application for the zoning permit and the business license as the applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business or tattoo parlor is other than an individual, each individual who has a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for the permit and license as the applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or tattoo parlor or as the entity which wishes to operate such a business, each individual having a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the corporation must sign the application for the permit and license as the applicant. 
5.6.3.   Conditions for issuance of business license.
    The City of Hanahan Business License Official shall issue a license to an applicant within thirty (30) days after receipts of an application unless he/she finds one (1) or more of the following to be true: 
(A)	An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(B)	An applicant or applicant(s) spouse is overdue in his/her payment of the city or the county for taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against him/her for imposes upon him/her in relation to a sexually oriented business or tattoo parlor. 
(C)	An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the zoning permit and business license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the applicant form. 
(D)	An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a business license by the City of Hanahan to operate a sexually oriented business or tattoo parlor within the preceding twelve (12) months, or residing with a person whose business license to operate a sexually oriented business or tattoo parlor has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months. 
(E)	The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business or tattoo parlor have not been approved by the health department, fire department, zoning administrator, and the building official as being in compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(F)	The business license fee required by this ordinance has not been paid. 
(G)	An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this ordinance. 
(H)	The business license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business or tattoo parlor. 
(I)	An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this ordinance. 
(J)	The business license, if granted, shall state on its fact the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business or tattoo parlor. The license shall be posted in conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business or tattoo parlor so that it may be easily read at any time. 
5.6.4.   Inspection.
(A)	An applicant or permittee and/or licensee shall permit representatives of the sheriff's department, health department, fire department, building inspections, zoning, or other city departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business or tattoo parlor for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(B)	A person who operates a sexually oriented business or tattoo parlor or his/her agent or employee commits a misdemeanor if he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
5.6.5.   Expiration of business license.
(A)	Each business license shall expire on April 30th of each year and may be renewed only by making application as provided in Section 6.1.3. Application for renewal should be made no fewer than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, and when made fewer than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(B)	When the City of Hanahan Business License Official denies renewal of a license, the applicant will not be issued a license for one (1) year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the City of Hanahan Business License Official finds that the basis for denial for the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date denial became final. 
5.6.6.   Suspension of business license.
    The City of Hanahan Business License Official shall suspend a business license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he/she determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
(A)	Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this ordinance; 
(B)	Engaged in excess use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business or tattoo parlor premises; 
(C)	Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business or tattoo parlor premises as authorized by this chapter; or 
(D)	Knowingly allowed gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business or tattoo parlor premises. 
5.6.7.   Revocation of business license.
(A)	The City of Hanahan Business License Official shall revoke a business license if a cause of suspension in Section 5.5.6 occurs and the permit and/or license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months. 
(B)	The City of Hanahan Business License Official shall revoke a business license if he determines that: 
(1)	A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the licensing department during the application process; 
(2)	A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)	A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)	A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business or tattoo parlor during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)	A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sexual conduct to occur in or on the licensed premises; or 
(6)	A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city, county, or state for any taxes for fees past due. 
(C)	When the City of Hanahan Business License Official revokes a business license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year, and the licensee shall not be issued another license for one (1) year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the City of Hanahan Business License Official finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a permit and/or licensee if at least ninety (90) days has elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. 
5.6.8.   Transfer of zoning permit and/or business license.
    A permittee or licensee shall not transfer his/her permit and/or license to another, nor shall a permittee or licensee operate a sexually oriented business or tattoo parlor under the authority of a zoning permit and/or business license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
5.6.9.   Location of adult uses.
(A)	A person shall be in violation of this ordinance if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business or tattoo parlor outside of an approved location. 
(B)	A person shall be in violation of this ordinance if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business or tattoo parlor within one thousand (1,000) feet of: 
(1)	A religious institution; 
(2)	A public or private elementary or secondary school; 
(3)	A boundary of any residential district; 
(4)	A public park adjacent to any residential district; or 
(5)	The property line of a lot devoted to residential use. 
(C)	For the purpose of this ordinance, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or object, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business or tattoo parlor is conducted, to the nearest property line or the premises of a public or private affected public park, residential district, or residential lot. 
(D)	The person shall be in violation of this ordinance if he/she causes or allows the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of an adult use within one thousand (1,000) feet of another adult use. 
(E)	A person shall be in violation of this ordinance if he/she causes or allows the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one (1) adult use in the same building, structure, or portion thereof or the increase of floor areas of any adult use in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another adult use. 
(F)	For purposes of Subsection 6.1.9(D) of this section, the distance between any two (2) adult uses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(G)	Any sexually oriented business or tattoo parlor lawfully operating on June 8, 1993, that is in violation of subsection 6.1.9, (A) through (F) of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be allowed to continue for a period not to exceed two (2) years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two (2) or more adult uses are within one thousand (1,000) feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business or tattoo parlor which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later-established business(s) is nonconforming. 
5.6.10.   Additional regulations for adult motels.
(A)	Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two (2) or more times in a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a refutable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter. 
(B)	A person commits a misdemeanor if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a business license to operate a sexually oriented business, he/she rents or sub-rents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, he/she rents or sub-rents the same sleeping room again. 
(C)	For purposes of subsection 6.1.10(B) of this section, the terms "rent" or "subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any consideration. 
5.6.11.   Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos.
    A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises, in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements. 
(A)	Upon application for a zoning permit and a business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one (1) or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be allowed. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the business license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The business license official may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(B)	The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(C)	No alteration in the configuration of location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the zoning administrator. 
(D)	It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one (1) employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(E)	The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms shall not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is allowed access for any purpose from at least one (1) of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(F)	It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises, to ensure that the views specified in this subsection remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is allowed access to any area of the premises that has be designated as an area in which patrons will not be allowed in the application filed pursuant to this section. 
(G)	No viewing room may be occupied by more than one (1) person at a time. 
(H)	The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures or sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are allowed access at an illumination of not less than one (1) foot-candle, as measure at the floor level. 
(I)	It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
5.6.12.   Exemptions.
    It is not a violation of Section 5.6 of the Zoning Ordinance if a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(A)	By a private college or university, which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(B)	In a structure: 
(1)	That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and 
(2)	Where in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and 
(3)	Where no more than one (1) nude model is on the premises at any one (1) time. 
5.7. - Mini-warehouses. 
    Due to the need to better integrate mini-warehouses into the urban fabric of the community, the following standards shall be observed: 
(A)	Lot size. Mini-warehousing site shall not exceed two (2) acres. 
(B)	Lot coverage. Lot coverage of all structures shall be limited to fifty (50) percent of the total area 
(C)	Vehicular ingress-egress shall be limited to one (1) point for each side of property abutting any street lot line. 
(D)	Storage only. No business activities other than rentals of storage units shall be conducted on the premises. 
5.8. - Manufactured home on a separate lot. 
    The placement of manufactured homes in subdivisions, and on individual or separate lots, where permitted by this ordinance, shall comply with the following regulations. 
(A)	Only one (1) manufactured home shall be located on a lot. 
(B)	The manufactured home and accessory uses shall conform to all applicable district requirements. 
(C)	The manufactured home shall be attached to a permanent foundation and securely underpinned and anchored. The securing of the unit to a permanent foundation shall be inspected and approved by the building official or his designee. 
(D)	Each manufactured home shall have skirting constructed of bricks, concrete blocks, or other appropriate material, which extends from the exterior wall to the ground. 
(E)	The tongue shall be removed where so designed. 
5.9. - Manufactured home parks, courts, and communities. 
    Manufactured home parks, courts, and communities shall comply with the following development standards, when application is made to the zoning administrator for a new or renovated community. 
(A)	The minimum park or court area shall be two (2) acres. 
(B)	The park shall be served by community water and sewer systems, and a system of storm drainage in accordance with the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance. 
(C)	Roadways, which are not to be dedicated as public streets, shall have a minimum travel width of twenty (20) feet exclusive of parking. 
(D)	Paved roadways shall be required of all parks. 
(E)	All on-site roadway intersections shall be provided with adequate lighting, and interior lights shall be provided at not more than four hundred-foot intervals. 
(F)	Each manufactured home stand shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet from any other stand and at least twenty-five (25) feet from the right-of-way or ingress-egress easement of any drive which provides common circulation, and fifteen (15) feet from any side or rear property line, and shall meet the front yard setbacks for the district. 
(G)	Manufactured homes shall be placed on one (1) of the following types of foundations, which shall be subject to approval by the building official. 
(1)	Piers under frame of masonry construction on 16×16×4-inch thick foundation (nominal). 
(2)	Masonry curtain-wall foundation of solid continuous construction around the entire perimeter of the mobile home on concrete or masonry footings. 
(3)	Concrete slab foundation. 
(H)	Foundation shall be so constructed as to prevent settling and accumulation of water under the manufactured home. 
(I)	All manufactured homes placed on a concrete slab foundation or on a concrete or masonry footing foundation shall be provided with appropriate skirting of solid durable material around the entire perimeter. 
(J)	Each manufactured home shall be securely under-pinned and anchored. 
(K)	Space number. Permanent space numbers shall be provided on each mobile home space and shall be located so as to be visible from the internal circulation road. Signs identifying space locations shall be provided at each road intersection. 
(L)	License required; revocation. A business license shall be requisite to the opening or operation of a manufactured home community in the City of Hanahan. 
(1)	Said license may be revoked by the city business license official for a violation of this ordinance or other applicable ordinance and regulations governing the operations of such uses. 
(2)	Recreational vehicle parking. Camper or RV parking is allowed only if on piers, anchored, skirted, and permanently hooked up to utilities. 
5.10. - Veterinary services. 
    Veterinary services and the boarding of animals shall be regulated as follows. 
5.10.1.   Veterinary clinics.
    Veterinary services for small domestic animals must be undertaken within completely enclosed buildings and operated in such a way as to produce no objectionable odors or noise outside its walls. The treatment of large animals such as swine, sheep, goats, horses, cattle, and other livestock shall be prohibited, except in extreme emergency cases. Sheltering and boarding of small domestic animals shall be incidental and secondary to the clinic. 
5.10.2.   Commercial kennels.
    Commercial kennels shall be located no closer to a conventional residential zoning district than five hundred (500) feet and two hundred (200) feet to any residential property line. The applicant shall furnish evidence that adequate measures will be taken to prevent odor, noise, or drainage from becoming a nuisance to uses on adjacent properties. 
5.11. - Self-service car wash. 
    Where allowed, self-service car washes shall be oriented on a lot so that no open vehicular bays will open on or face the street. Where a car wash occupies a corner lot, a fence or dense vegetative buffer shall be provided along the road on the side facing the open bays. 
5.12. - Townhouse development. 
    Due to the unique design features of townhouses, the following design requirements shall be imposed for all such projects in a zoning district where allowable as a conditional use. 
(A)	Such projects shall have a minimum of one-and-a-half (1.5) acres. 
(B)	Not more than eight (8) townhouses may be joined together. 
(C)	The side setback for the end unit shall be as required for the zoning district in which the project is proposed, with not less than fifteen (15) feet between buildings in the project area. 
(D)	Rear setbacks shall be ten (10) feet. 
(E)	Minimum lot width shall be eighteen (18) feet. 
(F)	Buffer areas along the periphery of the project shall be as required by Section 6.4.3. 
(G)	Impervious surface area shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of a townhouse lot, on average, except where at least twenty-five (25) percent of the land development is devoted to green space, whereby impervious surface may increase to one hundred (100) percent of a townhouse lot. 
(H)	Maximum height of buildings shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet. 
(I)	Front setbacks shall be twenty-five (25) feet, but may be waived or modified by the planning commission, due to the unique style of such housing. 
(J)	Rear yards shall be enclosed by a six-foot wall or fence unless used for parking, and may include one (1) accessory building no greater than one hundred (100) square feet in gross floor area. 
5.13. - Patio and row housing developments. 
    Due to the unique design features of patio and row housing, the following requirements shall be imposed on all such projects in a zoning district where allowable as a conditional use. 
(A)	Such projects shall have a minimum of one and one-half (1.5) acres. Minimum lot area shall be three thousand (3,000) square feet for each residence. 
(B)	Minimum lot width shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
(C)	Maximum height of buildings shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet. 
(D)	Where a unit is to be constructed at or on the property line, a five-foot maintenance easement shall be provided on the adjoining lot for access to the structure. 
(E)	A minimum patio or yard area of seven hundred (700) square feet shall be provided on each lot, not more than fifteen (15) percent of which shall be impervious. 
(F)	Impervious surface area shall not exceed sixty-five (65) percent of a residential lot, on average, except where at least twenty (20) percent of the land development is devoted to green space. In such instances, impervious surface areas may increase to eighty-five (85) percent of a residential lot, on average. 
(G)	At least one (1) side yard extending not less than five (5) feet from the property line shall be provided. 
(H)	The side yard of the exterior units shall be ten (10) feet from the community tract boundary line. 
(I)	Rear yard setbacks shall not be less than ten (10) feet. 
(J)	Front setbacks shall be twenty-five (25) feet, but may be waived or modified by the planning commission, due to the unique style of such housing. 
(K)	Buffers along the periphery of the project shall be as required per Section 6.4.3. 
5.14. - Communications tower and antenna. 
    The purpose of this ordinance to is to regulate the siting of telecommunications towers and antennae in order to balance the interests of the residents of the City of Hanahan, telecommunications providers, and telecommunications customers. Telecommunications facilities must be sited in a way that protects the health, safety, property, and the general public welfare, but also should not be so restrictive as to prohibit a competitive environment for telecommunications carriers and/or prohibit the provision of quality personal wireless services for residents, workers, and visitors of the City of Hanahan. As cell phone ownership rates increase and landline ownership rates decrease, more households rely on cell phones to make 911 and other emergency calls. Telecommunications facilities should be sited properly in order to provide cellular services, especially during natural disasters and other emergencies. 
(Ord. No. 2-2016, § 1, 4-12-2016) 
5.14.1.   Interpretation.
(A)	Communications tower, as used in this section shall mean a tower, pole, or similar structure which supports a telecommunications antenna operated for commercial purposes above ground in a fixed location, free-standing, guyed, or on existing buildings or other support structures. Common types of telecommunications towers include monopole towers, lattice towers, guyed towers (those held up by guyed wires), or free-standing towers. 
(B)	Telecommunications, as defined in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, means the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without charge in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 
(C)	Antenna as used in this section means any exterior apparatus used to transmit or receive electromagnetic waves for telephonic, radio, television, or personal wireless services. 
(D)	Height of a communications tower is the distance from the base of the tower to the top of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 2-2016, § 1, 4-12-2016) 
5.14.2.   Documentation requirements.
    In addition to the completed application for zoning permit, which includes a site development plan, the developer shall submit the following information. 
(A)	One (1) copy of typical specifications for proposed structures and antenna, including description of design characteristics and materials. 
(B)	Depiction of tower location with reference to property boundaries, tower height, guy wires and anchors, existing structures, photographs or elevation drawings depicting typical design of proposed structures, parking, fences, landscape plan, and existing land uses on adjacent property. 
(C)	A description of anticipated maintenance needs for the proposed structures and antenna, including frequency of service, personnel, equipment, and traffic, noise, or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
(D)	Where applicable, documentation of existing antenna, facilities, and towers, and approved, yet-to-be constructed towers serving any property within the city. 
(E)	Identification of the geographic service area for the subject installation, including a map showing the proposed site/service area and the nearest telecommunications facility sites/service areas. Included should be a depiction of distances between proposed facility site and existing telecommunications facilities and how the proposed facility's service area fits into and is necessary to fill a gap in the service network. 
(F)	Evidence that co-location of the antenna with an existing facility is not feasible. 
(G)	In the event that a tower or antenna is proposed in a Conservation Preservation (CP), Residential Office (RO), or the Town Center (TC) district, a map identifying all nonresidential properties within the same service area and documentation of attempts to identify and/or secure alternative sites within a nonresidential zoning district as a preferred location for siting of the proposed facility. 
(H)	A report from a structural engineer registered in South Carolina showing the tower antenna capacity by type and number, and a certification that the tower is designed to withstand winds in accordance with ANSI/EIZ/TIA 22 (latest revision) standards, and structural failure characteristics to determine that site and setbacks are adequate to contain debris within the identified fall zone (property boundaries). 
(I)	Identification of the owners of all antennae and equipment to be located on site. 
(J)	Evidence that a valid FCC license for the proposed activity has been issued. 
(K)	A line of sight analysis showing the potential visual and aesthetic impacts on adjacent residential districts. 
(L)	A written agreement to remove the tower and/or antenna within one hundred eighty (180) days after cessation of use. 
(M)	Evidence that applicable conditions in this section are met. 
(N)	Additional information required by the zoning administrator for determination that all applicable zoning regulations are met. 
(Ord. No. 2-2016, § 1, 4-12-2016) 
5.14.3.   Communications tower and antenna as a conditional use.
(A)	A communications tower and antenna may receive zoning permit from the zoning administrator as a conditional use upon demonstrated conformance with the following table and adherence to all other conditions provided in this chapter. 
Zoning Districts Standards Residential Office/Town Center Free Standing Tower with height not exceeding 120 feet subject to section 5.14.2(G) above and 5.14.3(C)(3) below. General Commercial Free Standing or Guyed Tower with height not exceeding 160 feet; Towers proposed with height exceeding 160 feet may be approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as a Special Exception per Section 5.14.4. Industrial Free Standing or Guyed Tower with height not exceeding 300 feet; Towers proposed with height exceeding 300 feet may be approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as a Special Exception per Section 5.14.4. Conservation/Preservation Free Standing or Guyed Tower with height not exceeding 250 feet; Towers proposed with height exceeding 250 feet may be approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals as a Special Exception per Section 5.14.4. Planned Development Districts (Type 'B') Tower with height specified according to zoning is permitted under conditions set forth in plan.  
(B)	Not withstanding the above height limitations, a tower and/or antenna mounted on a building, water tank, or structures other than a freestanding or guyed communications tower shall be allowed up to twenty (20) feet above the highest part of the structure in all zoning districts except Town Center. 
(C)	The developer shall demonstrate conformance with the following conditions prior to receiving a zoning permit. 
(1)	The proposed communications tower, antenna or accessory structure will be placed in a reasonably available location and/or designed with special aesthetic treatments (e.g., stealth, pine or palm trees) which will minimize the visual impact on the surrounding area and allow the facility to function in accordance with minimum standards imposed by applicable communications regulations and applicant's technical design requirements. 
(2)	Applicant must show that a proposed antenna and equipment cannot be accommodated and function as required by applicable regulations and applicant's technical design requirements without unreasonable modifications on any existing structure or tower under the control of applicant. 
(3)	Applicants for a permit in a residential office district must show that the area cannot be adequately served by a facility placed in a non-residential district for valid technical reasons. 
(4)	Prior to consideration of a permit for location on private property which must be acquired, applicant must show that available publicly owned sites zoned to permit telecommunications facilities, and available privately owned sites occupied by a compatible use, are unsuitable for operation of the facility under applicable communications regulations and applicant's technical design requirements. 
(5)	If parcel is within the Accident Potential Zone (APZ) for aircraft, the applicant must show that the height of the tower is less than one hundred twenty (120) feet. 
(6)	Applicant must show that a new tower is designed to accommodate additional antennae equal in number to applicant's present and future requirements. 
(7)	Applicant must show that all applicable health, nuisance, noise, fire, building, and safety code requirements are met. 
(8)	All state and federal requirements must be met: these requirements include, but are not limited to, those set by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO), and Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
(9)	A communications tower must not be painted or illuminated unless otherwise provided by state or federal regulations. 
(10)	Applicant must show that the proposed site is sufficient to accommodate the fall zone of a tower to ensure there will be no encroachments on adjacent properties in the event of structural failure. 
(11)	A permit for a proposed tower site within two thousand (2,000) feet of an existing tower shall not be issued unless the applicant certifies that existing structural specifications and applicant's technical design requirements are not compatible, or that a collocation agreement could not be obtained. 
(12)	Applicant must show by certificate from a professional engineer that the proposed facility will contain only equipment meeting FCC rules, and must file with zoning administrator a written indemnification of the municipality and proof of liability insurance or financial ability to respond to claims up to one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in the aggregate which may arise from the operation of the facility during its life, at no cost to the municipality. 
(13)	Land development regulations, visibility fencing, screening, landscaping, parking, access, lot size, exterior illumination, sign, storage, and all other general zoning district regulations except setback and height, shall apply to the use. Setback and height conditions in this section apply, except where specifically modified or waived by the board of zoning appeals with good cause. 
(14)	A tower must be a minimum distance equal to one-half (1/2) the height of the tower from property designated by city council as historic or architecturally significant, and must be set back from all lot lines distances equal to the district setback requirements plus twenty-five (25) percent of the tower height, whichever is greater. 
(D)	The zoning administrator may forward the application to the board of zoning appeals to be considered as a special exception, per Section 2.5.3, in any case where he deems that achievement of the conditions is not abundantly clear. 
(Ord. No. 2-2016, § 1, 4-12-2016) 
5.14.4.   Communications tower and antenna as a special exception use.
    The board of zoning appeals shall authorize the issuance of a zoning permit for a tower, pole or antenna by special exception based on the following criteria: 
(A)	All application requirements and conditions imposed by this Section 5.14 for conditional use are met, except height limitations and setbacks, which may be adjusted as follows. 
(1)	If additional tower height is requested, total tower height will not exceed one hundred fifty (150) percent of the maximum height allowed in the table provided in Subsection 5.14.3(A). The applicant shall demonstrate that additional height above that allowed in the table is necessary for service to occupants of an area within the municipality. 
(2)	In approving a special exception, the Board of Zoning Appeals may impose such conditions, safeguards, and restrictions upon the premises benefited by the special exception as may be necessary to avoid, minimize, or mitigate any potentially adverse or injurious effect of such special exceptions upon other property in the neighborhood and to carry out the general purpose and intent of this ordinance. Conditions and restrictions may include, but are not limited to, those related to fencing, planting, or other landscaping, additional setbacks from property lines, location, and arrangement of lighting, and other reasonable requirements deemed necessary to safeguard the interest of the general public. The board may require a guarantee or bond to ensure that conditions imposed will be complied with. 
(B)	In considering a telecommunication facility for special exception approval, the BZA shall give the following factors reasonable consideration: 
(1)	The effect of the proposed telecommunication facility on environmentally sensitive land or natural features, wildlife habitat and vegetation, water quality and air quality. 
(2)	Whether the proposed telecommunication facility will adequately provide for safety from fire hazards and have effective measures of fire control. 
(3)	The traffic expected to be generated by the proposed facility, the adequacy of access and the vehicular and pedestrian circulation elements (both on and off site), all in relation to the public's interest in pedestrian and vehicular safety and efficient traffic movement. 
(4)	The glare or light that may be generated by the proposed facility in relation to uses in the immediate area. 
(5)	The location and area footprint with dimensions (all drawn to scale), nature and height of the proposed tower in relationship to other structures in the neighborhood. 
(6)	The nature and extent of existing or proposed landscaping screening and buffering on the site and in the neighborhood. 
(7)	The location and screening of parking and loading spaces and/or areas. 
(C)	In conjunction with the board's action to approve a special exception use, the board shall make written findings certifying compliance with the criteria for a special exception in Subsections (A) and (B) above and any other conditions and regulations applicable to the proposed use. The Telecommunications Act of 1996 requires that denial of a permit be supported by substantial evidence. Therefore, if the board denies approval of the request, it shall specify its reasons for such denial. 
(Ord. No. 2-2016, § 1, 4-12-2016) 
6. - LANDSCAPING 

6.1. - Intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide landscape amenities, setbacks, and screening which promote a positive city image reflecting order, harmony and pride. The results will be a strengthening of the economic stability of Hanahan business and residential areas. The goal of this chapter is to contribute to a strong sense of neighborhood and community. The objectives of the ordinance are as follows: 
(A)	Improve the appearance of the vehicular use areas and properties abutting public rights-of-way; 
(B)	Provide protective buffering between incompatible land uses; 
(C)	Protect and preserve the appearance, character, and value of surrounding neighborhoods; 
(D)	Promote the aesthetic appeal, scenic beauty, character, and value of the city while preserving and enhancing our natural environment; 
(E)	Promote public health, safety, and welfare of our community through the reduction of noise pollution, storm water runoff, air pollution, visual pollution, and artificial light glare; 
(F)	Maintain the integrity of trees and plant materials placing them where they will survive and are allowed to grow to their natural size and shape; 
(G)	Set criteria for landscaping while allowing for flexibility in design and theme; 
(H)	Meet the public demand for orderly growth and aesthetic quality; 
(I)	Protect the existing landscape and any future changes in the landscape; 
(J)	Create a continuous network of green space and improve the streetscape in the community; 
(K)	Define necessary installation and maintenance guidelines for landscaping or community; and 
(L)	Define the role of the public and private sectors in creating a community landscape while safeguarding and enhancing property values. 
6.2. - Applicability. 
    All new site and land developments proposed to include commercial, industrial, and multi-family developments, mobile home parks, and other structures shall comply with the minimum landscaping required by the provisions of this chapter. The requirements shall be applicable regardless of zoning district, unless the standards of the zoning district specifically require otherwise or an alternate standard is provided in this chapter. 
6.3. - Review and approval of landscaping plans. 
(A)	The developer proposing a land use for which landscaping is required shall seek a zoning permit. The site development plan shall document proposed landscaping necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(B)	The developer proposing a residential land development for which landscaping is required shall document proposed landscaping necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter on the preliminary land development plan. The developer shall install or bond landscaping required in common areas prior to application for certificates of occupancy for at least twenty-five (25) percent of the residences proposed in the land development or current phase thereof. 
(C)	The developer proposing a non-residential land development for which landscaping is required shall document proposed landscaping necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter on the preliminary land development plan. The developer shall install or bond landscaping required in common areas prior to application for any certificates of occupancy within the land development or current phase thereof. 
6.4. - Landscaping provisions for certain land uses. 
6.4.1.   Manufactured housing community.
    A manufactured housing community (a.k.a. mobile home park) shall have a minimum landscaped buffer of at least ten (10) feet in width adjacent to all property boundaries, including rights-of-way. Landscape material will consist of at least five (5) trees and thirty (30) shrubs per one hundred (100) linear feet of buffer. 
6.4.2.   Commercial and industrial.
(A)	A commercial land use abutting a conventional residential district shall provide one of the following buffers along the district boundary. 
(1)	A landscaped buffer ten (10) feet wide that shall consist of at least five (5) canopy trees, seven (7) understory trees, and thirty (30) shrubs per one hundred (100) linear feet of buffer. 
(2)	A landscaped buffer eight (8) feet wide with the inclusion of a berm, with a maximum slope of two to one (2:1), that is at least two (2) feet in height. The landscaping shall consist of at least five (5) canopy trees, seven (7) understory trees, and thirty (30) shrubs per one hundred (100) linear feet of buffer. 
(3)	A natural, undisturbed vegetative buffer at least eight (8) feet wide, where it is demonstrated that the minimum plantings are retained and provide a year-round opaque buffer. 
(B)	An industrial land use abutting a conventional residential district shall provide one of the following buffers along the district boundary. 
(1)	A landscaped buffer fifty (50) feet wide that shall consist of at least five (5) canopy trees, seven (7) understory trees, and thirty (30) shrubs per one hundred (100) linear feet of buffer. 
(2)	A landscaped buffer thirty-five (35) feet wide with the inclusion of a berm, with a maximum slope of three to one (3:1), that is at least three (3) feet in height. The landscaping shall consist of at least five (5) canopy trees, seven (7) understory trees, and thirty (30) shrubs per one hundred (100) linear feet of buffer and groundcover to inhibit erosion. 
(3)	A landscaped buffer twenty-five (25) feet wide with the inclusion of a continuous masonry wall at least six (6) feet in height and eight (8) inches in width (nominal). The landscaped buffer shall be installed outside the masonry wall, along the property lines, and shall consist of at least five (5) canopy trees, seven (7) understory trees, and thirty (30) shrubs per one hundred (100) linear feet of buffer and groundcover to inhibit erosion. 
(4)	A natural, undisturbed vegetative buffer at least twenty-five (25) feet wide, where it is demonstrated that the minimum plantings are retained and provide a year-round opaque buffer. 

(Ord. No. 7-2012, § 1, 1-8-2013) 
6.4.3.   Multi-family, townhouse, patio home, and zero-lot-line residential developments.
(A)	Buffering. 
(1)	A landscaped buffer of ten (10) feet minimum width shall be provided where a multi-family or townhouse development is proposed on property adjoining a lower density zoning district with no intervening road right-of-way. 
(2)	The required buffer shall consist of a combination of two (2) trees and eight (8) smaller plants (understorey trees and/or shrubs) per one hundred (100) linear feet of buffer. 
(B)	Canopy provision. 
(1)	In addition to the buffer requirements above, one (1) overstorey tree shall be planted for every two (2) dwelling units in common areas of the development. 
(2)	Understorey trees may substitute for up to half of the required overstorey trees, at the discretion of the developer, at a two-to-one ratio (2:1). If the chosen understorey tree is Sabal Palmetto, the ratio shall increase to three to one (3:1). 
(3)	Preservation of existing trees may count toward these requirements. 
6.5. - Landscaping provisions for off-street parking, loading, and vehicular use areas. 
(A)	Trees shall be preserved or planted within and/or around the vehicular use and parking area to ensure that all parking stalls are within fifty (50) feet of a tree. Trees on adjacent property shall not contribute to this requirement. 
(B)	In the event that the above requirement triggers a tree to be planted within a parking area, the tree shall be planted in a bed of at least two hundred (200) square feet in area. The planting area shall be supplemented by at least six (6) small shrubs or twenty (20) ornamental groundcover plants, such as flowers. 
(C)	A landscaped buffer at least eight (8) feet in depth shall be provided along the perimeter of all off-street parking, loading, and vehicular use areas. Minimum required landscaping shall consist of four (4) trees and twenty-five (25) shrubs per one hundred (100) linear feet of buffer. 
(1)	The landscaped buffer may be reduced to five (5) feet for parking, loading, and vehicular use areas greater than thirty (30) feet from property boundaries. Minimum required landscaping shall consist of two (2) trees and fifteen (15) shrubs per linear feet of buffer. 
(2)	The depth shall increase to ten (10) feet to buffer loading areas and vehicle service areas within thirty (30) feet of property boundaries. Minimum required landscaping shall consist of five (5) trees and thirty (30) shrubs per linear feet of buffer. 
(3)	Sabal palmettos may substitute for required trees at a two-to-one (2:1) ratio. 
(4)	Land between the buffer and property boundaries shall be left in a natural vegetative state or landscaped with turf grass, at a minimum. 
(5)	The buffer may be interrupted by an occupiable structure, walkways accessing the structure, and a driveway providing access to the property. 
(D)	For off-street parking areas with more than forty (40) stalls, the buffer between the off-street parking, loading, and vehicular use areas and the adjacent road right-of-way shall be supplemented by one (1) of the following or a combination thereof. 
(1)	A masonry garden wall at least thirty-two (32) inches tall. 
(2)	A landscaped berm at least two (2) feet tall with a maximum slope of one to two (1:2) with landscaping necessary to inhibit erosion. 
6.6. - General landscaping standards. 
(A)	The zoning administrator shall be authorized to modify buffer requirements of this ordinance if it [is] determined that: 
(1)	Buffers will not serve any useful purpose due to the fact that masonry walls, berms, or landscaping of at least equivalent height, opacity, and maintenance already exist on the adjacent parcel. 
(2)	The area of required buffer would exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the site proposed for development. 
(B)	A sight triangle shall be maintained at all road intersections or intersections of driveways with roads. Trees shall be allowed as long as, except during early growth stages, only the trunk is visible between the ground and six (6) feet above the ground. Shrubbery or other low growing plants are allowed provided the maximum height at maturity shall not exceed twenty-four (24) inches. 
(C)	Landscaping elements, including plants and walls, shall be protected from vehicle collision by barrier curbs, wheel stops, or bollards, which shall be placed at least thirty (30) inches from the landscaping elements to be protected. 
(D)	The landscape buffer and material adjacent to any right-of-way shall be provided by the property owner adjoining the right-of-way. When adjacent to other common boundaries, the landscape buffer and materials shall be provided on the parcel being developed. 
(E)	If there exists a landscape buffer on the adjoining property, then it is the responsibility of the owner of the property being developed to ensure that the landscaping in the two (2) buffers are compatible. 
(F)	When two (2) required buffers would overlap, the stricter, more densely planted buffer shall be implemented. 
(G)	Trees planted to meet the requirements of other chapters of the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance and the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance may count toward the planting requirements of this chapter. Trees preserved, either voluntarily or by ordinance requirement, may count one to one toward the planting requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 7-2012, § 1, 1-8-2013) 
6.7. - Landscaping materials standards. 
    All landscape materials shall be of the variety and species that is known to grow and thrive in Hanahan and vicinity. Proposed materials shall be suitable for botanical zone 8-B and shall be tolerant to the conditions in which they are proposed. For instance, plants proposed in paved parking areas shall be tolerant to high heat conditions; shade-tolerant plants shall be installed on the north side of buildings and under tree canopy; and plants installed in tight spaces shall be of a shape and species suited to the limited space. Any material that is proposed which is normally not used in the South Carolina Lowcountry will not be approved unless the owner and designer present documentation regarding the care and survivability of the questioned material to the zoning administrator. Unless specified elsewhere within the Zoning Ordinance, landscape material requirements are as follows: 
(A)	Some form of groundcover shall be installed in all portions of landscaped area not occupied by required trees and shrubs. Groundcover may consist of the following: grasses, vines, and other low-growing plants; organic mulch or pine straw; or crushed stone or other natural material. Artificial materials shall be prohibited. 
(B)	At least two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of required trees and shrubs planted for property boundary buffers shall be evergreen. At least one-third ( 1/3 ) of required trees and shrubs planted to buffer off-street parking, loading, and vehicular use areas shall be evergreen. 
(C)	All shrubs planted in and around parking areas shall be of a type that naturally attains a mature height of at least twenty-four (24) inches. All shrubs planted along property boundaries shall be of a type that naturally attains a mature height of at least forty-eight (48) inches. Shrubs may be grouped or clustered, provided they maintain the required frequency. Three-gallon shrubs shall be the smallest allowed at installation. The following types are preferred shrubs: Glossy Abelia ( Abelia grandiflora ), Azalea ( Azalea indica ), Banana shrub ( Michelia figo ), Broadleaf Ligustrum ( Ligustirum japonica ), Cleyera ( Cleyera japonica ), Sasanqua Camellia ( Camellia sasanqua ), Camellia ( Camellia japonica ), Eleagnus ( Eleagnus pungens "Fruitland" ), Dwarf Burford Holly ( Ilex cornuta "Burfordi" ), Gordonia ( Lisianthus ), Variegated Ligustrum ( Ligustrum sinensis ), Fragrant Tea Olive ( Osmanthus fragrans ), Pittosporum ( Pittosporum tobira ), Variegated Pittosporum ( Pittosporum variegata ), Podocarpus ( Podocarpus macrocarpus maki ), Indian Hawthorn ( Raphiolepis indica ), Yeddo Hawthorn ( Raphiolepis unbellata ), Wax myrtle ( Myrica cerifera ), and Crape Myrtle ( Lagerstromia indica ). 
(D)	Understorey trees, where required, shall be two-inch caliper trees, minimum, upon installation. Understorey trees typically mature to no greater than forty (40) feet in height. Understorey trees shall be planted at least ten (10) feet from one another and at least twenty (20) feet from overstorey trees. 
(E)	Overstorey trees, where required, shall be three (3) inches in caliper, minimum, upon installation. Overstorey trees typically mature to forty (40) feet or more in height and twenty-five (25) feet or more in width. Overstorey trees employed for buffering should typically be columnar or pyramidal in shape; magnolia and red cedar are recommended. Overstorey trees in parking areas should be canopy trees to prevent intrusion of limbs into travel lanes and parking areas; oaks and elms are recommended. 
(F)	Palmetto trees shall not count toward tree provision requirements except where specifically allowed. 
(G)	The following plants are specifically prohibited from use to meet the landscaping requirements of the City of Hanahan: 
(1)	Yucca, Spanish Bayonet, Adams Needle, cactus and any other plant harmful to touch or any plants that are poisonous to touch. 
(2)	Kudzu vine, farm crops, or any other plant determined by the zoning administrator to be a nuisance. 
6.8. - Landscaping installation and maintenance standards. 
    The owner, tenant, and any agents thereof shall be jointly and severally responsible for the continued proper maintenance of all landscaping materials. The developer shall document a program for landscape maintenance to the zoning administrator with an application for a zoning permit, which shall include irrigation unless xeriscaping is proposed. The zoning administrator may review landscaping periodically to ensure proper maintenance. 
(A)	Trees planted and retained to fulfill the requirements of this ordinance shall be allowed to attain their normal and mature size. Trees shall be pruned only as necessary to promote healthy growth and within the guidelines of Section 7 - Tree Protection. All unhealthy or dead material shall be replaced. 
(B)	Shrubs planted and retained to fulfill the requirements of this ordinance shall not be trimmed in unusual shapes and shall be allowed to grow to their normal height or to mature into hedges appropriate for buffering and landscape definition. All unhealthy or dead material shall be replaced. 
(C)	All landscaped planting areas shall always contain the groundcover as approved for property development. All required landscaped planting areas shall remain visibly absent of weeds, refuse, or debris at all times, shall be kept with adequate ground cover, and shall have an orderly appearance. 
6.9. - Landscaping completion agreement and warranty. 
    Landscaping shall be bonded or implemented, inspected, and approved by the zoning administrator upon application by the developer for a certificate of occupancy. The developer shall be eligible to bond landscaping only where extenuating circumstances prevented installation of landscaping prior to application for the certificate of occupancy. The developer seeking to bond landscape materials shall adhere to the following procedures. 
(A)	The developer shall indicate his desire to guarantee landscaping by submitting a written, signed agreement and financial warranty with or prior to a completed application for a certificate of occupancy to the zoning administrator. The agreement shall document conditions preventing installation of landscaping prior to application for the certificate of occupancy. 
(B)	The developer shall sign a written agreement binding him to complete the improvements within four (4) months of receipt of the certificate of occupancy, as indicated by the dated signature of the zoning administrator. The certificate of occupancy shall be referenced in the agreement. 
(C)	The developer shall submit one (1) or a combination of the following financial warranties to the city planner with the written, signed agreement with the completed application for a certificate of occupancy: 
(1)	A no-contest, irrevocable bank letter of credit; 
(2)	A performance and payment bond underwritten by a corporate surety licensed by the State of South Carolina; or 
(3)	A cashier's check or cash equivalent. 
(D)	The financial warranty shall be in an amount equivalent to two hundred fifty (250) percent of the total labor and materials costs of the landscaping proposed to be ensured. The warranty shall name the City of Hanahan the beneficiary. The zoning administrator shall be authorized to review and approve the costs estimates. 
(E)	The zoning administrator will forward the agreement and warranty to the city attorney for review and comment. The developer shall address those comments and resubmit the agreement if deemed necessary by the city attorney. 
(F)	An agreement and warranty acceptable to the City of Hanahan shall be required components of a completed application for successful receipt of a certificate of occupancy. 
(G)	If guaranteed landscaping is not completed as required, the developer shall be in default. The city shall be authorized to utilize funds of the financial warranty to let or re-let a contract to complete the landscaping. Any funds remaining from the warranty after successful completion of the landscaping shall be returned to the developer. 
(H)	As the developer completes the landscaping, it shall be inspected by the zoning administrator. If the zoning administrator determines that the landscaping has been installed in accordance with approved plans, the city shall release the financial warranty to the developer. 
7. - TREE PROTECTION 

7.1. - Intent. 
    Pursuant to authority conferred by the South Carolina Code of Laws, to promote the public health, safety and general welfare; to reduce noise, heat and glare; to reduce air pollution; to prevent soil erosion; to improve surface drainage and minimize flooding; to prevent excessive and unsightly clearing of wooded tracts of land and to promote tree conservation and preservation; to ensure that noise, glare and other distractions of movement on one (1) area not adversely affect activity within other adjacent areas; to beautify and enhance improved and undeveloped land; to provide a protective physical and psychological barrier between pedestrians and traffic; to create special places that are inviting; to create a civic identity; to counteract the heat stand effect; to encourage energy and water conservation; to protect the wildlife habitat and sensitive ecosystems; to enhance real estate and economic values; to ensure that excessive tree cutting does not reduce property values; to minimize the cost of construction and maintenance of drainage systems necessitated by the increased flow and diversion of surface waters; to encourage the proliferation and replacement of trees on public and private property; and to allow trees to attain their natural shape and size while growing to maturity, the city council does hereby ordain and enact into law this tree protection chapter. The provisions herein shall not be interpreted to prohibit or unduly inhibit development of private property. 
7.2. - Business licensing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who is being paid a fee for the business of planting, cutting, trimming, pruning, removing, or otherwise modifying trees within the City of Hanahan to conduct such business without first signing an affidavit stating that he/she has received and read the Tree Protection Ordinance and 1995 ANSI A300 Standards. Such affidavit shall be completed and submitted when making application for or renewing a City of Hanahan business license. 
7.3. - Protected Trees. 
(A)	The following trees shall be considered "protected" by the City of Hanahan for the purposes of this ordinance: 
(1)	Trees planted or retained to meet the requirements of the Hanahan Zoning and Land Development Ordinances. 
(2)	All species of trees that are eight (8) inches or more in diameter at breast height (DBH). 
(3)	All trees declared to be "landmark" trees per Section 7.4 below. 
(B)	On the lot of a single-family detached, single-family attached, or individually sited manufactured home, the following trees shall be exempt from the tree protection requirements of this ordinance: 
(1)	All trees in the proposed buildable area or driveway, excluding "landmark" trees. 
(2)	Up to twenty-five (25) percent of "protected" trees, excluding landmark trees, outside of the proposed buildable area or driveway. 
(3)	Pines (pinus), sweet gums (liquidamber styraciflua), wax myrtles (myrica cerifera), and crepe myrtles (lagerstromia indica). 
(4)	Dead trees or trees badly damaged by accident, storm, fire, or infestation. 
(C)	On the lot of multi-family residential and nonresidential uses, the following trees shall be exempt from tree protection requirements of this ordinance; provided that in no instance shall there be fewer than twenty (20) trees per acre or less than twenty (20) trees per acre with a combined DBH greater than or equal to one hundred sixty (160) inches per acre retained. 
(1)	All trees in the proposed buildable area, driveway, or other required site improvements, excluding "landmark" trees and those protected trees located within required setback or buffer areas whichever is greater, not to exceed sixty-five (65) percent of the entire site. 
(2)	Pines (pinus), sweet gums (liquidamber styraciflua), wax myrtles (myrica cerifera), and crepe myrtles (lagerstromia indica). 
(3)	Dead trees or trees badly damaged by accident, storm, fire, or infestation. 
(Ord. No. 7-2012, § 1, 1-8-2013) 
7.4. - Landmark trees. 
(A)	The city hereby declares the following trees greater than or equal to the stated diameter at breast height to be "landmark trees" with the preservation standards provided above those for "protected trees." 
SPECIES COMMON NAME DBH Juniperus virginiana Eastern Red Cedar 24? Magnolia grandiflora Southern Magnolia 24? Quercus virginiana Live Oak 24? Quercus laurifolia Laurel Oak 24? Quercus phellos Willow Oak 24? Acer rubrum Red Maple 24? Taxodium distichum Bald Cypress 24? Ilex opaca American Holly 10? Cornus florida Flowering Dogwood 8? Carya Hickory (except Pecan) 24?  
(B)	All trees not listed above, but greater than thirty-six (36) inches in diameter at breast height and protected under Section 7.3 above, shall be considered "landmark" trees for the purposes of this ordinance. 
7.5. - Preservation of protected and landmark trees. 
(A)	It shall be unlawful to cut or otherwise destroy a protected tree or landmark tree without first obtaining a tree removal permit or, for property development, a zoning permit. 
(B)	Unless specifically authorized by the zoning administrator, no person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any protected or landmark tree; attach any signs with rope, wire, nails, or other contrivance to any protected or landmark tree; allow any substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact with them or be placed within their drip line over pervious areas; or intentionally set fire or allow any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any protected tree or landmark tree. 
(C)	The developer shall ensure, to the extent practical, that site and land developments are planned, designed, and constructed to maximize retention of existing trees. Protected trees and especially landmark trees shall be located in common areas and in required buffers and yards to the extent practical. 
7.6. - Tree survey required for development. 
7.6.1.   General provisions.
(A)	The developer shall document protected and landmark trees on the property proposed for development. Two (2) survey methods are provided herein. The developer of property ten (10) acres or more in area shall have the option to utilize "standard" or "sampling" survey method for protected trees. Landmark trees shall always be surveyed using the standard method. 
(B)	A required tree survey shall appear on all preliminary land development plans, site development plans, and any engineering and building site plans showing the installation and construction of improvements and structures. 
(C)	Tree surveying shall not be required on tracts reserved for later phases or future development, on residual tracts of land, or in wetlands proposed to remain undisturbed. 
7.6.2.   Standard tree survey.
(A)	All protected and landmark trees shall be surveyed and graphically indicated on the appropriate development plan. The graphic indications shall be labeled by species and diameter at breast height. 
(B)	Critical root zones and drip lines of protected and landmark trees should be surveyed and illustrated as well. In the absence of specific root zones and drip lines, the plan shall illustrate a graphical representation of the drip line, which shall be a circle centered at the trunk of the tree equal in feet to the diameter at breast height in inches. (e.g., a twenty-four-foot-diameter drip line shall encircle a tree labeled "twenty-four-inch live oak".) 
(C)	The survey shall indicate those portions of critical root zones and drip lines of trees on abutting properties that overlap the subject property, to the extent that such drip lines and critical root zones can be determined from the vantage point of the property to be developed. This provision shall not authorize the trespass on other private property abutting the subject site. 
(D)	The development plan shall graphically indicate which trees are proposed to be removed, retained, and retained with pruning. 
7.6.3.   Tree sampling survey.
(A)	The intent of the tree sampling survey of protected trees is to relieve the developer of the burden of a complete tree survey for all protected trees, which may be numerous, but to encourage the preservation of clusters of protected trees of greater value in a specific portion or section of a tract or in a natural state. Typically, those trees with greater value on a given site are mature, bottomland, and hardwood, while immature upland pines are of little value to the City of Hanahan. The planning commission will consider an immature upland pine forest a suitable site for development. 
(B)	The tree sampling survey of protected trees shall supplement the standard survey of landmark trees. The sampling survey shall indicate the type of groundcover present on each acre of property required to be surveyed. Sampling shall therefore occur once per acre, evenly distributed throughout the property. Groundcover types to be documented on the appropriate development plan include, but are not limited to "cleared," "sandy area," "scrub/shrub," "bottomland hardwood forest," "upland hardwood forest," "bottomland mixed forest," "upland mixed forest," "bottomland pine forest," "upland pine forest," and "marshland." 
(C)	Forests shall be surveyed for predominant species types, approximate average age, approximate average tree diameter at breast height, and frequency or density of trees. The sample shall consider all trees, from immature trees to landmark trees. These findings shall be documented per sample and indicated on the development plan. 
(D)	Forested areas shall be indicated on the plan via hatching or other graphic method as whether they are proposed to be cleared or retained. The developer shall tabulate the approximate number of trees in proposed cleared forests, which shall be the basis for the tree removal mitigation strategy set forth in Section 7.7. 
7.7. - Tree removal mitigation. 
(A)	A developer shall propose a tree planting schedule to replace all protected and landmark trees cleared for property development as defined in Sections 7.3 and 7.4. Trees planted shall be proposed in landscaped buffers, common areas, road rights-of-way, and/or other portions of the developed site. To the extent practical, replacement trees shall be the same species and diversity as those removed, and shall be suitable for Botanical Zone 8B (as suggested in Appendix I). The number and size of mitigation trees shall be in accordance with the table below. 
Each Exiting Tree 
Removed... Will Be Replaced By... Replacement Tree Size... 1 tree, 8-16? DBH 3 trees 2? in Caliper 1 tree, over 16-24? DBH (excluding landmark trees as defined per Section 7.4) 5 trees 3? in Caliper 1 tree, over 24-36? DBH (excluding landmark trees as defined per Section 7.4) 8 trees 3? in Caliper *All landmark trees 
(as defined per Section 7.4) 10 trees 4? in Caliper All protected or landmark trees removed without an approved permit shall be mitigated at twice the requirement listed above  
(B)	Existing trees, mitigation trees and/or planted buffer trees required in accord with Section 6.4 shall be applied towards the required minimum of twenty (20) trees per acre or less than twenty (20) trees with a combined DBH greater than or equal to one hundred sixty (160) inches per acre requirement. 
(C)	If planting trees required for mitigation schedule or to meet the minimum in (B) above is not practical due to site constraints, the developer may opt to pay a fee in lieu of required trees, or, at the discretion of the zoning administrator, plant trees at an off-site location identified on the Community Tree Planting Plan adopted by city council. The amount of the fee shall be equivalent to the value of the required tree. The City of Hanahan Community Tree Planting Plan may provide alternate fees that secure adequate funds to plant required trees elsewhere in the city, as provided for in the plan. 
(D)	All newly planted vegetative material shall be guaranteed to meet American Standards for Nursery Stock at time of planting and for one year thereafter. Maintenance and replacement of damaged, destroyed, or dead plant materials shall be the responsibility of the property owner, or in the case of mitigation trees planted off-site, the responsibility of the developer. 
(Ord. No. 7-2012, § 1, 1-8-2013) 
Editor's note- Appendix I has been set out at the end of this chapter. 
7.8. - City of Hanahan Community Tree Planting Plan and Funding. 
(A)	The Hanahan Planning Commission shall prepare and the Hanahan City Council shall adopt a community tree planting plan prior to the collection of any fees in lieu of required tree removal mitigation. At a minimum, the plan shall specify locations proposed for reforestation and aesthetic tree plantings, which may include public parks, schools and other community facilities and rights-of-way. 
(B)	Fees in lieu of trees required in the mitigation plan, per Section 7.7, shall be recorded and maintained in a special account to be known as the City of Hanahan Tree Preservation Account. Monies maintained in this account may accrue interest at short-term rates prevailing in the market. All such funds and accrued interest shall be used, when appropriated by city council, only for the purpose of funding the installation and maintenance of trees within the City of Hanahan, according to the City of Hanahan Community Tree Planting Plan. Funds may be used to obtain trees, other landscaping associated with tree plantings, sprinklers and other items or materials necessary and proper for the preservation, maintenance, relocation, and restoration of tree ecosystems. 
7.9. - Tree protection measures during development. 
    The developer shall take the following measures to protect retained trees during land disturbance, installation of improvements, construction, and other development activities. 
(A)	Clear-cutting shall be prohibited. Clearing of a site for sale or development prior to application for preliminary land development plan approval or a zoning permit shall be prohibited. 
(B)	Protected trees scheduled to remain shall be protected against: 
(1)	Unnecessary cutting, breaking, or skinning of roots; 
(2)	Skinning and bruising of bark; 
(3)	Smothering of trees by stockpiling construction or excavation materials within drip line and critical root zone; 
(4)	Burning of trash or debris within the drip line or critical root zone; 
(5)	Excessive foot or vehicular traffic; 
(6)	Parked vehicles within the drip line and critical root zone; and 
(7)	Grading, filling, ditching, or trenching, except as specifically provided herein. 
(C)	If trees are wounded or stressed during construction, any wounds to the bark should be cleaned to sound wood by removing loose bark and wood, leaving a smooth edge around the wound. 
(D)	Topsoil disturbance in the critical root zone and drip line of each tree will be limited to six (6) inches removed or six (6) inches added. Any soil added shall be a loamy soil mix to ensure compaction is minimized. 
(E)	The developer shall provide water and fertilizer to trees as required to maintain their health during construction work. 
(F)	The developer shall designate one (1) corridor for construction access on the development plan, preferably where the driveway or parking area will be located, and shall limit construction equipment access, material storage, fuel tanks, chemical or cement rinsing, vehicle parking and construction office locations to non-forested areas to the greatest extent practical. 
(G)	No more than thirty (30) percent of the area within the drip line and critical root zone of the tree shall be disturbed for access to the construction site, installation of improvements or other construction, except as specifically approved by the planning commission or the design control committee on a development plan under its purview. 
(1)	The developer shall submit documentation from a professional landscape architect or arborist that any disturbance beyond thirty (30) percent can be mitigated and that the tree will survive and remain healthy despite the intrusion. 
(2)	All segments of roots removed during development shall be severed clean and a two-inch layer of mulch shall be applied over the surface of remaining exposed roots during development. 
(H)	The developer shall erect temporary barricades at the drip lines of all trees or groups of trees, except where approved development plans propose installation of improvements or other construction per subsection (G), above. 
(1)	The barricade is to be at least three (3) feet high and shall be of adequate structure to prevent removal or failure by natural causes. Two-by-four lumber construction of barricades is recommended. Approval by the zoning administrator shall be required for alternate methods. 

(2)	The barricade shall be posted as "tree protection zone" or similarly visibly designated. Orange fencing common to construction sites in the Lowcountry is recommended. 
(3)	Nothing shall be stored within the barricades, including but not limited to construction material, machinery, chemical, or temporary soil deposits. 
(I)	Any actions that cause the death or removal of trees during development for which approval was not received shall result in a violation of this ordinance AND shall necessitate mitigation for the loss of the tree, per Section 7.7. 
7.10. - Issuance of tree removal permits. 
7.10.1.   General provisions.
    A person who seeks to remove a tree outside the context of property development shall apply for a tree removal permit, which shall be required to authorize the removal of the tree. The permit shall be authorized only for the following trees or conditions. 
(A)	Trees that may threaten health or property. 
(B)	Diseased or infectious trees and trees in decline. 
(C)	Trees or their root systems causing visible damage to structures or areas used for pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(D)	Trees or their root systems causing damage to areas used for pedestrians, vehicular movement, or underground utility lines. 
(E)	Trees within road and utility rights-of-way and easements that cannot be properly pruned by the local utility company. 
(F)	Trees on land actively managed for forestry and/or harvesting. 
7.10.2.   Forest management.
(A)	Proper and routine forest management, including thinning and prescribed burns, is encouraged in Hanahan for those properties owned for the prospect of harvesting timber and/or for conservation. The forest manager shall comply with Section 7.2 of this ordinance and shall seek a tree removal permit. 
(B)	The applicant in receipt of a tree removal permit for forest management shall not be eligible to apply for preliminary land development plan approval or a zoning permit within two (2) years of the authorization date of the tree removal permit. 
7.10.3.   Permit review.
(A)	The person seeking to remove a protected tree shall submit a completed application form available from the zoning administrator, together with the fee for review, to the zoning administrator no fewer than five (5) business days prior to removing the tree(s). 
(1)	The completed application shall include the name of the applicant, the name of the property owner of the tree, if different from the applicant, the addresses of each, and the reason(s) for proposed removal of the tree. A professional certification may be used to substantiate the reason for removal, and may be submitted as part of the completed application. 
(2)	One (1) permit covers all trees proposed for removal in the application. 
(B)	The zoning administrator shall review the application and either approve or deny it within five (5) business days. The dated signature of the zoning administrator on the submitted application shall constitute the tree removal permit. 
(1)	The zoning administrator shall be authorized by receipt of the application to visit the site as he deems necessary to inspect for compliance with this section of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(2)	The zoning administrator shall state in writing the reason(s) for denial. A denied application shall be eligible for appeal to the Hanahan Board of Zoning Appeals, per Section 2.3. 
(C)	The authorized permit shall be posted on the site at the road right-of-way during tree removal. The permit shall be valid for six (6) months after the date the zoning administrator signed the application. 
(Ord. No. 7-2012, § 1, 1-8-2013) 
7.11. - Tree pruning. 
(A)	Maintenance pruning allows for the healthy uniform growth of a tree. Tree pruning promotes the health and natural growth of the tree. A tree's habit of growth must be considered ahead of time, and pruning must not interfere with any design intent or landscaping upon the tree's installation. 
(B)	The use of unnatural pruning techniques will be considered an unauthorized removal of a tree unless the tree is designated on approved landscape plan to be shaped or formed in an unnatural pattern or to be maintained at a certain height. Examples of unnatural pruning are topping, stubbing, dehorning, or lopping. 
(C)	In the situation where a protected tree or its limbs present a potential hazard to real property, minimal pruning shall be allowed in an effort to prevent negative impacts to public and private property and to provide for public safety. In the case of a hazardous tree, removal may be allowed, per Section 7.10. 
(D)	No permit is necessary for pruning; however, improper pruning and pruning out of conformance with these provisions shall be a violation of this ordinance and shall necessitate mitigation of the tree's loss, per Section 7.7. 
Appendix I. Suggested Mitigation Trees 
Scientific Name Common Name Acer rubrum Red Maple Betula nigra River Birch Carya illinoensis Pecan Carya species Hickory Celtis laevigata Sugarberry Cercis Canadensis American Redbud Comus florida Flowering Dogwood Cupressus x chamaecyparis Leyland Cypress Eriobotrya japonica Loquat Fagus grandifolia American Beech Fraxinus species White, Carolina, Green Ash Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo Gordonia lasianthus Loblolly Bay Ilex opaca American Holly Ilex vomitoria Yaupon Holly Ilex x attenuata Fosters, Savannah Holly Juniperus virginiana Eastern Red Cedar Lagerstroemia indica Crepe Myrtle Liriodendron tulipifera Tulip Poplar Magnolia grandiflora Southern Magnolia Magnolia virginiana Sweetbay Nyssa slyvatica Blackgum, Tupelo Oxydendron arboretum Sourwood Pistacia chinensis Chinese Pistache Quercus acutissima Sawtooth Oak Quercus alba White Oak Quercus falcata Southern Red Oak Quercus laurifolia Laurel Oak Quercus lyrata Overcup Oak Quercus phellos Willow Oak Quercus prinus Chestnut Oak Quercus shumardii Shumard Oak Quercus stellate Post Oak Quercus virginiana Live Oak Sassafrass albidum Sassafrass Stewartia species Stewartia Styrax species Snowbell Taxodium distichum Bald Cypress Ulmus parvifolia Chinese Elm Zelkova serrata Japanese Zelkova  
(Ord. No. 7-2012, § 1, 1-8-2013) 
8. - SIGNAGE 

8.1. - Intent. 
    The purpose of this ordinance is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life, health, property, property values, and general public welfare and promote traffic safety by controlling the design, quality of materials, construction, illumination, size, location and maintenance of sign and sign structures. The City of Hanahan requires signs to have a quality design, to be pleasing in appearance, and to be appropriate in size, materials and illumination to the type of activity to which they pertain. Signs are to be designed and installed in a manner that complements both the building and the general streetscape. Unless located on a major highway, signs are to be designed to be pedestrian in scale. Signs are permitted on (a) workplace, storefront, civic, and live/work buildings, and (b) on attached residential building projects under common ownership with units for rent, and single-family residential developments. 
8.2. - Sign review. 
8.2.1.   Zoning permit required for most signs.
    A zoning permit is required for the erection, posting, reposting, placing, replacing or hanging of any sign except where specifically noted below. All signs in Design Control Districts for which a zoning permit is required shall be reviewed by the design control committee, per the requirements of Section 3 of this ordinance, for achievement of the design criteria and standards set forth in this ordinance before a permit for the sign will be issued. The zoning administrator must approve all other signs provided they comply with the requirements of this section before the issuance of a zoning permit. A permit shall not be required for routine maintenance and repair. Minor appearance changes limited to less than twenty (20) percent of the total sign area, including change in text, shall not require a zoning permit. 
8.2.2.   Sign documentation for zoning permit.
    The zoning administrator may review signage for compliance with these standards during site development plan review, per Section 2.6, in which case the zoning permit issued for the development would cover the sign. The applicant shall submit ten (10) copies of a scaled illustration legibly depicting the size and content of the sign and its copy on bond or similar paper. The review process for sign erected independent of a site development for which a zoning permit is required shall nevertheless be that specified for the zoning permit, Section 2.6. 
8.3. - Pedestrian-oriented signs. 
    The following regulations apply to signs proposed on property adjacent to all roads except intercity arterial highways with four (4) or more travel lanes, except where alternate standards for signs for certain purposes and land uses are specified. 

8.3.1.   Wall signs.
    Any sign directly attached to an exterior wall of a building or dependent upon a building for its support shall be considered a wall sign. Signs directly painted on wall shall be considered wall signs. Wall-mounted signs are subject to the standards below. 
(A)	The size of the wall sign shall be no more than five (5) percent of the facade area on which the sign is located, or twenty-four (24) square feet, whichever is less. 
(B)	The maximum wall sign area may be divided into two (2) separate signs on the same building facade as long as the total area of the two (2) signs does not exceed the maximum permitted. 
(C)	Maximum height shall be eighteen (18) feet above finished grade on that facade. 
(D)	Wall signs cannot be located on windows or doors. Standards for window signs appear elsewhere in this chapter. 
(E)	Metal applied letter signs may substitute for wall signs. The sign size shall be calculated by drawing one (1) parallelogram around the text and images, adding a two-inch border on all sides, and calculating the area of the resulting box. 

8.3.2.   Projecting signs.
    A sign affixed to a building and supported only by the wall on which it is mounted is a projecting sign. These signs shall be subject to the following regulations. 
(A)	Maximum sign area is six (6) square feet per side. 
(B)	Clearance from the lower edge of the signboard to the ground shall be seven (7) feet or greater. 
(C)	Height of the top edge of the signboard shall not exceed the height of the wall from which it projects for single story buildings, or the height of the sill or bottom of any second story window for multi-storey buildings. 
(D)	Distance from the building to the signboard shall not exceed two (2) feet. 
(E)	Width of signboard shall not exceed three (3) feet. 

8.3.3.   Freestanding (ground-mounted) signs.
    A freestanding sign is that supported by a sign structure secured in the ground, wholly independent of any other support. Freestanding signs shall meet the following standards. 
(A)	The building served by the freestanding sign shall be set back at least five (5) feet. 
(B)	Maximum sign area is eight (8) square feet of copy area per side. If there are no other signs on the facade of the building for which the sign is erected, the copy area of the ground-mounted sign shall be a fifteen (15) square feet per side, maximum. The frame and/or structure of the sign shall not count toward maximum sign area, provided the structure is not more than one (1) foot thick. 
(C)	Ground-mounted signs identifying institutions shall be a maximum of twenty (20) square feet of copy area per side. The frame and/or structure of the sign shall not count toward maximum sign area, provided the structure is not more than one (1) foot thick. 
(D)	The height of the top of the signboard, or of any posts, brackets, or other supporting elements shall not exceed seven (7) feet. 
(E)	In the case of a group of buildings or shops that act as a unit, one (1) freestanding sign may be erected to advertise all of the businesses. 
(F)	No neon is allowed on freestanding signs. 

8.3.4.   Awning signs.
    An awning sign is made of flexible fabric or similar material covering a metal frame attached to a building over a window or door. The awning sign may be erected so that it can be raised to a position flat against the building when not in use. Awning signs shall meet the following standards. 
(A)	Eight (8) square feet maximum signage area on an awning. 
(B)	No backlit awnings shall be allowed. 
(C)	No neon shall be allowed on awnings. 
8.3.5.   Window (and door) signs.
    Any sign on a building, either exterior or interior, within two (2) feet of the window, which is intended to be viewed from the exterior of such building, shall be considered a window sign. On-site advisory signs, however, are not considered window signs for the purpose of this ordinance. Window signs shall meet the following standards. 
(A)	Maximum size shall be ten (10) percent of the window or door area, or four (4) square feet, whichever is less. 
(B)	The sign shall be silk-screened, hand-painted, vinyl, or etched onto the window. Alternatively, a neon sign hung inside the building in the window shall be allowed. 
(C)	A window sign in a door shall be no more than two (2) square feet. 
8.3.6.   Sidewalk signs.
    A sidewalk sign is an A-frame sign or easel sign, also known as a sandwich board, placed on the sidewalk in front of a business, sometimes posting a menu, or directing patrons to a business at the rear of a building. Sidewalk signs shall meet the following standards. 
(A)	The sign location may be located in the right-of-way adjacent to the property served by the sign, but the sign shall not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular circulation or sightlines and shall leave at least four (4) feet of sidewalk clearance. 
(B)	All sidewalk signs shall be located in front of a primary building, but may direct patrons to the rear of the building or to a neighboring building along an intersecting right-of-way. 
(C)	The sign is constructed of durable materials. 
(D)	The signboard does not exceed six (6) square feet per side and one (1) sign per building. 
(E)	Letter height shall not exceed four (4) inches. 
8.3.7   Changeable copy signs.

    Any sign with a portion thereof constituting a readerboard with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged by any means (manual, electronic, atmospheric, mechanical, remote, etc.) without altering the face or surface of the sign. Changeable copy signs, including time and temperature signs, shall meet the following standards to be permitted: 
(A)	District limitations. Changeable copy signs shall not be allowed within any residential zoning district with the exception of changeable copy signs used in conjunction with an institutional use; e.g., schools, churches, or public uses. 
(B)	Size. Maximum sign area is dictated by that for freestanding/ground mounted signs per subsection 8.3.3(B) and (C), unless the sign location falls under Section 8.4 for highway-oriented signs. 
(C)	Integration. The changeable copy readerboard portion of the sign may comprise no more than fifty (50) percent of the total sign face area to which it is a part. 
(D)	Illumination. If the message center portion of the sign is being utilized after sunset, the static portion of the sign must also be functioning, illuminated, and readable. 
(E)	Electronic changeable copy signs: 
(1)	District limitations. Electronic changeable copy signs shall be allowed for use by nonprofit and public agencies; e.g., schools, churches, or public uses. 

(2)	Orientation. When located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of one (or more) residentially-used lot(s) in a residential zone, all parts of an electronic changeable copy sign shall be oriented so that no portion of the sign face is visible from existing or permitted principal structures on those lots; 
(3)	Limited text. Changeable text of the sign shall be limited to a maximum of ten (10) words to allow passing motorists to read the entire copy with minimal distraction; 
(4)	Duration. Any changeable portion of the message shall have a minimum duration of eight (8) seconds and shall be a static display. 
(5)	Transitions. During transition from one sign face to another, messages may fade in, dissolve, or scroll or have limited animation provided they do not violate the prohibitions in Section 8.9. 
(6)	Color. In residential districts, any portion of the changeable message shall use an amber color; 
(7)	Brightness. Prior to issuance of a permit for an electronic changeable sign, the applicant shall provide a written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory pre-set not to exceed a maximum illumination of five thousand (5,000) nits (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours, and five hundred (500) nits (candelas per square meter) between dusk to dawn as measured from the sign's face at maximum brightness in any district. 
(8)	Dimmer control. The sign shall be equipped with an automatic dimmer control that will automatically dim the intensity of the light emitted by the sign during ambient low-light conditions and at night so the sign does not exceed the maximum brightness levels allowed in [subsection] (7) above. 
(Ord. No. 1-2012, § 1, 3-13-2012) 
8.3.8.   Reserved.
8.3.9.   Illuminated signs.
(A)	Signs may be illuminated by an external or internal source. 
(B)	All illumination shall be provided by a steady stationary light source. 
(C)	The intensity of light emitted to or from a sign shall not exceed two hundred twenty (220) lux at any point on the sign face. 
(D)	Signs illuminated by an internal source must have permanent, nonilluminated framing. 
(E)	The light source for any externally illuminated sign shall be shaded, shielded and directed such that the light intensity or brightness is not visible from adjacent properties or rights-of-way. 
(F)	No exposed reflective type bulbs and no strobe/intermittent light or incandescent lamps shall be used to illuminate a sign. 
(G)	Neither the direct, nor reflected, light from primary light sources - internal or external - shall create a traffic hazard to operators of motor vehicles on public thoroughfares. 
(H)	The color of external light sources to illuminate signs shall be white. 
(Ord. No. 1-2012, § 1, 3-13-2012) 
8.4. - Highway-oriented signs. 
    The following regulations apply to signs proposed on property adjacent to intercity arterial highways with four (4) or more travel lanes, except where alternate standards for signs for certain purposes and land uses are specified. 
8.4.1.   On-premises commercial signs.
(A)	On-premises signs shall be permitted in all zones provided that the sign advertises the principal use of the lot. 
(B)	Signs shall be located in such a way that they will maintain horizontal and vertical clearance of all overhead electrical conductors. No sign shall be installed closer than ten (10) feet horizontally or vertically from any conductor or public utility guy wire. 
(C)	No sign shall be allowed to protrude into the front, side or rear setback. In the absence of required setbacks, no sign shall be located closer than ten (10) feet from the right-of-way or five (5) feet from the side property lines. 
(D)	One (1) freestanding on-premises sign shall be allowed per parcel, unless the use is located within a complex, such as a business park or office complex, and shall not exceed three (3) square feet of copy area for each linear foot of road frontage (e.g., one hundred (100) feet of road frontage would justify a seventy-five-square-foot sign), or the maximum sign area permitted in a district, whichever is less. 
(E)	Wall signs are allowed, but shall not exceed more than fifty (50) percent of the wall area on which the sign is affixed. 
Setback Sign 

Clearance 10 feet 8 feet 11 feet 7 feet 12 feet 6 feet 13 feet 5 feet 14 feet 4 feet 15 feet 3 feet 16 feet 2 feet 17 feet 1 feet 18 feet ground level  
(F)	The height of a freestanding on-premises sign shall not exceed twenty (20) feet from the surface elevation of the right-of-way, or surface grade beneath the sign, whichever is less. 
(G)	The clearance of a freestanding on-premises sign shall comply with the table at right. Clearance shall be measured from finished grade beneath the sign and the surface elevation of the adjacent right-of-way to ensure adequate visual clearance for motorists. 
(H)	Signs oriented parallel to the right-of-way shall be exempt from the requirement above and may be located at grade level. 
(I)	No sign shall be erected at the intersections of streets, driveways, or alleys in such a manner as to obstruct clear vision. 
(J)	On-premises signs may be illuminated by indirect or internal illumination. 
(K)	In the event a business is located on a corner lot, two (2) on-premises freestanding signs shall be allowed per parcel. If the intersecting street is not an intercity arterial road with four (4) or more lanes, the second sign shall meet the requirements for pedestrian-oriented signs, Section 8.3. 
(L)	No sign shall be placed within fifty (50) feet of conventional residential zoning district purposes unless the sign meets the requirements for pedestrian-oriented signs, per Section 8.3. 
(M)	All pedestrian-oriented signs, per Section 8.3, shall be allowed on property adjacent to intercity arterial highways with four (4) or more travel lanes, except that sidewalk signs shall not be permitted in the right-of-way of the same intercity arterial highways. 
8.4.2.   Off-premises signs.
    Any sign located, or proposed to be located, at any place other than within the same site or land development in which the specific business or activity being identified on the sign is itself located or conducted is an off-premises sign. 
(A)	Off-premises signs shall be allowed only in the Industrial (ID) zoning district. 
(B)	One (1) off-premise sign shall be allowed per lot. 
(C)	Off-premises signs shall not be greater than twenty (20) feet in height above the surface elevation of the adjacent right-of-way of finished grade beneath the sign. 
(D)	Off-premises signs shall not be greater than one hundred fifty (150) feet in copy area per side. 
(E)	Off-premises signs shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from the pavement edge of the nearest road surface. 
(F)	Separation of off-premises signs greater than thirty-five (35) feet in sign area shall be at least one thousand (1,000) feet, measured along the nearest road, from any other off-premises sign. 
8.5. - Signs for specific purposes and land uses. 
    Signs for the following specific purposes and land uses shall meet those standards provided herein, regardless of standards more broadly applied. 
8.5.1.   Neighborhood signs.
    A sign that identifies a neighborhood, residential community, or other residential subdivision, name and logo shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area. Such signs shall be placed so as not to obstruct the view of traffic and shall be externally illuminated. The sign shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from residential lot lines and road right-of-way. 
8.5.2.   Project construction signs.
    Any sign erected and maintained on the premises temporarily during construction and displaying information, such as the name of the architect, contractor, developer, finance organization, subcontractor or materials vendor on property such individual is furnishing labor, services, or material shall meet these standards for project construction signs. 
(A)	One (1) sign shall be allowed per land development or site development. 
(B)	The sign shall not exceed thirty (32) square feet (one (1) side). 
(C)	The sign is removed within fifteen (15) days of the completion of the project. 
(D)	The sign location shall not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular circulation or sightlines. 
8.5.3.   Informational signs.
(A)	Building directory signs, identifying the occupants of a building, shall be wall-mounted, located next to the entrance, a maximum of three (3) square feet, and shall not project more than six (6) inches from the wall. 
(B)	Service entrance signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet. 
(C)	Parking directional signs may be either wall-mounted or freestanding and are limited to two (2) square feet. 
8.6. - Maximum number of signs. 
(A)	The following maximums shall apply for individual buildings. Standards for each sign type shall be found in Sections 8.3 and 8.4, above. 
(1)	Three (3) total signs of the following types are allowed: wall, awning, freestanding, window, projecting. A sidewalk sign is allowed in addition. 
(2)	One (1) additional sign is allowed per secondary entrance (located at the secondary entrance) of the following types: wall, awning, window. 
(3)	One (1) service entrance sign is allowed. 
(4)	One (1) parking directional sign per parking area is allowed. 
(B)	The following maximums shall apply for multi-unit buildings, such as commercial strip malls. Standards for each sign type shall be found in Sections 8.3 and 8.4, above. 
(1)	The following maximums apply to the entire property. 
(a)	One (1) wall sign allowed on the primary facade. 
(b)	One (1) building directory sign per entrance to the property. 
(c)	One (1) service entrance sign. 
(d)	One (1) parking directional sign per parking area. 
(2)	The following maximums apply to each tenant space with a separate entrance. 
(a)	Three (3) signs from the following list are allowed: wall, awning, window, projecting, sidewalk sign. 
(b)	One (1) sign per unshared secondary entrance is allowed from the following types: wall, awning (on main face or valance), window. 
(3)	The following maximums apply to each tenant space with a shared primary entrance. 
(a)	One (1) sign is allowed from the following types: wall, awning, window. 
(b)	One (1) sign per unshared secondary entrance from the following types: wall, awning, window. 
(c)	One (1) sidewalk sign per entrance. 
8.7. - Flags and banners. 
(A)	Flags on residential property are exempt signs. 
(B)	Street banners (those spanning roads) and flags in road rights-of-way shall be limited to noncommercial activities of local government, institutions (e.g., schools), and nonprofits and similar organizations. 
(C)	A maximum of one (1) flag per corporation, institution, government, or other entity shall be allowed per building. Duplicate or identical flags shall not be allowed. 
(D)	The pole from which said flags are flown shall not exceed the building height limit of the zoning district in which it is located. 
8.8. - Exempt signs. 
    The following signs do not need a zoning permit and may be erected at the discretion of the landowner. 
(A)	Signs erected for orderly traffic control and other municipal or governmental purposes will be permitted, including historical monuments, markers, and signs erected by a public authority. 
(B)	Signs advertising agricultural products produced on the premises that do not exceed four (4) square feet in area. There shall be a limit of one (1) such sign along each street abutting the parcel. Such signs shall be taken down during the seasons the agricultural products are not being sold. 
(C)	Temporary civic, cultural, and public service window posters. 
(D)	Temporary promotional or special sales window signs no greater than six (6) feet in sign area, when posted inside commercial establishments, for not more than thirty (30) days. 
(E)	Commercial copy signs on ball fields mounted on outfield fences, facing toward the infield. 
(F)	Flags on residential property. 
(G)	Political signs. Any sign erected for the purpose of advertising a candidate for public office, or stating a position on a public issue on which an election or referendum is pending with respect to a particular campaign, shall be exempt, provided the following standards are met. 
(1)	It is unlawful to place, erect, or maintain any political sign so as to pose a visible hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic along streets, sidewalks, or at street corners. 
(2)	No political signs are allowed to be illuminated or larger than sixteen (16) square feet. 
(3)	Signs cannot be placed more than thirty (30) days prior to official election date for the issue presented on the sign. 
(4)	Signs must be removed no later than ten (10) days after the election. 
(H)	Real estate signs. Any temporary sign pertaining to the sale, exchange, lease or rental of a building or real property, or other form of exchange shall be exempt, provided the following standards are met. 
(1)	Real estate signs in residential zoning districts shall be not exceed eight (8) square feet. One (1) sign shall be allowed per road frontage. 
(2)	Real estate signs in non-residential zoning districts shall appear as follows. 
(a)	A sign not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet is allowed for the sale, lease, rental, or display of the property on which the sign is located. 
(b)	Real estate signs in shopping and/or retail centers must be displayed within the tenant space window and/or in the tenant panel space of the freestanding sign. 
(c)	Freestanding real estate signs shall be allowed on property adjacent to intercity arterial highways with four (4) or more travel lanes. Otherwise, the sign shall be posted on the building or in a window. 
(d)	One (1) sign shall be allowed per road frontage. 
(Ord. No. 3-2009, § 1, 5-12-2009) 
8.9. - Prohibited signs 
(A)	Signs that are dilapidated or in disrepair shall be prohibited. 
(B)	Signs on roofs, chimneys and balconies shall be prohibited. 
(C)	Signs programmed to flash, blink or fluctuate the intensity of lights or to operate intermittently so as to create a strobe effect shall be prohibited. 
(D)	Mobile or portable signs shall be prohibited, except sidewalk signs. 
(E)	Signs on parked vehicles shall be subject to the following standards. 
(1)	Signs placed on, painted on, or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers that are parked on public right-of-way, public property so as to be visible from a public right-of-way, and where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product or business, or direct people to a business or activity located on the same or nearby property shall be prohibited except as temporary signage, meeting the requirements of Section 9.6.4. 
(2)	This does not prohibit identification sign painted on or affixed to vehicles and trailers, such as small lettering on motor vehicles, where the sign is incidental to the primary use of the vehicle or trailer. 
(F)	Any sign that emits a sound, odor, or visible matter such as smoke or vapor, including any form of pyrotechnics shall be prohibited. 
(G)	Any sign or sign structure that obstructs the view of, or is operated in any way that could cause it to be confused with, a traffic/directional safety device or public safety vehicle shall be prohibited. 
(H)	Any sign painted on or affixed to trees or other natural features, utility poles, or benches shall be prohibited. 
(I)	Any sign exhibiting statements, words, or pictures that are of an obscene or pornographic nature shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 11-2011, § 1, 12-13-2011; Ord. No. 1-2012, § 1, 3-13-2012) 
9. - MISCELLANEOUS ZONING PROVISIONS 

9.1. - Applicability. 
    The following provisions shall apply throughout Hanahan, regardless of the underlying regulating district 
9.2. - Externalities. 
(A)	Vibration. No inherent and recurring generated vibration shall be created so as to be perceptible without instruments at the property line. 
(B)	Noise. No persistent noise shall be detectable beyond the property line in excess of the average level of street and traffic noise generally heard at the point of observation, and no noise above such level shall be caused that is objectionable with respect to intermittence, beat, frequency, or shrillness. 
(C)	Odor. No objectionable odor shall be created detectable beyond the property line, and the emission of odors, regardless of type, shall not be such as to be detrimental to the value and use of adjacent property. 
(D)	Light. The source of exterior lighting shall not be arranged in such a manner as to be detrimental to adjacent properties or the traveling public. The following standards shall apply. 
(1)	Intensity. A light source not provided specifically for the circulation of pedestrians or vehicles between parcels or to and from the public right-of-way shall not emit light exceeding one (1) foot-candle in intensity at the lot line or in the right-of-way. Lighting of parking areas and drive-in, drive-through, and drive-up services shall comply. 
(2)	Focused, directed, and undiffused light sources shall not be aimed, directed, or reflected toward a public right of way or another lot. 
9.3. - Non-conformities. 
9.3.1.   Non-conforming lots of record.
    Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of this ordinance or revision thereto has less area or width than required in the zoning district in which it is located, such a lot may nevertheless be used for a permitted use in the district, provided such complies with all other zoning district regulations provided all other applicable regulations are complied with. 
9.3.2.   Non-conforming land uses.
(A)	Non-conforming land uses are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. However, to avoid undue hardship, the lawful use of any building or land at the time of the enactment of this ordinance may be continued even though it does not conform with the provisions of this ordinance, provided that the non-conforming building or land use is not: 
(1)	Changed to another non-conforming use; or 
(2)	Reestablished after discontinuance of one (1) year. 
(B)	Property restoration, rehabilitation, retrofit, and replacement shall be allowed, provided, neither gross square footage of structures nor the number of dwelling units is increased. 
(C)	Notwithstanding subsection (B), above, a non-conforming manufactured home may be replaced by another manufactured home meeting the standards of Section 5.8: Manufactured Home on a Separate Lot, or Section 5.9: Manufactured Home Parks, Courts, and Communities, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 6-2009, § 1, 9-8-2009) 
9.3.3.   Non-conforming structures.
(A)	Any improvements to the property worth fifty (50) percent of the appraised value of the structure shall trigger compliance with all standards found herein. 
(B)	The structure shall not be expanded, enlarged, or altered in a way that increases the non-conformity (e.g., farther protrusion into required yards). 
9.3.4.   Non-conforming site conditions.
(A)	Improvements worth ten (10) percent of appraised value or addition of six (6) or more parking spaces shall trigger compliance with standards for parking, access, and landscaping. 
(B)	All proposed signage for which a permit is required shall comply with signage standards, except those measures necessary to maintain or repair the non-conforming sign. 
9.4. - Working from home. 
9.4.1.   Home occupations.
    A home occupation shall be permitted in any dwelling unit, regardless of zoning district, provided it: 
(A)	Is conducted by residents of the dwelling; 
(B)	Employs a maximum of two (2) persons in addition to any residents of the dwelling; 
(C)	Utilizes not more than thirty (30) percent of the total floor area of principal building for commercial use; 
(D)	Collocates with no accessory structure on the property exceeding half the gross floor area of the dwelling; 
(E)	Is not visibly evident from the outside of the dwelling and produces no alteration or change in the character or exterior appearance of the principal building from that of a dwelling; 
(F)	Shall not display products visible from the street; 
(G)	Does not generate traffic in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood; and 
(H)	Provides no more than two (2) off-street parking spaces in the front yard (which shall typically occur unstacked in the driveway) with remaining required spaces to the side or rear of primary structure. 
9.4.2.   Live/work.
    A live/work unit is a joint residential-commercial unit that the proprietor occupies as a residence. Allowable non-residential uses and locations for live/work units are specified by zone, per Chapter 4. The live-work unit shall meet the following standards: 
(A)	Residents of the dwelling operate the commercial use. 
(B)	The commercial use employs a maximum of four (4) persons in addition to any residents of the dwelling. 
(C)	The commercial use utilizes not more than sixty-seven (67) percent of the total floor area of principal building. 
(D)	The use may employ a portion or all of an accessory structure on the property, provided the accessory structure does not exceed half the gross floor area of the primary structure. 
9.4.3.   Rummage sales.
    Yard, garage, tag, rummage, and estate sales occurring no more than four (4) times a year for up to three (3) days at a time shall not be regulated and are allowed without a permit as an accessory use on any residential lot. 
(Ord. No. 3-2009, § 1, 5-12-2009) 
9.5. - Fence and wall standards. 
9.5.1.   Applicability.
    Jails are exempt from fence and wall standards. Fence standards shall not apply in industrial zoning districts. Unless otherwise noted in this ordinance, fences or walls are permitted in the various districts subject to the following regulations. In the event that a fence is located in a drainage area centered along a property boundary, fence height maximums shall be exclusive of average swale depth, measured from top of bank. 
(Ord. No. 1-2015, § 1, 3-10-2015) 
9.5.2.   Standards for residential uses.
(A)	Maximum height-Front yard: Four (4) feet, except as may be required for screening in the affected district. 
(B)	Maximum height-Side and rear yard: Six (6) feet, except as may be required for screening in the affected district. Where the side or rear yard is adjacent to intercity arterial highways with four (4) or more travel lanes, the maximum height is eight (8) feet. 
(C)	Materials. The preferred materials are wood, wrought iron, brick, or combinations thereof. Chain link is acceptable only in side and rear yards. Barbed and razor wire shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1-2015, § 1, 3-10-2015) 
9.5.3.   Standards for non-residential uses.
(A)	Maximum height-Front yard: Six (6) feet. 
(B)	Maximum height-Side and rear yard: Eight (8) feet. 
(C)	Materials. Brick, stucco, iron, stone, wood, concrete, chain link or combinations thereof are preferred. Chain link is acceptable only in side and rear yards. Barbed wire atop chain link is permitted for fences not visible from a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1-2015, § 1, 3-10-2015) 
9.6. - Temporary uses and displays. 
9.6.1.   Construction trailers.
(A)	Construction trailers may be located at a building site for which a valid building permit has been obtained from the City of Hanahan, or in the case of a residential subdivision, a valid building permit has been obtained for at least one (1) of the residential units being constructed. 
(B)	All construction trailers shall be located at least ten (10) feet from any active public right-of-way and from all property boundaries external to the project. 
(C)	All construction trailers shall be removed within one (1) month of the completion of the project and before issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
9.6.2.   Temporary manufactured homes.
    A manufactured home may be allowed on a temporary basis in a zoning district even if it is a prohibited use if a disaster occurs that results in the destruction of an occupied single-family dwelling. The purpose of allowing such manufactured home on said lot is to give the occupants of the destroyed dwelling unit a place to live during the restoration or replacement of the destroyed unit. The zoning administrator will issue a zoning permit for such for a period of up to twelve (12) months, provided the following: 
(A)	Construction of a new dwelling unit is proceeding in a diligent manner; 
(B)	The granting of such permit will not materially endanger the public health, welfare, or safety; and 
(C)	The manufactured home is at least ten (10) feet from all lot lines. 
9.6.3.   Temporary sales and events.
(A)	Where otherwise prohibited in a particular zoning district, temporary sales and events may be issued a zoning permit as herein provided. Such permits shall be effective for a duration mutually agreed to by the applicant and the zoning administrator not longer than forty-five (45) days, except for fifteen (15) additional days before and after the event allowed for setting up or taking down equipment, tents, and the like. A zoning permit may be renewed up to three (3) months thereafter, totaling four and one-half (4.5) months of operation per year. Upon completion and submittal of an application, the zoning administrator may grant a zoning permit for the following temporary uses: 
(1)	Off-site seasonal retail; 
(2)	Revivals; 
(3)	Shows for civic and youth organizations; and 
(4)	Fairs, carnivals, or other similar public activities. 
(B)	All temporary uses not otherwise listed will be granted a zoning permit after the zoning administrator has made the following determinations: 
(1)	The proposed use shall not materially endanger the public, health, welfare, and safety; 
(2)	The proposed use shall not have a substantial negative effect on adjoining properties; 
(3)	The proposed use shall be an allowed permanent land use in the zoning district in which it is proposed or, where not specified, similar to the set of allowed uses; and 
(4)	A separate permit shall be obtained for each event. 
(C)	In approving a zoning permit for a temporary use, the zoning administrator may authorize conditions regarding duration of the use, hours of operation, signage, lighting, etc. to ensure compliance with provisions of Section 9.6. Conditions stated in this section as well as conditions imposed by the zoning administrator to uphold the intent of this ordinance shall be indicated on the zoning permit issued for the temporary use. The applicant in receipt of the zoning permit shall ensure the permit is readily available at the temporary event, preferably posted at a prominent location, such as the entrance, ticket desk, or point of purchase. 
9.6.4.   Temporary displays.
    For displays of lighting and signage to be shown for a temporary sale or event, such as a grand opening, carnival, or farmers market, the zoning administrator may authorize a zoning permit for the following: 
(A)	Temporary signage. A temporary display may contain fluttering devices (e.g., flags, banners, and streamers) for a period of not more than thirty (30) days. Not more than two (2) signs totaling not more than thirty-five (35) feet in sign area shall be allowed per use or purpose. 
(B)	Temporary lighting. A temporary display may contain lighting in addition to that generally permitted in the district provided such light source is constant and stationary, for a duration of not more than thirty (30) days. 
9.6.5.   Portable storage systems.
(A)	A portable storage system shall be allowed as a temporary use for maximum period of thirty (30) days in any twelve-month period. The units shall only be allowed in the rear or side yards of the parcel and shall meet building setback requirements. 
(B)	If the rear and side yards are inaccessible, as determined by the zoning administrator, the portable storage unit may be placed in the front yard. The unit shall meet front yard setbacks to the extent practical. Front yard placement shall be limited to a maximum of fifteen (15) days in any twelve-month period. 
(Ord. No. 3-2009, § 1, 5-12-2009) 
9.7. - Miscellaneous parking and outdoor storage. 
9.7.1.   Parking, storage, or use of campers or other major recreational equipment.
(A)	For the purpose of this ordinance, major recreational equipment shall include motorized watercraft, aircraft, and off-highway motor vehicles for use other than commercial purposes, as well as on-highway vehicles intended for racing, sleeping, or other non-transportation uses, in addition to any trailer or similar equipment used to transport major recreational equipment. 
(B)	All major recreational equipment shall have a current registration and be usable for the purpose for which it was manufactured. 
(C)	Storage. No camper or major recreational equipment shall be parked or stored on any empty (vacant house/undeveloped) lot in a residential zoning district. Recreational equipment shall be parked or stored only in the side or rear yard of a developed residential lot; however, in demonstrable cases where recreational equipment cannot be stored in the side or rear yard due to physical constraints on the property, it may be stored in the front yard area under this ordinance. No such equipment shall be used for living or housekeeping purposes when permanently parked or stored on a residential lot in any location not approved for such uses. 
(D)	Parking. Campers and other major recreational equipment shall be temporarily parked anywhere on residential premises for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours during loading or unloading. Such equipment may be temporarily parked anywhere on the lot for visiting purposes, in which visitors utilize the equipment for sleeping overnight, for up to two (2) weeks. 
(E)	Campers and other major recreational equipment shall not be parked or stored in a manner that obstructs a motorist's view of oncoming traffic on adjacent and intersecting streets. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, § 1, 1-13-2015) 
9.7.2.   Parking, storage, and use of non-recreational vehicles and equipment and inoperable vehicles.
    An "inoperable" vehicle is one that is in such condition at the time of inspection, that it is no longer usable for the purpose for which it was manufactured, regardless of the potential for repair or restoration. If the vehicle is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled it is presumed to be "inoperable." 
(A)	All inoperable vehicles and non-recreational equipment, including those without a current registration and license plate, shall be stored in enclosed structures or entirely blocked from view from the public roadway behind a fence or natural barrier. 
(B)	No construction equipment shall be stored on lot in a residential zoning district other than in completely enclosed buildings. 
(C)	Parking of vehicles, implements, and/or equipment used for commercial, industrial, farming, or construction purposes in a residential zoning district shall be limited to one (1) vehicle per residence. Such vehicle, implement, or equipment shall have a curb weight equal to or less than ten thousand five hundred (10,500) pounds and a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR), where applicable, equal to or less than thirteen thousand (13,000) pounds. 
(D)	A vehicle or equipment with a curb weight in excess of ten thousand five hundred (10,500) pounds or a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR), where applicable, in excess of thirteen thousand (13,000) pounds used for commercial, industrial, farming, or construction purposes shall be prohibited from parking in a residential zoning district, inclusive of any right-of-way, when not actively engaged in commerce. 
(E)	Unless subsection 9.7.2(C) applies, a truck/van with an enclosed cargo volume equal to or greater than three hundred fifty (350) cubic feet (e.g., a box truck) shall be parked or stored only in the side or rear yard of a developed residential lot or in a completely enclosed building (e.g., garage) when in a residential zoning district, except when actively engaged in commerce (e.g., loading and unloading). 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, § 1, 1-13-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-2014, § 1, adopted Jan. 13, 2015, changed the title of § 9.7.2 from "Parking, storage, and use of non-recreational vehicles and equipment" to read as herein set out. 
9.7.3.   Use of shipping containers prohibited.
    Shipping containers shall not be placed or stored in any open area, except where expressly permitted by this ordinance, and shall not be used as an accessory building or structure in any zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 3-2009, § 1, 5-12-2009; Ord. No. 5-2009, § 1, 9-8-2009; Ord. No. 10-2014, § 1, 1-13-2015) 
9.7.4.   Restoration vehicles.
    A "restoration vehicle" is a vehicle that is retained on the premises for the purpose of repair or upgrade. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, § 1, 1-13-2015) 
9.7.5.   Restoration permit required.
(A)	Restoration. A person who seeks to restore a vehicle on their premises shall apply for a vehicle restoration permit. The location of the vehicle must be the same as the applicant's place of residence. The City of Hanahan Building and Codes Department may issue one (1) written permit to an owner allowing the unlicensed or unregistered vehicle to be on the owner's premises for the purpose of repair and upgrade for a period not to exceed twelve (12) consecutive months, with a one (1) year extension available upon request and approval (See (D)). Only one (1) vehicle restoration permit is allowed at a time per household or dwelling site. 
(B)	Storage. Any unlicensed or unregistered vehicle being repaired or upgraded under the vehicle restoration permit authorization must be stored in a garage or must be parked on a concrete or asphaltic surface, or an approved rock/gravel surface, and covered with an approved fitted cover designed for that vehicle type. The repair or upgrade of the vehicle must be for personal hobby or recreational purposes, and not be for business purposes. 
(C)	Application. Restoration permits shall be obtained from the building and codes department after completion of an application and payment of a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00). 
(D)	Extension. Permittee may request and the city may authorize one (1) twelve (12) month extension in order to complete the repair, provided permittee is in compliance with the terms of the permit and the property maintenance provisions in this ordinance. At the expiration of the permit or its extension period, if the vehicle is not fully restored to working condition, the owner must either store the vehicle in a fully enclosed building or remove the vehicle from the property. 
(Ord. No. 10-2014, § 1, 1-13-2015) 
10. - TERMS 

10.1. - Intent. 
    For the purpose for interpreting this ordinance, certain words, concepts, and ideas are defined. Except as defined herein, all other words used in this ordinance shall have their every-day dictionary definition. 
10.2. - Interpretation. 
(A)	Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
(B)	Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural number include the singular. 
(C)	The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, corporation, trust, and company as well as an individual. The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel" or "tract." 
(D)	The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
(E)	The word "structure" shall include the word "building." 
(F)	The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
(G)	Any word denoting gender includes the female and the male. 
(H)	The word "city" means the City of Hanahan in Berkeley County, South Carolina, unless otherwise noted, while the capitalization of the word - "City" - means the government of the same. 
(I)	The word "state" means the State of South Carolina, unless otherwise noted, while the capitalization of the word - "State" - means the government of the same. 
10.3. - Definitions. 
    As used in this ordinance, the following words and terms shall have the meanings specified herein: 
    ANSI A300. Pruning standards set forth in the Standard Practices for Trees, Shrubs, and Other Woody Plant Maintenance. 
    Access. A way or means of approach to provide vehicular or pedestrian physical entrance to a property. The location of the intersection of a street or driveway with a road. 
    Accessory. A use, structure, or part of a structure customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of a parcel or a structure is an accessory use or structure, provided the accessory use or structure functions as a complementary to the principal use or structure on the same parcel. e.g., residential accessory uses and structures include but are not limited to a garage, a utility shed, a swimming pool, and a deck. e.g., religious accessory uses and structures include but are not limited to a graveyard, a mausoleum, a columbarium. (Note that these uses and structures may also be accessory to the principal land use, "death care services.") 
    Acre. A measure of land area containing forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet. 
    Adult arcade. Means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one (1) time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depleting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult bookstore or adult video store. Means a commercial establishment which, as one (1) of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form or consideration any one (1) or more of the following: 
(a)	Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion picture, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or, 
(b)	Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and still be categorized as adult bookstore or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store so long as one (1) of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult cabaret. Means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(a)	Person who appear in a state of nudity; or 
(b)	Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or, 
(c)	Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult motel. Means a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment which: 
(a)	Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas; and which has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or 
(b)	Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or 
(c)	Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours. 
    Adult motion picture theater. Means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult theater. Means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Annexation. The incorporation of land into the limits of the existing municipality. 
    Antenna. A device, dish or array used to transmit or receive telecommunications signals. 
    Applicant. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or its representative who shall have express written authority to act on behalf of the owner. Consent shall be required of the legal owner. The terms subdivider and developer can mean the applicant. 
    Bond. Any form of a surety bond in an amount and form satisfactory to the governing body. All bonds shall be approved by the city council whenever a bond is required by these regulations. 
    Buildable land. Land free of encumbrances and available to development, including high ground and non-jurisdictional wetlands. Land not buildable includes jurisdictional wetlands, land under water, land under conservation easement, and land committed to infrastructure and community facilities built prior to a land development proposal. 
    Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
    Buffer. Land maintained in either a natural or landscaped state and used to screen and/or mitigate the impacts of development on surrounding areas, properties, or rights-of-way. 
    Caliper. The thickness of trees measured in inches. A caliper measurement for trees shall be measured twelve (12) inches above the soil line, or across the stump if the tree has been severed at less than twelve (12) inches above the soil line. 
    Common area. Land owned and maintained by a property owners association for the benefit of all owners, whether in conservation, recreation, stormwater management, circulation, parking, or other similar uses and spatial features. 
    Communications tower. A tower, pole, or similar structure which supports a telecommunications antenna operated for commercial purposes above ground in a fixed location, free-standing, guyed, or on a building. 
    Critical area. Wetlands below the critical line. 
    Critical line. The boundary of wetlands recognized by the Office of Ocean and Coastal Resources Management of the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control. 
    Crown. The above ground parts of the tree that gives the tree its normal shape at maturity. The basic tree shapes are: umbrella, horizontal oval, vase, round, mound, broad triangle, upright oval, narrow triangle, narrow upright, weeping, columnar, and palm. 
    Day care services. 
(a)	Family home day care. A dwelling unit in which care is given by a resident of that unit and no others during the day for one (1) and not more than twelve (12) children, including any child(ren) related to the caregiver. 
(b)	Child day care services. Any center, agency, or place, other than a residence, where children not related to the operator are received for custodial care, apart from their parents, whether for compensation, reward, or otherwise, during part or all of the day or night and upon any number of successive days or nights, provided no child is given care for more than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours. 
    Developer. The owner of land proposed to be improved or subdivided or his/her representative who is responsible for any undertaking that requires review and/or approval under these regulations. Also Subdivider. 
    Development. The construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alternation, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any mine, excavation, landfill or land disturbance; and/or any change in use, or alteration or extension of the use, of land. 
    Diameter at breast height (DBH). The tree trunk diameter measured in inches at a height four and one-half (4.5) feet above the ground. If a tree forks into multiple trunks below four and one-half (4.5) feet, the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the forks. Measurements shall be made by use of a circumference to diameter conversion tape. 
    Drip line. The vertical line extending from the outermost edge of the tree canopy to the ground. 
    Dwelling: Any building or part thereof used or intended to be used for continuous, long-term human inhabitation. 
    Dwelling, duplex: An independent dwelling unit utilizing structure-roof, floor, or wall-common to one (1) additional dwelling unit where both dwelling units occupy one (1) lot and no other primary land use or residence exists. 
    Dwelling, manufactured home. An independent dwelling unit composed of one (1) or more occupiable components assembled off-site, to a construction code certified by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, and transported to the site, but not permanently affixed to a foundation so that it can be subsequently relocated. 
    Dwelling, multi-family: An independent dwelling unit utilizing structure - roof, floor, and/or walls - common to one (1) or more additional dwelling units functioning as a community that provides access to each residence and a common area for vehicle parking and amenities. 
    Dwelling, patio house: A freestanding dwelling unit functioning as part of a community that provides access to each house and a common area for vehicle parking and amenities. A patio house lot does not provide parking for automobiles. 
    Dwelling, row house: A freestanding, independent dwelling unit on an individual parcel with no other primary residence or land use, for which vehicular access and parking are provided, at least in part, in the rear of the lot from an alley. 
    Dwelling, single-family detached: A freestanding, independent dwelling unit on an individual parcel with no other primary residence or land use. 
    Dwelling, townhouse or single-family attached: An independent dwelling unit sharing side wall(s) with like units, each with its own roof and foundation, on its own lot, which may be equal to or larger than the footprint of the unit. Direct access to and frontage on a transportation right-of-way is provided to each unit. Vehicle parking is provided on the lot, on street, or in common area. 
    Easement. Authorization by a property owner for another to use the owner's property for a specified purpose, to be recorded on a plat with the Berkeley County Register of Deeds. That area on private land used, or intended to be used, for the specified purpose. 
    Escort. Means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
    Escort agency. Means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one (1) of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
    Escrow. A deposit of cash with the local government or escrow agent to secure the promise to perform some act. 
    Establishment. With regard to sexually oriented businesses, means and includes any of the following: 
(a)	The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business. 
(b)	The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(c)	The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business 
    Family. Any number of persons related by blood or marriage and living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unity, plus not more than two (2) unrelated roomers, boarders or domestic servants; or no more than three (3) unrelated persons living and cooking together as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Flag lot. A mostly landlocked lot, surrounded by lots on all sides, that accesses a public right-of-way by means of a narrow strip of property projecting from the main body of the lot. 
    Floor/area ratio. Fraction representing gross square footage of structure (floor) divided by the square footage of land on which such structures stand (area). 
    Frontage. That side of a lot abutting a public right-of-way or the distance over which that lot abuts the public right-of-way. 
    Indigenous trees. Existing or natural growing trees native to the area, i.e. Live Oak ( Quercus virginiana ), Eastern Red Cedar ( Juniperus virginiana ), Southern Magnolia ( Magnolia grandiflora ), and Bald Cypress ( Taxodium distichum ) trees. 
    Infrastructure. The facilities and services needed to sustain residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, and other activities. 
    Land development. Activity, or the result of activity, described in Subsection 1.9(B) of the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance. 
    Lot. A tract, plot, or portion of a development or other parcel of land intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or possession or for development. 
    Lot, corner. A lot situated at the intersection of two (2) streets, the interior angle of such intersection not exceeding 135 degrees, which frontage on two (2) streets. 
    Lot frontage. The distance over which the lot abuts the public right-of-way. 
    Manufactured home space. Means a plot of ground within a manufactured home park designed for the accommodation of one (1) manufactured home. 
    Mural. Artistic expression painted onto a wall or ceiling. A mural that also qualifies as a sign (see definition below.) shall be regulated as a wall sign. 
    Non-conforming lot. A lot, the area, dimensions, or location of which were lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance, which fails to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Non-conforming structure/building. A structure or building, the size, dimensions, or location of which lawfully existed prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment to the Zoning Ordinance but which fails to conform to the current requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Non-conforming use. A use or activity that was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance but which fails to conform to the current requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Nude model studio. Means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
    Nudity or a state of nudity. Means the appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or full female breast without a fully opaque cloth covering over the entire nipple and areola. 
    Office. A use or location primarily used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry, government, or like activity where, typically, no material goods are produced or traded. 
    Parcel. A portion of land for which a single title describing and locating such land exists and is on record with the Berkeley County Register of Deeds. 
    Pedestrian-oriented development. Development designed with an emphasis on street sidewalk and other pedestrian access to and through the site(s) and building(s) over automobile access and parking areas. Such development will have parking to the side or rear of a building, will mix uses and provide them in proximity to one another, will allow the pedestrian the option or choice of not having to use a car to travel between uses, and will provide a variety of interesting and detailed streetscapes which balance the needs of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
    Pedestrian scale. Relationships between a person and the natural or built environment in which the person conceives of a sense of scale by comprehending depths, distances, and spaces, made possible through existing or manipulated size, texture, permanence, light, acoustics, and accessibility. 
    Permitted use. Any use specifically allowed in a zoning district, meeting the uniform standards set forth for the district, and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district. 
    Permittee and/or licensee. Means a person in whose name a permit and/or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license. 
    Manufactured home. See dwelling, mobile home. 
    Person. Means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
    Public hearing. A meeting announced and advertised in advance that is open to the citizens and landowners of Hanahan where the public is given an opportunity to participate and provide input. 
    Public improvement. Any roadway, sidewalk, parkway, drainage ditch, or other facility for which the local government or other public agency may ultimately assume responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may effect an improvement for which the responsibility of local government or other public agency is established. 
    Proper pruning. Pruning as defined by the 1995 ANSI A300 standards. 
    Right-of-way. Land used, or intended to be used, for transportation, drainage, or other public purpose defined by parcel boundaries and not overlapping privately owned parcels of land. 
    Scale. Established measure of proportion between actual and represented features and spaces, such as that represented graphically on a hard-line drawing. 
    Semi-nude. Means a state of dress in which the clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
    Setback. The shortest distance from a structural element to a lot line. See also yard. 
    Sexual encounter center. Means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one (1) of its primary business purposes, for any form of consideration. 
(a)	Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(b)	Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one (1) or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude. 
    Sexually oriented business. Means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
    Sign. Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. 
    Sign, animated or moving. Any sign or part of a sign that changes physical position or light intensity by any movement or rotation or that gives the visual impression of such movement or rotation. 
    Sign, changeable copy. A sign or portion thereof which as a readerboard for the display of text information in which each alphanumeric character, graphic, or symbol is defined by objects, not consisting of an illumination device and may be changed or re-arranged manually or mechanically with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign. 
    Sign, electronic changeable copy. A sign or portion thereof that displays electronic, non-pictorial, text information in which each alphanumeric character, graphic, or symbol is defined by a small number of matrix elements using different combinations of light emitting diodes (LED's), fiber optics, light bulbs or other illumination devices within the display area. Electronic changeable copy signs include computer programmable, microprocessor controlled electronic displays. Electronic changeable copy signs include projected images or messages with these characteristics onto buildings or other objects 
    Sign, flashing. A directly or indirectly illuminated sign or portion thereof that exhibits changing light or color effect by any means, so as to provide intermittent illumination that changes light intensity in sudden transitory bursts and creates the illusion of intermittent flashing light by streaming, graphic bursts showing movement, or any mode of lighting which resembles zooming, twinkling, or sparkling. 
    Sign, freestanding. Any non-movable sign not affixed to a building, awning, or canopy. For the purposes of this ordinance, monument signs, defined below, shall be considered separately. 
    Sign, off-site. Any sign identifying, advertising, or directing the public to a business, merchandise, service, institution, entertainment, or activity which is located, sold, rented, based, produced, manufactured, furnished, or taking place at a location other than on the property where the sign is located. 
    Sign, portable. A sign that is not permanently affixed to a building, separate structure, awning, canopy, or the ground. 
    Sign, time and temperature. Any sign which displays exclusively current time and temperature information. 
    Sign, wall. A sign that is permanently affixed or applied to a wall where the face of the sign is parallel to the wall, such as letters, words, or graphics mounted on the wall; furthermore, a plaque hung on the wall or paint or other illustrative material applied to the face of a wall. 
    Site development. Improvement of and/or construction on a single parcel of land. 
    Specified anatomical areas. Means the male genitals in a state of sexual arousal and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female genitals. 
    Specified sexual activities. Means and includes any of the following: 
(a)	The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(b)	Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(c)	Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(d)	Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (a) through (c) above. 
    Subdivider. Any person who, (1) having an interest in land, causes it directly or indirectly to be subdivided, (2) directly or indirectly sells, leases, or develops, or offers to sell, lease, or develop a portion of land, (3) engages directly or through an agent in the business of selling, leasing, developing, or offering for sale, lease, of a subdivision or any interest, lot, parcel site, unit, or plat in a subdivision, or is directly or indirectly controlled by or under direct or indirect common control with any of the foregoing. 
    Subdivision. Any land, vacant or improved, which is divided or proposed to be divided into two (2) or more lots, parcels, sites, or interests for the purpose of offer, sale, lease, or development, whether immediate or future, or act heretofore. Subdivision includes the movement or abandonment of lot lines and the combination of lots. 
    Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business. Means the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than twenty-five (25) percent. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business. Means and includes any of the following: 
(a)	The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(b)	The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(c)	The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by request or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
    Street, public. All public property reserved or dedicated for street traffic. 
    Street, private. A local roadway serving only abutting lots, not publicly dedicated or maintained by the [local government] but meeting specific municipal improvement standards, and providing access for service and emergency vehicles. 
    Structure. Anything constructed or erected that requires location on the ground or attached to something having location on the ground. 
    Telecommunications. The transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without charge in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 
    Timber harvest. The removal of trees from a lot for the commercial purpose of converting them into lumber, wood pulp or other wood products. 
    Topping. Also known as stubbing, dehorning, or lopping refers to cutting back of the leader stem or limbs into stubs larger than three (3) inches in diameter within the tree's crown so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. 
    Transportation right-of-way. For the purposes of this ordinance, a transportation right-of-way shall be the right-of-way providing automobiles, bicycles, and/or pedestrians. Railroad right-of-way shall only be considered a transportation right-of-way where specified as such. In the absence of a transportation right-of-way adjoining the subject property, an ingress/egress easement expressly allowed for certain land developments may be interpreted by city officials and boards to substitute for purposes of lot frontage, building orientation, and parking area configuration. 
    Tree removal. The cutting or removing of fifty (50) percent or more of the crown, trunk, or root system of a tree, or causing the death of a tree through damaging, poisoning or other direct or indirect action. 
    Tree. A large, woody perennial plant with one (1) main trunk and many branches. 
    Utility. Public services, including potable water supply, sanitary sewer service, stormwater drainage infrastructure, telephone line, cable television line, and electricity line. 
    Vehicular use area. An area other than public or privately dedicated right-of-way, to be utilized for the circulation of automobiles to include alleyways, rear access points and waste removal sites. 
    Yard. A space created by a required or provided setback on the same lot with a principal building, open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to the sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
    Yard, buffer. A yard containing materials used to provide sight and sound screening from adjoining properties and rights-of-way. The required height and width of the buffer yard and materials used in its constructions may vary according to use and zoning district. 
    Yard, rear. The yard extending the full width of the lot, situated between the rear lot line and the line projected to the side lot lines from the rear of the building. 
    Yard, side. The yard situated between the side lot line, the front and rear yards, and the side of the building. 
(Ord. No. 3-2009, § 1, 5-12-2009; Ord. No. 1-2012, § 1, 3-13-2012; Ord. No. 4-2014, § 1, 6-10-2014) 
Part II - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE 
1. - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE GENERAL PROVISIONS 

1.1. - Title and intent. 
(A)	This ordinance governs the conversion of raw land and parcels into subdivided tracts and lots for the construction of buildings and other structures and development and shall be known as the "Land Development Ordinance of the City of Hanahan, SC," herein referred to as the "Land Development Ordinance." 
(B)	The purpose of this ordinance is to provide for harmonious, orderly, and progressive development of land to promote the public health, safety, economy, good order, appearance, convenience, and general welfare of the citizens of Hanahan. This purpose shall be achieved through the following objectives: 
(C)	Encouraging the development of an economically sound and stable city; 
(1)	Assuring, in general, the wise and timely development of new areas or redevelopment of areas in harmony with the Comprehensive Plan; 
(2)	Assuring the timely provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new development of land; 
(3)	Assuring safe and convenient traffic access and circulation - both vehicular and pedestrian - in and through new development projects; and 
(4)	Assuring the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in new development projects by dedication or reservation of land for recreation, education, transportation, and other public purposes. 
(D)	Purpose. South Carolina Code § 6-29-1120 sets forth five (5) purposes for municipal regulation of land development, restated below. Following these are additional purposes established by the City of Hanahan to uphold and promote "the public health, safety, economy, good order, appearance, convenience, morals, and general welfare" (SCC § 6-29-1120). The Hanahan Planning Commission is charged with the implementation of these purposes in part through its review and approval of preliminary land development plans for major land developments and minor land development plats. 
(1)	Encourage the development of an economically sound and stable city. 
(2)	Assure the timely provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new development of land. 
(3)	Assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in and through new land developments. 
(4)	Assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational educational, transportation, and other public purposes. 
(5)	Assure, in general, the wise and timely development of new areas, and redevelopment of previously developed areas in harmony with the Hanahan Comprehensive Plan. 
(6)	Assure the development of new areas in a manner and arrangement that minimizes impacts on sensitive and valued resources, such as landmark trees, wetland ecosystems, and water quality, through identification and avoidance of natural features and progressive stormwater management. 
(7)	Assure the integration and accessibility of new public spaces - streets, sidewalks, parks, school sites, and the like - into the existing built environment of Hanahan through context-sensitive urban design. 
1.2. - Policy. 
(A)	It is declared to be the policy of the City of Hanahan to consider the subdivision of land and development thereof as subject to the control of the city pursuant to the adopted comprehensive plan for the orderly, planned, efficient, and economical development of Hanahan. 
(B)	Land subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, or other menace, and land shall not be subdivided until adequate public facilities and improvements exist and proper provision has been made for drainage, water, sewerage, and capital improvements such as schools, parks, recreational facilities, transportation facilities, and other improvements. 
(C)	The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the policies of the comprehensive plan, official zoning map, and capital budget and program of the city, and it is intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in building and housing codes, the Zoning Ordinance, the Comprehensive Plan, and the capital budget and program. 
(D)	Land that has been subdivided prior to the effective date of these regulations should, whenever possible, be brought within the scope of these regulations to further the purposes of standards identified in Section 1.1. 
1.3. - Jurisdiction. 
(A)	This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority granted under § 6-29-1110 of the Code of Laws of South Carolina. The Hanahan Planning Commission is vested with the authority to review, approve, conditionally approve, and disapprove applications for the subdivision and development of land. 
(B)	These regulations apply to all subdivision and development of land located within the corporate limits of the City of Hanahan. The planning commission may grant modifications of these regulations pursuant to the provisions of Section 1.9. 
(C)	No land may be subdivided through the use of any legal description other than with reference to a plat approved by the planning commission and/or the city planner in accordance with these regulations. 
1.4. - Severability. 
    Should any portion of this ordinance be found illegal by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the ordinance shall remain in effect. 
1.5. - Amendments. 
    For the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare, the planning commission may, from time to time, propose amendments to these regulations, which shall then be approved or disapproved by city council following the amendment procedure set forth in Section 2.4 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
1.6. - Enforcement. 
(A)	In general. No grading or excavation of land or construction of any public or private improvements shall commence in violation with the provisions of these ordinances. No land described in this section shall be subdivided, sold, leased, or transferred until the developer has filed a final plat approved by the Hanahan City Planner or Planning Commission with the Berkeley County Register of Deeds. No zoning or building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any lot or parcel of land, or any building or structure located thereon, that is subdivided, developed, or sold in violation of the Hanahan Zoning and Land Development ordinances. The City of Hanahan shall have no obligation to issue a certificate of occupancy or to extend utility services to any parcel created in violation of these ordinances. 
(B)	Interpretation. Terms used in this ordinance shall have the meaning specified in Chapter 10 - Terms - of the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance. Where the ordinances are mute, the term shall have its regular dictionary definition. 
(C)	Limit on re-application. Except for requests which are continued with the mutual consent of the applicant and the planning commission, an applicant shall not initiate duplicate application for land development affecting the same parcel of property or any part thereof more often than once in twelve (12) months. 
(D)	Violations. 
(1)	The city planner, as provided in Section 1.7, shall be empowered to utilize all of the enforcement tools provided to the zoning administrator per Section 2.9.3 of the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance. 
(2)	The city planner may deny administrative land development approval and/or withhold a land disturbance permit as he deems necessary to ensure compliance with the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance. The developer may appeal such action to the Hanahan Planning Commission per Section 1.10. 
1.7. - City planner. 
(A)	The office of the city planner shall be charged with the administration and enforcement of the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance, which shall entail the following duties: 
(1)	Interpreting the Land Development Ordinance; 
(2)	Administering permits and approvals; 
(3)	Processing applications for plan and plat review; 
(4)	Fee collection for permits and plan and plat review; 
(5)	Processing appeals to the planning commission and preparing the record for appeal to circuit court; 
(6)	Maintaining public records related to land development; 
(7)	Investigating and resolving complaints pertaining to the ordinance; 
(8)	Enforcing the ordinance; and 
(9)	Other duties, as may be assigned. 
(B)	The city administrator may designate the zoning administrator, provided for in Section 2.1 of the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance, as the city planner. If the city planner and the zoning administrator are two (2) separate individuals, the zoning administrator shall be authorized to assist the city planner with administration and enforcement of the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance. 
1.8. - General procedure. 
(A)	Applicability. Whenever a person proposes the adjustment or subdivision of the land, vacant or improved, involving two (2) or more lots for the purpose of offer, sale, lease, or development, approval by the city planner and/or the planning commission shall be required, in addition to all other procedures and approvals required in the Zoning Ordinance, whether or not applicable zoning procedures also require approval, review, or recommendation. All such proposals are herein referred to as land developments. 
(B)	Classification of land developments. Before any changing of land characteristics through redevelopment, construction, subdivision into parcels, condominium complexes, commercial parks, shopping centers, industrial parks, mobile home parks and similar developments for sale, lease, or any combination of owner and rental characteristics, the owner(s) of such properties, or their authorized agent, shall apply for and secure approval of the proposed land development in accordance with the procedures provided herein. A proposal shall be classified as one (1) of the following types. 
(C)	Exempt subdivision. Certain land developments are exempt from planning commission review and approval per South Carolina Code § 6-29-1110(2), as amended, and shall be submitted to the city planner for information prior to recordation with Berkeley County. The city planner shall stamp at least one (1) submitted plat as received and exempt so that the applicant may submit the plat to Berkeley County for recordation. The criteria for exempt subdivisions are as follows: 
(1)	The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to city standards (sometimes referred to as a boundary line adjustment). 
(2)	The combination or recombination of entire lots of record where no new street or change in existing streets is involved. 
(3)	The division of land into parcels of five (5) acres or more where no new street is involved. 
(D)	Record drawing. A record drawing is the depiction of the survey of an existing lot, typically performed prior to property transfer. For purposes of the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance, record drawings shall be subject to the same standards as exempt subdivisions. 
(E)	Critical-area delineation. A critical-area delineation is the survey of critical area consisting entirely of wetlands regulated by the State of South Carolina. A critical-area delineation shall not create any new parcels and shall merely reestablish wetlands boundaries. In some cases, the boundaries of existing parcels may be reestablished where adjacent to tidal marsh, creeks, and drainage rights-of-way. For purposes of the Hanahan Land Development Ordinance, critical-area delineations shall be subject to the same standards as exempt subdivisions. 
(F)	Minor land development. Subdivision of land resulting in the alteration or creation of five (5) or fewer parcels totaling less than one (1) acre neither requiring or resulting in the installation of new or upgraded infrastructure described in this ordinance, whether privately or publicly maintained, including transportation, stormwater management, and other systems shall be a minor land development. 
(1)	A remnant parcel five (5) acres or more in size with street frontage meeting city standards to remain in its pre-developed state and requiring and resulting in no additional infrastructure need not contribute to the one-acre or five-parcel standards. 
(2)	The planning commission may require the developer of a minor land development, due to its complexity or unusual conditions, to pursue major land development review and approval. 
(G)	Major land development. 
(1)	Any land development requiring or resulting in the installation of new or upgraded infrastructure, including but not limited to transportation, stormwater management, potable water, and sanitary sewerage infrastructure shall be a major land development. 
(2)	Any subdivision of land not classified a minor land development shall be a major land development. 
1.9. - Modification of land development standards. 
(A)	Where the planning commission finds that extraordinary hardships derived from practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations and/or that the purposes of these regulations may be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve modifications to these land development regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that the modification does not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations; further provided, the planning commission shall not approve modifications unless it makes findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific case that all of the following criteria apply: 
(1)	The granting of the modification will not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other property; 
(2)	The conditions upon which the request is based are unique to the property for which the relief is sought and are not applicable generally to other property; 
(3)	Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the owner would result - as distinguished from a mere inconvenience - if the strict letter of these regulations is carried out; and 
(4)	The modification sought will not in any manner be in conflict with the provisions of zoning standards of this ordinance or the policies of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(B)	Procedure. The planning commission shall be empowered to modify land development standards in the course of land development review and approval. The developer shall bear the responsibility to demonstrate to the planning commission that the modification sought meets the criteria for modification stated above. The procedure shall be that provided for appeals to the planning commission in Section 1.10 of this ordinance. 
(C)	Conditions. In allowing modifications, the planning commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the intent and policies described in this chapter. 
(D)	Documentation. Upon granting or allowing a modification, the planning commission shall then state in writing findings of fact supporting its decision to grant or allow the modification. 
1.10. - Appeals of decisions of the city planner on land development applications. 
(A)	Procedure for appeal. An applicant or any party of legal standing believing to have found error in the written decision of the city planner may appeal the decision to the planning commission. 
(1)	Appeal submittal. Ten (10) copies of the application in question shall be submitted to the city planner not less than twenty-five (25) days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered by the planning commission. 
(2)	Application and fee. The appellant shall file an appeal by completing the form available from the city planner and submit it, together with an application fee in an amount set by Hanahan City Council. The appellant shall state on the form reasons for the appeal. The date of receipt of the completed application shall be the official submittal date and stamped by the city planner on the completed written appeal as "received." 
(B)	City procedure. The planning commission shall act on the submitted appeal within sixty (60) days of the official submittal date. Failure to act within sixty (60) days shall constitute automatic approval, and the appellant shall be notified of this in writing. The sixty-day time limit may be extended by mutual agreement between the appellant and the city planner. 
(1)	Notification of meeting. Action taken by the planning commission on the appeal shall be at a scheduled public meeting, and notice of the time and place of said meeting shall be mailed by the city to the appellant. Such notice shall be sent not less than fifteen (15) days before the date of the meeting. Conspicuous notices shall be posted on or adjacent to the affected property by the city planner. One notice shall be visible from each transportation right-of-way that borders the property at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public meeting. 
(2)	Decision of the planning commission. The concurring vote of the majority of members of the commission shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the city planner. Upon decision of the planning commission, three (3) copies of the plat shall be retained by the city for its records and the remaining copies returned to the applicant, one (1) of which shall be signed by the chairperson of the planning commission and the city planner and bearing the date of approval or disapproval with written reasons for such action attached. 
(C)	An applicant or any party of legal standing may appeal a decision of the planning commission to circuit court, filing with the clerk of such court a petition in writing setting forth plainly, fully, and distinctly wherein such decision is contrary to law. The applicant must appeal within thirty (30) days of receiving written notice of the decision. 
1.11. - Vested rights to develop property. 
1.11.1. - Definitions. 
(A)	Except as hereinafter set forth, the words, terms, and phrases when used in this Section 1.11 shall have the meaning as set forth in Section 6-29-1520 of the South Carolina Code of Laws, as enacted by Act 287 of 2004. 
(B)	The following actions and documents approved or issued by the city planner, zoning administrator, planning commission, board of zoning appeals, design control committee, and city council shall constitute authorization of a "site-specific development plan." 
(1)	Planned Development District (type "B"), including Master Development Plan. 
(2)	Preliminary land development plan. 
(3)	Land disturbance permit. 
(4)	Final plat. 
(5)	Site development plan. 
(6)	Zoning permit. 
(7)	Zoning variance. 
(8)	Special exception. 
(9)	Certificate of appropriateness. 
1.11.2. - Establishment and conditions of vested rights. 
(A)	A vested right to developer property in accordance with a site-specific development plan is triggered upon the final approval of the site-specific development plan by the final official or body of the municipality authorized to approve the site-specific development plan and the payment to the city of all applicable established fees. 
(B)	Except as hereinafter set forth, a vested right established by this Section 1.11 is subject to the conditions and limitations as set out in §§ 6-29-1540 and 6-29-1550 of the Code of Laws of South Carolina, as enacted by Act 287 of 2004. 
(C)	A vested right for an approved site-specific development plan expires two (2) years after the date of final approval by the final official or body authorized to approve a site-specific development plan. 
(D)	When approved with conditions, the site-specific development plan shall not confer vested rights unless the conditions of approval have been met. The vesting period shall nevertheless commence upon the date of conditional approval. 
(E)	No vested rights are established for phased development plans, including approved or conditionally approved phased development plans and including phased development plans applicable to property proposed for annexation. An approved or conditionally approved site-specific development plan is required prior to approval with respect to each phase of a phased development plan. 
(F)	A vested site-specific development plan may be amended if the amendment conforms to, or does not cause greater non-conformity with, the then current provisions of Hanahan Zoning and Land Development Ordinances. Approval or conditional approval of an amendment does not reset or restart the expiration period of a vested right. 
(G)	No sooner than three (3) months and no later than forty-five (45) days prior to the expiration of the two-year vested right period for an approved site-specific development plan, the landowner of the property with a vested right in a site-specific development plan may apply to the zoning administrator for a zoning and design authorization or to the city planner for a land development authorization for an annual extension of the vested right. The authorized official must approve an application for an annual extension of the vested right unless an amendment to the Hanahan Zoning or Land Development Ordinance has been adopted that prohibits approval. No more than five (5) annual extensions of the vested right may be approved. 
2. - LAND DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCESS 

2.1. - Intent of chapter. 
    The following steps constitute the land development approval process for projects in City of Hanahan. Each step is required unless stated otherwise. 
2.2. - Pre-application conference. 
    The developer is strongly encouraged, but not required, to participate in a pre-application conference with the Hanahan City Planner before applying to the City of Hanahan for approval of a land development or Planned Development District. The developer should contact the city planner to arrange an appointment to discuss a project proposal. The developer should bring a sketch plan of the proposed land development or PDD Master Plan to facilitate the discussion. 
2.2.1.   Purpose.
    The pre-application conference provides the city planner the opportunity to: 
(A)	Determine whether the land development is an exempt subdivision, minor land development, or major land development. 
(B)	Familiarize the developer with the land development approval process of the City of Hanahan; 
(C)	Assess the compatibility of the proposed land development with the Hanahan Comprehensive Plan; and 
(D)	Apprise the developer of city, state, and federal standards related to the development of land and their potential applicability to the developer's proposal, including but not limited to: 
(1)	Hanahan Land Development Design and Improvements Standards (Chapter 5 of this ordinance); 
(2)	Standards of the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance; 
(3)	Standards of the Hanahan Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance; 
(4)	Berkeley County land development and engineering standards for roads and drainage; 
(5)	Berkeley County Water and Sanitation Authority standards for potable water provision and sanitary sewerage; 
(6)	State standards for roads and encroachments, as administrated by the Department of Transportation; 
(7)	State standards for on-site sewage disposal, as promulgated by the Department of Health and Environmental Control; 
(8)	State standards for wetlands protection, stormwater management, erosion and sedimentation reduction, as promulgated by the Office of Ocean and Coastal Resources Management; 
(9)	Federal standards for wetlands and water quality protection, as promulgated by U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; and 
(10)	Federal standards for endangered species protection, as administrated by the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources. 
2.2.2.   Procedure.
    The city planner shall review any provided sketch plan with the developer. The city planner may suggest that the developer submit the sketch plan to the planning commission for comment and recommendation. Should the developer voluntarily agree to submit to the planning commission, the following procedures shall apply. 
(A)	The developer shall submit the sketch plan to the city planner at least fifteen (15) days before a regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission so that the city planner can distribute the document to the planning commission with appropriate research and commentary. 
(B)	This service is provided free of charge to the developer, and no formal application is required; however the sketch plan should include those items specified in Section 3.1 of this ordinance. 
(C)	The city planner shall include the sketch plan as an agenda item on the next regularly scheduled planning commission meeting. 
(D)	The city planner should draft a report to the planning commission as to the compatibility of the sketch plan with the Comprehensive Plan and as to the compliance of applicable zoning standards. 
(E)	The planning commission shall review the sketch plan for compatibility with the Comprehensive Plan and may vote to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the sketch plan. 
(F)	The planning commission may include as conditions any recommendations it has to uphold and promote the objectives of the Comprehensive Plan. 
2.2.3.   Approval non-binding.
    The vote on the sketch plan is advisory only to the developer and does not prevent him from applying for any land development approval. Likewise, sketch plan approval does not authorize the developer to commence in any land disturbance, improvements, or other land development activities. The developer is strongly encouraged to resubmit after two (2) years if no further land development approval process steps are taken. 
2.3. - Preliminary land development plan. 
2.3.1.   Applicability.
(A)	The preliminary plan is the first required step in the major land development approval process. 
(B)	A developer proposing an exempt subdivision or a minor land development need not submit a preliminary plan. Only the developer proposing a major land development must apply for planning commission review and approval of a preliminary plan. 
2.3.2.   Purpose.
(A)	The Hanahan Planning Commission is charged with the implementation of the purposes of land development regulations specified in Section 1.1 of this ordinance in part through its review and approval of preliminary plans for major land developments. 
(B)	The developer shall demonstrate to the planning commission the intent and ability to meet or exceed all zoning and land development standards of the City of Hanahan. 
(C)	Approval or conditional approval of a preliminary plan authorizes the developer to begin engineering and construction drawings for community facilities needed for land development. 
2.3.3.   Procedure.
(A)	The developer shall submit a preliminary plan to the city planner no fewer than twenty-five (25) days before the planning commission meeting at which he seeks plan approval. 
(B)	The city planner shall date and stamp the preliminary plan "received." 
(C)	A complete preliminary land development plan includes those items specified in Section 3.2 of this ordinance, which include, but are not limited to an application form and fee. 
(D)	Notification of meeting. The city planner shall notify the developer of the time and place of the planning commission meeting at which the land development is to be considered no fewer than five (5) days before the meeting at which the preliminary plan is to be considered. A copy of the agenda for the meeting shall suffice as written notice. 
(E)	Decision on preliminary land development plan. 
(1)	The planning commission shall approve, approve conditionally, or disapprove the preliminary plan at its regularly scheduled monthly meeting or at a duly advertised called meeting. 
(2)	The planning commission may attach conditions of approval that uphold and promote the purposes of land development regulations, stated in Section 1.1. The commission shall have the authority to require changes to preliminary plans as conditions of approval in order to uphold and promote those purposes. Changes may relate to land development content, arrangement, and design. The commission may modify land development regulations as they apply to the preliminary land development plan under review provided those same purposes are upheld and promoted. Standards for modification appear in Section 1.9. The commission shall not require or allow modified zoning standards unless authorized to do so in specific cases, as provided in the Hanahan Ordinance. 
(3)	The planning commission shall act on the preliminary plan within sixty (60) days of the official submittal date. Failure to act within sixty (60) days shall constitute automatic approval, and the developer shall be notified in writing. The sixty-day time limit may be extended by mutual agreement between the developer and the city planner. 
(4)	The city planner shall submit to the developer a written report of the planning commission's decision, with any attached conditions of approval or reasons for disapproval, within ten (10) days of the decision. 
2.4. - Land disturbance permit. 
    The developer shall be eligible to apply for a land disturbance permit after gaining planning commission approval of a preliminary land development plan and meeting any attached conditions. 
2.4.1.   Purpose.
(A)	The land disturbance permit is the enforcement tool by which the city planner can assure that a major land development is constructed in accordance with the preliminary plan approval or conditional approval and furthermore, that the land development will meet or exceed the design and improvements standards for community facilities specified in Chapter 5 of this ordinance. 
(B)	The developer shall demonstrate upon application for a land disturbance permit achievement of federal, state, and local natural resource protection standards during construction and the ability to meet natural resource protection standards during construction and post-construction. 
(C)	This step allows the developer to avoid the potential costs of significant changes to engineering drawings required by the planning commission during its review of the preliminary plan. 
(D)	Receipt of a land disturbance permit authorizes the developer to clear and grade land, remove trees in accordance with Hanahan tree protection standards (Chapter 7 of the Zoning Ordinance), and install community improvements. 
2.4.2.   Procedure.
(A)	The developer shall submit to the city planner a completed application for a land disturbance permit, which the city planner shall date and stamp "received." 
(B)	A completed application for a land disturbance permit includes those items specified in Section 3.4 of this ordinance, which include, but are not limited to an application form and fee. 
(C)	The city planner shall have no more than thirty (30) days in which to review the completed application and either issue the land disturbance permit or submit to the developer in writing reasons for disapproval. The city planner shall be authorized to inspect natural resource protection measures proposed as part of the land development, as applicable. The thirty-day time limit may be extended by mutual agreement between the developer and the city planner. 
(D)	The developer shall post an approved land disturbance permit on the major land development site at a location easily visible and accessible from the adjacent transportation right-of-way until improvements specified in the application for the permit are installed, pass inspection of, and are, where applicable, successfully dedicated to the appropriate agency. 
(E)	The developer may appeal the decision of the city planner to the planning commission in accordance with the appeals process specified in Section 1.10. 
2.5. - Third-party review and inspection. 
    The developer may propose improvements that do not meet Berkeley County standards for engineering, construction, development, and stormwater drainage adopted by the City of Hanahan by reference as land development design and improvements standards. This option shall only be available where alternate standards are provided in Chapter 5. The following standards shall apply. 
(A)	The developer shall designate a professional engineer approved by the city planner, who is not employed by the developer or any firm hired by the developer or any subcontractor thereof for the proposed land development under consideration, to review the land development plans and inspect their construction to a standard equivalent to the detail and frequency of Berkeley County inspectors. The city planner may require more detailed or frequent inspections where necessary to ensure compliance with the intent of this ordinance and to uphold good engineering practices, as promulgated by recognized professional resources, such as the AASHTO Green Book. 
(B)	The fees of third-party review for various engineers shall appear in the City of Hanahan Schedule of Fees and Fines and made available to the developer upon request. The fees shall be percentages of construction costs of the improvements subject to third-party review or other quantifiable dollar amount based on the size or extent of the land development or system of improvements proposed. 
(C)	The developer shall indicate to the city planner in writing his desire to utilize the services of the selected third-party engineer and submit to the city planner upon application for land disturbance permit an itemized construction costs estimate of those improvements proposed for third-party review. The written notification shall commit the developer to the selected engineer for the duration of the land development process or phase thereof and shall indicate acceptance of responsibility for fees. 
(D)	The amount of fees shall be altered only if (1) the land disturbance permit is expired or up for renewal or (2) the city planner finds or learns from the third-party engineer that the developer miscalculated construction costs. Upon renewal of a land disturbance permit, the developer shall recalculate and submit a new construction costs estimate and may choose another engineer for third-party review. Miscalculation of construction costs shall be a violation of this ordinance, which if not corrected by the developer, shall authorize the city planner to take enforcement action. 
(E)	A change from the third-party engineer originally selected during construction document review or inspection shall be approved solely by the city planner, who shall document in writing that good cause exists for the change, such as unprofessional conduct or unexpected unavailability of the third-party engineer. The developer shall then select a replacement approved by the city planner. 
(F)	The third-party professional engineer shall report to the city planner in writing his conclusions as to whether alternative plans further the objectives of this ordinance and his findings upon inspection of improvements under construction as to the successful implementation of approved plans. The city planner shall forward written reports to the developer, who shall address any deficiencies in the report to the satisfaction of the third-party engineer and the city planner. 
(G)	The City of Hanahan, not the developer, shall be responsible for payment of the third-party engineer. 
2.6. - Field changes. 
    On-site conditions may unduly inhibit land development and as depicted in an approved or conditionally approved preliminary land development plan and/or the successful land disturbance permit application. In this event, the developer shall submit any changes to the preliminary plan or the land disturbance permit application to the city planner for review and approval. Field changes shall meet the following standards. 
(A)	All land development standards of the City of Hanahan shall apply, or the developer may seek modification of standards per Section 1.9. 
(B)	The field change shall be sufficiently minor, as deemed by the city planner. Field changes that result in a significant change, typically ten (10) percent or greater, in the quantity or extent of lots, community facilities, or affected natural resources shall require the developer to resubmit the amended preliminary land development plan for planning commission review and approval. 
(C)	The developer shall submit a request in writing for a field change to the city planner, which the city planner shall date and stamp "received." 
(D)	The city planner shall have fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt to review the field change and respond in writing to the developer. The city planner shall approve the field change or instruct the developer to resubmit for preliminary land development plan approval. The fifteen-day time limit may be extended by mutual agreement between the developer and the city planner. 
2.7. - Final plat. 
    The developer shall be eligible to apply for final plat approval after receipt of a land disturbance permit and completion, or assurance of completion, of all public and/or common improvements indicated in the approved preliminary land development plan. 
2.7.1.   Purpose.
(A)	An approved final plat enables the developer to subdivide property into lots for transfer or to seek a zoning permit for use. 
(B)	The final plat shall conform in all respects to the approved preliminary plan, as amended to meet attached conditions and as amended by field changes. 
(C)	The city planner approves a final plat only after the developer has satisfactorily completed all public and/or private community facilities, such as systems of infrastructure, sites for public buildings, and common open space. Alternatively, the developer may financially guarantee completion of the improvements per Chapter 4. 
(D)	Final plat approval does not constitute acceptance of existing or proposed community facilities. The developer shall make arrangements for the maintenance of community facilities per Section 4.5. 
(E)	Final plat approval shall be a pre-requisite for a zoning permit for any lot proposed in the land development. 
2.7.2.   Procedure.
(A)	The developer shall submit a final plat to the city planner, who shall date and stamp the final plat "received." 
(B)	A complete final plat includes those items specified in Section 3.5 of this ordinance, which include, but are not limited to an application form and fee. 
(C)	The city planner shall have no more than thirty (30) days in which to review and either approve or disapprove the final plat. The city planner shall be authorized to inspect community facilities, natural resource protection measures, and landscaping proposed as part of the land development, as applicable. The city planner shall then sign and date the approved final plat for recordation or submit in writing reasons for disapproval to the developer. The thirty-day time limit may be extended by mutual agreement between the developer and the city planner. 
(D)	The developer may appeal the decision of the city planner to the planning commission in accordance with the appeals process specified in Section 1.10. 
2.7.3.   Recordation of plat.
    The city planner shall retain one (1) copy of the final plat for City of Hanahan records and return remaining copies to the developer. The developer shall be responsible for filing the final plat with the Berkeley County Register of Deeds. 
2.8. - Minor land development plat. 
    The developer shall be eligible to apply for minor land development plat approval for a proposal that that qualifies as a minor land development per Section 1.8(F) of this ordinance. 
2.8.1.   Purpose and applicability.
(A)	The Hanahan Planning Commission is charged with the implementation of the purposes of land development regulations specified in Section 1.1 of this ordinance in part through its review and approval of plats for minor land developments. 
(B)	The developer shall demonstrate to the planning commission the intent and ability to meet or exceed all zoning and land development standards of the City of Hanahan. 
(C)	The minor land development plat is equivalent to a final plat submitted to the planning commission for review and approval of minor land development. 
(D)	Approval of a minor land development plat authorizes the developer subdivide the land into lots for transfer or to seek a zoning permit for use. 
2.8.2.   Procedure.
(A)	The developer shall submit a minor land development plat to the city planner no fewer than twenty-five (25) days before the planning commission meeting at which he seeks plan approval. 
(B)	The city planner shall date and stamp the plat "received." 
(C)	A complete minor land development plat includes those items specified for a final plat in Section 3.5 of this ordinance, which include, but are not limited to an application form and fee. 
(D)	Notification of meeting. The city planner shall notify the developer of the time and place of the planning commission meeting at which the land development is to be considered no fewer than five (5) days before the meeting at which the minor land development plat is to be considered. A copy of the agenda for the meeting shall suffice as written notice. 
(E)	Decision on minor land development plat. 
(1)	The planning commission shall approve, approve conditionally, or disapprove the minor land development plat at its regularly scheduled monthly meeting or at a duly advertised called meeting. 
(2)	The planning commission may attach conditions of approval that uphold and promote the purposes of land development regulations, stated in Section 1.1. The commission shall have the authority to require changes to minor land development plats as conditions of approval in order to uphold and promote those purposes. Changes may relate to land development content, arrangement, and design. The commission may modify land development regulations as they apply to the minor land development plat under review provided those same purposes are upheld and promoted. Standards for modification appear in Section 1.9. The commission shall not require or allow modified zoning standards unless authorized to do so in specific cases, as provided in the Hanahan Ordinance. 
(3)	The planning commission shall act on the minor land development plat within sixty (60) days of the official submittal date. Failure to act within sixty (60) days shall constitute automatic approval, and the city planner shall notify the developer of this in writing. The sixty-day time limit may be extended by mutual agreement between the developer and the city planner. 
(4)	The city planner shall submit to the developer a written report of the planning commission's decision, with any attached conditions of approval or reasons for disapproval, within ten (10) days of the decision. 
(5)	If the planning commission has approved the minor land development plat and any and all conditions of approval have been met, the city planner shall sign and date the approved plat for recordation and submit it to the developer. 
2.8.3.   Recordation of plat.
    The city planner shall retain one (1) copy of the minor land development plat for City of Hanahan records and return remaining copies to the developer. The developer shall be responsible for filing the plat with the Berkeley County Register of Deeds. 
2.9. - Record drawings. 
(A)	A record drawing documents completed improvements required to serve the land development and an as-built survey executed by the developer as evidence that all improvements have been installed according to an approved preliminary land development plan and application for land disturbance permit, in compliance with design and improvements standards of this ordinance. 
(B)	The developer shall submit one (1) copy of record drawings of all completed improvements upon application for final plat approval. All incomplete improvements shall be financially guaranteed per Section 4.2. Record drawings of financially guaranteed improvements shall be submitted prior to release of financial guarantees. 
(C)	The developer shall submit copies of record drawings to utility providers expected to maintain the improvements and shall provide verification to the city planner from the utility provider that all improvements have been installed to their specifications prior to final plat approval or release of financial guarantees. 
2.10. - Zoning permit. 
    The developer of a building site shall obtain a zoning permit prior to commencing any site development activities, including clearing and tree removal performed for and development site preparation. Section 2.6 of the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance provides for the applicability, purpose, procedure, documentation requirements, and appeal process for a zoning permit. The developer is strongly encouraged to participate in a pre-application conference, per Section 2.1 of this ordinance prior to seeking a zoning permit. 
2.11. - Building permit. 
    The developer in receipt of a zoning permit shall be eligible to apply for a building permit. All standards for review and approval shall be found in the building code adopted by the City of Hanahan, as amended. The application procedure for a building permit shall be that found in Section 2.7 of the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance. 
(A)	Proposals of construction and reconstruction shall secure a building permit from the City of Hanahan where such is required by the building code adopted by the City of Hanahan, as amended, except that public utilities installing and repairing transmission lines, poles, and substations shall be exempt. 
(B)	The purposes of building code administration shall be those found in the building code adopted by the City of Hanahan, as amended. 
2.12. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    A developer or other applicant in receipt of a building permit and/or zoning permit shall obtain a certificate of occupancy prior to taking residence or commencing business in the structure for which the permit is received. The application procedure for a certificate of occupancy shall be that found in Section 2.8 of the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance. 
(A)	All public improvements, including those financially guaranteed, in a major land development shall be completed to the satisfaction of the City of Hanahan prior to application for a certificate of occupancy for any structure within the major land development. In the event of a phased land development, each of these systems shall be completed within the current phase and all previous phases. 
(B)	Application for a certificate of occupancy signals to the building official and the zoning administrator that construction and site improvements specified in applications for a building permit and a zoning permit are complete or, where allowed, are financially guaranteed. 
2.13. - Outline of the approval process for major land development. 
    The outline, appearing on the following page, is intended as a summation of the above text and shall not be considered ordinance language. The reader should refer to the section of the ordinance referenced by the section for which he desires more information. 

3. - LAND DEVELOPMENT DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS 

3.1. - Sketch plan. 
    This step is strictly voluntary and description of content spelled out for the sketch plan is to provide guidance to the developer. 
(A)	The sketch plan of a proposed land development should be legibly drawn to scale without necessarily showing precise dimensions and should contain at least the following information: 
(1)	North arrow; 
(2)	Written and/or graphic scales; 
(3)	Location map showing the relationship between the proposed development and the surrounding properties; 
(4)	Tract boundaries and total acreages; 
(5)	Approximate sizes and locations of existing structures; 
(6)	Existing and proposed land uses throughout the development; 
(7)	Existing character of the land, such as approximate locations of natural resources, which may be identified on aerial photography; 
(8)	Tentative street and lot arrangement showing average lot size and the number of lots; 
(9)	Non-residential sites with approximate acreages and gross floor area, where applicable; 
(10)	Zoning classification(s); and 
(11)	Designation of phases, where applicable. 
(B)	A completed application for sketch plan review should include a form available from the city planner that indicates land ownership and representation, where applicable, and contact information for both. The Berkeley County parcel identification number(s) and the property address, where available, of the subject property should be specified on the application form. No fee is required, since this step is voluntary. 
3.2. - Preliminary land development plan. 
(A)	Application requirements. The following constitute a completed application for preliminary land development plan approval. 
(1)	An application form available from the city planner. The form shall include the Berkeley County parcel identification number(s) and the address, where available, of the property proposed for land development. 
(2)	An application fee in the amount set by Hanahan City Council. 
(3)	Ten (10) copies of the preliminary land development plan printed on bond paper or material of equivalent durability. Data sets appearing in the preliminary plan shall be those below. 
(4)	Ten (10) copies of the traffic study, where required. Standards and content requirements for the traffic study appear in Section 3.3. 
(B)	Documentation requirements. The completed application for preliminary land development plan approval shall meet the following standards. 
(1)	Scale. The preliminary land development plan shall be legibly drawn at a scale that clearly communicates the information required, typically no smaller than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet on a sheet twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches. If the preliminary land development plan necessitates more than one (1) sheet, a key diagram drawn at a smaller scale shall show and reference each portion of the plan. The city planner may approve alternate scale and sheet sizes at his sole discretion. 
(2)	General information. 
(a)	Title block, including the following: 
(i)	Proposed name of development, which shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically or otherwise, the name of any development within the jurisdiction; 
(ii)	Names, signatures, and seals of applicant, owner, surveyor, engineer and other professionals involved in plan preparation; 
(iii)	North arrow, graphic scale, and written scale; 
(iv)	Space for city officials' signatures necessary for approval; and 
(v)	The month, day, and year that the original drawing was completed and the month, day, and year for each revision of the original drawing. 
(b)	A vicinity map, for the purpose of locating the property being developed, drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals two thousand (2,000) feet and showing the relation of the property to surrounding properties, differentiated by tone or pattern, to adjoining property and roads, municipal boundaries, and landmarks existing within two thousand (2,000) feet of any part of the property. 
(3)	Existing site information. 
(a)	The distance and bearing from one (1) corner of the boundary of the development to the nearest intersection of existing streets or roads. 
(b)	Total tract boundaries of the property being developed, showing bearing and distances, and a statement of total acreage of the property. 
(c)	Existing parcel identification numbers (tax map numbers). 
(d)	Location, ownership, parcel identification numbers, zoning classifications, and land uses of adjoining properties, including those across rights-of-way. 
(e)	All existing municipal boundaries, property lines, rights-of-way, easements, railroads, water and sewer lines, fire hydrants, utility transmission lines, culverts, bridges, storm drainage infrastructure, water courses, and buildings and other structures. 
(f)	All existing roads, including roads of record but not constructed, and bicycle/pedestrian infrastructure, including sidewalks, on or abutting the tract, labeled with names, right-of-way widths, facility widths, and materials. 
(g)	All trees required to be protected, including graphic indication as to whether landmark trees and protected trees are proposed to be preserved or removed. Tree survey and protection standards shall be those found in Chapter 7 of the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance. 
(h)	Type and location of ground cover samples, if required, per Section 7.6.3 of the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance. 
(i)	Topography: one- or two-foot contours. 
(j)	Flood hazard areas delineated and labeled by type and flood map panel number. Flood hazard information shall be in accordance with the flood hazard ordinance adopted by Hanahan City Council, as amended. 
(k)	Critical lines of jurisdictional and isolated wetlands in accordance with state and federal standards as well as any buffers expected to be required by state and federal agencies. The city planner should advise the developer during the pre-application conference about meeting such requirements. 
(l)	Endangered species habitat areas, where required by state and federal standards. 
(4)	Proposed land development information. 
(a)	Roads, rights-of-way, widths, and materials. 
(b)	New road names pre-approved by Berkeley County E-911. 
(c)	Extent of all parking areas with number of stalls, including handicap-accessible and loading stalls. 
(d)	Bicycle and pedestrian facilities and rights-of-way, widths, and materials. 
(e)	Lot lines, dimensions, and sizes. 
(f)	Proposed land uses by lot. 
(g)	Other easements and rights-of-way, including locations, dimensions, and purposes. 
(h)	Schematic plans for utilities (i.e. - sewerage, potable water, electricity, street lighting, cable, telephone, and gas lines, and stormwater drainage). 
(i)	Parks, school sites, common areas and other areas designated for public use, if any. 
(j)	Sites proposed for single-family detached and two-family residential structures. 
(k)	Sites with proposed land uses other than single-family detached and two-family residential structures with approximate footprints of any structures, with approximate gross floor area and dimensions. Approximate footprints shall indicate intent to meet or exceed any building design regulations promulgated in the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance. 
(l)	Any required vegetative buffers, tree protection areas, and tree planting requirements such as street trees and roadside trees. 
(5)	Platting information. 
(a)	The total tract boundary lines of the area being developed shall be in accordance with the most recent edition of the Minimum Standards Manual for the Practice of Land Surveying in South Carolina, as promulgated by the Code of Laws of South Carolina, Title 40, Chapter 21. 
(b)	The preliminary land development plan shall meet all standards and requirements as set forth in the laws of the State of South Carolina and these regulations. 
(6)	Supplemental data. Any other information required by ordinance or considered pertinent by the applicant, the planning commission, or the city planner to the review of the preliminary land development plan shall be submitted with or on the plan. 
3.3. - Traffic study. 
(A)	Applicability. A traffic study shall be required as part of a complete application for preliminary land development plan approval or zoning permit for any land development projected to generate one hundred (100) or more peak-hour vehicle trips at any intersection at the perimeter of the land development. The planning commission may request a traffic study in its consideration of a proposed planned development district. Trip generation rates from the applicable, current manual of the Institute of Transportation Engineers or equivalent shall apply. 
(B)	Study scope. The planning commission may require any or all of the following. The city planner should indicate these needs to the applicant prior to the planning commission review of the preliminary land development plan. 
(1)	The results of the traffic study may be reported to the planning commission in writing, full traffic impact analysis, or other means appropriate to the scale of the study, as acceptable to the planning commission. 
(2)	The traffic study area shall include all existing and proposed road intersections and segments along the perimeter of the land development site. The planning commission may also require the study to include road intersections and segments of collector and arterial roads that provide direct access to the land development site. 
(3)	Periods of analysis shall include daily and peak-hour traffic. 
(4)	Analysis scenarios shall include existing conditions and conditions at proposed build-out. The planning commission may require intermediate scenarios as well. 
(5)	Where desired by the planning commission, the process for determining trip generation and distribution, including generation category and diversion and distribution assumptions, shall be reported. 
(6)	The study shall include growth rate in background traffic assumptions. 
(7)	The study shall include, to the extent practical, the impacts of nearby land developments with potentially overlapping study areas and proposed transportation system improvements. 
(C)	Existing conditions. The traffic study shall report existing conditions, including: 
(1)	Graphic representation of the road system with geometric features, lane usage, signage, curb cuts, adjacent traffic generators; 
(2)	Traffic volumes, including average daily traffic, which may be available from SCDOT, and peak-hour traffic, which shall be seasonally adjusted (e.g., to account for school traffic) to the extent practical; 
(3)	Capacity of road intersections and segments in the study area; and 
(4)	Other information as deemed necessary by the planning commission, including, but not limited to sight distances, queue length analysis, pedestrian counts, accident data, and traffic speeds (50th and 85th percentile). 
(D)	Projected future conditions. The traffic study shall project future conditions with and without the proposed land development, the latter of which shall account for traffic growth rate and completion of approved nearby land developments with potentially overlapping study areas. The report shall include the following details of future conditions with the proposed land development: 
(1)	Projections of daily and peak-hour traffic distributed into the road network; 
(2)	Capacity analysis at build-out and any required intermediate points in time; and 
(3)	Where deemed necessary by the planning commission, determination of warrants for signalization, safe sight distances, gap analysis, turning radius requirements, queue length analysis, turning lane length analysis, curb cut locations, and design speeds with proposed posted speed limits. 
(E)	Mitigation plan. The traffic study shall conclude with recommendations to add turn lanes, traffic signage and signals, and other measures to offset negative impacts that exceed capacity or absorb a large proportion (typically one-third ( 1/3 ) or more) of capacity in an area expected to grow significantly, as determined by the planning commission. The mitigation plan shall not neglect potential impacts of its recommendations on bicycle and pedestrian access and safety. The recommendations of the mitigation plan shall be conditions of preliminary land development plan and/or zoning permit approval. Failure to implement the recommendations shall be grounds for disapproval or denial of a rezoning request. 
3.4. - Land disturbance permit. 
(A)	Application requirements. The following constitute a completed application for a land disturbance permit. 
(1)	An application form available from the city planner. The form shall include the Berkeley County parcel identification number(s) and the address, where available, of the property proposed for land development. 
(2)	An application fee in the amount set by Hanahan City Council. 
(3)	An approved preliminary land development plan or conditionally approved preliminary land development plan that reflects adherence to all planning commission conditions of approval. 
(4)	Tree protection plans, per Chapter 7 of the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance. 
(5)	Any vegetation to be preserved for required and otherwise proposed buffering, undisturbed green space, or other purposes. 
(6)	Reviewed and approved engineering plans for necessary utilities (i.e. - sewerage, potable water, electricity, street lighting, and stormwater drainage) proposed to serve the land development. The applicant shall be responsible for submitting plans to appropriate agencies for review and approval. Approvals shall be verified by an official letter from the appropriate agency. 
(7)	Plans to control erosion and sedimentation, to protect water quality, and to protect endangered species, as approved by state and federal agencies with jurisdiction. Approval shall be verified by an official letter from the appropriate agency. 
(8)	Copies of any encroachment permits required by SC Department of Transportation, Berkeley County, US Army Corps of Engineers, and other county, state, or federal agencies with jurisdiction. 
(B)	Documentation requirements. The completed application for a land disturbance permit shall meet the following standards. 
(1)	Engineering plans shall meet the standards of the utility provider expected to accept responsibility for the improvements, including SC Department of Engineering, Berkeley County Engineering, Berkeley County Water and Sanitation Authority, et al. 
(2)	Engineering plans for improvements proposed for private maintenance shall nevertheless meet documentation requirements promulgated by SCDOT, Berkeley County Engineering, and BCW&SA. Engineering plans shall then be eligible for third-party review, per Section 2.5 of this ordinance. 
(3)	Documentation shall be in accordance with the most recent edition of the Minimum Standards Manual for the Practice of Land Surveying in South Carolina, as promulgated by the Code of Laws of South Carolina, 1976, Title 40, Chapter 21. 
(4)	All engineering plans shall include the signature, seal, and certification of a registered professional land surveyor and/or engineer, as applicable, that the drawings accurately reflect a survey made by him or her, that any changes from the description appearing in the last recorded transfer of land contained in the final plat are so indicated, that all monuments shown thereon actually exist or will be installed, and that their positions are accurately shown. 
3.5. - Final plat/minor land development plat. 
(A)	Application requirements. The following constitute a completed application for final plat approval and for minor land development plat approval. 
(1)	An application form available from the city planner. The form shall include the Berkeley County parcel identification number(s) and the address, where available, of the property proposed for land development. 
(2)	An application fee in the amount set by Hanahan City Council. 
(3)	Two (2) copies of the final plat or ten (10) copies of the minor land development plat printed on bond paper or material of equivalent durability. Data sets appearing in these plats shall be those below. 
(4)	One (1) copy of record drawings of all required improvements or financial guarantees for those improvements not yet completed. 
(B)	Documentation requirements. The completed application for final plat minor land development plat approval shall meet the following standards. 
(1)	Scale. 
(a)	The final plat shall be legibly drawn at a scale that clearly communicates the information required, typically no smaller than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet on a sheet twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches. If the final plat necessitates more than one (1) sheet, a key diagram drawn at a smaller scale shall show and reference each portion of the plan. The city planner may approve alternate scale and sheet sizes at his sole discretion. 
(b)	The minor land development plat shall be legibly drawn at a scale that clearly communicates the information required, typically no smaller than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet on a sheet eight and one-half (81/2) by eleven (11) inches or larger. 
(2)	General information. 
(a)	Title block, including the following: 
(i)	Proposed name of development, which shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically or otherwise, the name of any development within the jurisdiction; 
(ii)	Names, signatures, and seals of applicant, owner, surveyor, engineer and other professionals involved in plan preparation; 
(iii)	North arrow, graphic scale, and written scale; 
(iv)	Space for city officials' signatures necessary for approval; and 
(v)	The month, day, and year that the original drawing was completed and the month, day, and year for each revision of the original drawing. 
(b)	A vicinity map, for the purpose of locating the property being developed, drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals two thousand (2,000) feet and showing the relation of the property to surrounding properties, differentiated by tone or pattern, to adjoining property and roads, municipal boundaries, and landmarks existing within two thousand (2,000) feet of any part of the property. 
(3)	Site information. 
(a)	The distance and bearing from one (1) corner of the boundary of the development to the nearest intersection of existing streets or roads. 
(b)	Total tract boundaries of the property being developed, showing bearing and distances, and a statement of total acreage of the property. 
(c)	Existing parcel identification numbers (tax map numbers). 
(d)	Location, ownership, and parcel identification numbers of adjoining properties, including those across rights-of-way. 
(e)	Existing and proposed parcel boundaries, dimensions, and sizes in square feet and acres and lot and block numbers. 
(f)	Labeled pre-existing, installed, and proposed rights-of-way, easements, railroads, water and sewer lines, fire hydrants, utility transmission lines, culverts, bridges, storm drainage infrastructure, roads including roads of recorded but not constructed, bicycle/pedestrian infrastructure including sidewalks on or abutting the tract, and buildings and other structures. 
(g)	Parks, school sites, and other areas designated for public use, if any. 
(h)	Municipal boundaries and watercourses. 
(i)	Flood hazard areas delineated and labeled by type and flood map panel number. Flood hazard information shall be in accordance with the flood hazard ordinance adopted by Hanahan City Council, as amended. 
(j)	Critical lines of wetlands in accordance with state and federal standards as well as any buffers expected to be required by state and federal agencies. 
(k)	Endangered species habitat areas, where required by state and federal standards. 
(4)	Platting information. 
(a)	The total tract boundary lines of the area being developed shall be in accordance with the most recent edition of the Minimum Standards Manual for the Practice of Land Surveying in South Carolina, as promulgated by the Code of Laws of South Carolina, Title 40, Chapter 21. 
(b)	The final plat shall meet all standards and requirements as set forth in the laws of the State of South Carolina and these regulations. 
(C)	Planning and design. The land development information depicted on the final plat shall conform to the greatest extent possible with the design depicted on the approved preliminary plan, except that all conditions required for preliminary land development plan approval and land disturbance permit shall be reflected. 
(D)	Certification. The following certificates shall be lettered, printed, and/or stamped on the face of the final plat. 
(1)	Surveyor or engineer certification of accuracy. The signature, seal, and certification of a registered professional land surveyor or engineer to the effect that the final plat accurately reflects a survey made by him or her, that any changes from the description appearing in the last recorded transfer of land contained in the final plat are so indicated, that all monuments shown thereon actually exist or will be installed and their positions are accurately shown. 
(2)	Certification of ownership and dedication. A notarized certification of title showing that the applicants are the owners, and statements by such owners acknowledging any offers of dedication of land for public use and restricting land by protective covenants. 
(3)	Certification of the approval of water and/or sewerage systems. Where applicable, the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC) and the appropriate service district shall certify that the water supply and/or sewage disposal system(s) installed or proposed for installation fully meet DHEC requirements. 
(4)	Certification by subdivider's engineer. Where applicable, the signature, seal, and approval of the subdivider's engineer shall indicate that required infrastructure improvements have been satisfactorily installed or that adequate financial guarantees have been provided (per Chapter Five). 
4. - COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS 

4.1. - Intent of chapter. 
    Before the final plat is signed and stamped for approval by the city planner, the developer shall either: 
(A)	Complete all public improvements, as required in this ordinance, and dedicate those public improvements to the appropriate body, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the dedicated property and public improvements; or 
(B)	Ensure completion of all public improvements, as required in this ordinance, via written, signed agreement by financial warranty and dedicate those public improvements to the appropriate body upon completion, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the dedicated property and public improvements. 
4.2. - Improvements agreement and warranty. 
(A)	The developer shall indicate his desire to guarantee public improvements by submitting a written, signed agreement and financial warranty with or prior to a completed application for final plat approval to the city planner. 
(B)	The developer shall sign a written agreement binding him to complete the improvements within two (2) years of final plat approval, as indicated by the dated signature of the city planner. The final plat shall be referenced in the agreement. 
(C)	The developer shall submit one (1) or a combination of the following financial warranties to the city planner and the written, signed agreement with the completed application for final plat approval: 
(1)	A no-contest, irrevocable bank letter of credit; 
(2)	A performance and payment bond underwritten by a corporate surety licensed by the State of South Carolina; or 
(3)	A cashier's check or cash equivalent. 
(D)	The financial warranty shall be in an amount equivalent to one hundred fifty (150) percent of the total costs of the public improvements proposed to be ensured. The warranty shall name the City of Hanahan the beneficiary. The city planner shall be authorized to review and approve the costs estimates, which may be recommended by a third-party professional engineer, provided for in Section 2.5 of this ordinance. 
(E)	The city planner will forward the agreement and warranty to the city attorney for review and comment. The developer shall address those comments and resubmit the agreement if deemed necessary by the city attorney. 
(F)	An agreement and warranty acceptable to the City of Hanahan shall be required components of a completed application for final plat approval. 
4.3. - Completion of improvements. 
(A)	If guaranteed public improvements are not completed as required, the developer shall be in default. The city shall be authorized to utilize funds of the financial warranty to let or re-let a contract to complete the improvements. Any funds remaining from the warranty after successful completion of the improvements shall be returned to the developer. 
(B)	As the developer completes improvements, they shall be inspected by the city planner or a third-party professional engineer, who shall submit a written report to the city planner, regarding adherence to the requirements of this ordinance and other applicable standards. 
(C)	The city planner shall review the third-party professional engineer's report and relay it to the developer, who shall address the comments in the report to the satisfaction of the city planner. 
(D)	Once the developer has completed the guaranteed public improvements as required, he shall prepare record drawings of all improvements, which shall conform in all respects to the final plat and reflect guaranteed public improvements as installed. The developer shall submit the record drawings to the city planner for review. If the record drawing meets the requirements of this ordinance, the city planner shall sign and date them approved. The developer shall submit the drawing to Berkeley County Register of Deeds. 
(E)	Upon successful recordation, the City of Hanahan shall release the financial warranty to the developer. The warranty may be partially released to the developer as improvements are completed in stages, at the discretion of the city planner. 
4.4. - Performance of completed improvements to be guaranteed. 
(A)	The developer shall guarantee the performance of completed roads and other improvements proposed to be dedicated to the City of Hanahan, Berkeley County, or a property owners association for a period of two (2) years after the improvements are documented and recorded with the Berkeley County Register of Deeds. This shall be accomplished via written, signed agreement by the developer with a financial warranty, which shall be submitted to the city planner. 
(B)	The developer shall submit one (1) or a combination of the following financial warranties to the city planner with the written, signed agreement completed application for final plat approval: 
(1)	A no-contest, irrevocable bank letter of credit; 
(2)	A performance and payment bond underwritten by a corporate surety licensed by the State of South Carolina; or 
(3)	A cashier's check or cash equivalent. 
(C)	The financial warranty shall be in an amount equivalent to twenty (20) percent of the total costs of the completed, guaranteed public improvements. The warranty shall name the City of Hanahan the beneficiary. The city planner shall be authorized to approve the costs stated, which may be reviewed by a third-party professional engineer, provided for in Section 2.5 of this ordinance. 
(D)	The city planner will forward the agreement and warranty to the city attorney for review and comment. The developer shall address those comments and resubmit the agreement if deemed necessary by the city attorney. 
(E)	If the city planner finds any deficiencies in completed public improvements, he shall notify the developer in writing, who shall have fifteen (15) days to respond and indicate a time frame to correct the deficiency to the satisfaction of the city planner. 
(F)	If deficiencies in guaranteed public improvements are not rectified as required, the developer shall be in default. The city shall be authorized to utilize funds of the financial warranty to let or re-let a contract to complete the improvements. 
(G)	The financial warranty and performance guarantee for completed public improvements shall expire within two (2) years and any remaining funds shall be returned to the developer. 
4.5. - Maintenance of improvements. 
(A)	The developer shall provide for the perpetual maintenance of all public improvements via one (1) of the following: 
(1)	Dedication to a public entity equipped to maintain those public improvements offered to it. The public entity may accept or refuse the improvements at its sole discretion. 
(2)	Conveyance of public improvements to a private entity equipped to maintain those public improvements offered to it. 
(3)	Establishment of a property owners association and conveyance of public improvements thereto. The association must be duly chartered by the State of South Carolina and recorded with the Berkeley County Register of Deeds. 
(B)	The developer shall provide for the perpetual maintenance environmental resources, including open space and wetlands and any associated buffering, via one (1) of the aforementioned maintenance vehicles (subsections A.1-3) or via one (1) of the following: 
(1)	Conveyance of the environmental resources to a landowner, typically a non-profit organization, whose principal mission is conservation of natural and cultural resources, with deed restrictions to that effect; or 
(2)	Dedication of a conservation easement protecting the environmental resources to a landowner, typically a non-profit organization, whose principal mission is conservation of natural and cultural resources, with a legal maintenance agreement from the same. 
(C)	The improvements shall be conveyed with appropriate easements and/or deed restrictions that ensure perpetual service of the improvements to the community and public that shall appear on the plat in illustration and/or in writing, as appropriate. The text shall specify the purpose and use of the improvements. 
(D)	A copy of a title insurance policy shall be furnished to the city planner for review by the city attorney indicating that the improvements have been completed, are ready for dedication or conveyance to the appropriate body, and are free and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances. 
5. - DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENTS STANDARDS 

5.1. - Intent of chapter. 
    Assurance of completion of improvements is necessary to ensure the performance of installed public improvements to the prospective property owner, occupant, public, and the City of Hanahan. 
5.2. - General standards. 
(A)	Conformity. Improvements shall be installed in accordance with the requirements and standards set forth in this ordinance and other specifications and policies of the City of Hanahan, Berkeley County Engineering, Berkeley County Water and Sanitation Authority, Charleston Water System, the South Carolina Department of Transportation, the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control, and other agencies of jurisdiction prior to final plat approval and after all applicable permits have been issued by the agencies. 
(B)	Access and inspections. Before beginning any work within the development, the developer shall make arrangements with those public agencies charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance to provide for adequate inspection of the improvements. All public agencies shall have access to the premises and structures of a development under jurisdiction of this ordinance during reasonable hours to make those inspections as deemed necessary by them to ensure compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
5.3. - Monuments. 
(A)	Monuments shall be installed at all angles formed by intersection of lot lines, right-of-way boundaries, and all exterior corners of the development. 
(B)	Monuments shall be one-quarter (1/4) inch steel rods or three-quarter (3/4) inch iron pipes not less than twenty-four (24) inches long and shall be placed vertically in the ground so as to extend two (2) inches above finished grade. 
5.4. - Lots. 
5.4.1.   Lot boundaries and proportions.
(A)	The lot size, width, shape, grade, and orientation shall be in relation to street and block design, existing topographical and natural vegetative conditions, and the type of development and use contemplated. 
(B)	The developer shall propose parcel boundaries insofar as practical such that landmark trees and significant groupings of protected trees occur in required yards and do not need to be cleared for building sites. 
(C)	Corner lots shall be of sufficient size and shape to permit required building setback and orientation to both streets. 
(D)	The average depth of a lot under two (2) acres in size shall be no more than five (5) times its average width, unless it is a double-frontage lot, in which case the average depth shall be no greater than seven (7) times its average width so as to accommodate on-site street parking and loading accessed by an alley in the rear of the lot. 
(E)	The frontage of a lot on a transportation right-of-way shall be at least two-thirds ( 2/3 ) its average width. 
(F)	A lot shall be at least eighteen (18) feet wide with eighteen (18) feet of frontage on a transportation right-of-way ingress/egress easement in accordance with Section 5.6. Individual zoning districts may require wider lots and/or more frontage. 
(G)	Any remnants of land not meeting lot area, width, and frontage required by City of Hanahan zoning and land development standards shall be incorporated into existing or proposed lots; legally dedicated to public use, if acceptable to the city; deeded to an appropriate utility provider to be occupied by infrastructure, if acceptable to the provider; or restricted by deed to community use for open space, stormwater management, or transportation. (Deed-restricted parcels shall be maintained in accordance with infrastructure maintenance procedures set forth in Section 4.5 of this ordinance.) 
5.4.2.   Lot access and orientation.
    The developer shall demonstrate access to all proposed parcels, either by frontage on a transportation or ingress/egress easement in compliance with one (1) of the following options. 
(A)	The lot shall abut a transportation right-of-way or ingress/egress easement with a street meeting or exceeding Hanahan Land Development Standards. 
(B)	The lot facing a mew or other common area for pedestrian circulation shall abut a transportation right-of-way or ingress/egress easement with an alley meeting or exceeding Hanahan land development standards. 
(C)	The lot shall be oriented directly toward the street insofar as practical. Side lot lines shall be perpendicular to straight streets or radial to curved streets insofar as practical. 
(D)	The lot shall directly address the street intended to serve it. No other property or structure shall partially or wholly intervene between the lot and the street serving the lot. Flag lots shall be prohibited. 
5.5. - Blocks. 
5.5.1.   Block conditions.
(A)	For the purposes of this ordinance and planning commission's determination of compliance therewith, blocks shall be any area defined by two (2) or more linear elements of vehicular circulation providing access to residential or non-residential units, lots, offices, storefronts etc., including roads, fire lanes, and other drives providing access to and within residential and non-residential communities, including townhouse developments, apartment complexes, commercial and industrial parks, shopping centers, mobile home parks, and other similar land developments. 
(B)	Alleys, parking lot aisles, and other lanes intended for access to covered or uncovered parking stalls and not relied upon for access to residential or non-residential units, lots, offices, storefronts etc., shall not be considered part of the block perimeter. 
(C)	In the event that vehicular circulation does not constitute the entire perimeter of a block, the block shall be considered bounded by adjacent property boundaries and/or drainage ways, including wetlands, for the purpose of considering the size and scale of the block. 
5.5.2.   Block design, orientation, and scale.
(A)	Blocks shall be oriented to complement natural topography, so as to minimize need for grading and clearing of natural resources such as trees. 
(B)	Blocks shall be oriented to complement natural stormwater drainage patterns and wetlands. 
(C)	Blocks shall be sized in proportion to the speed and volume of vehicular and pedestrian traffic expected within those rights-of-way or easements defining the block. 
(D)	Blocks shall be sized in proportion to existing and/or proposed land uses within the block and in proportion to the scale of structures sheltering such land uses. 
(E)	Dimensions for blocks may be specified in zoning districts to ensure the existing or intended scale of the district is achieved and enhanced. 
5.6. - Roads. 
5.6.1.   General road standards.
(A)	Roads shall meet or exceed all design and construction standards provided in AASHTO Green Book: A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, 5th Edition, a publication of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, 2001, or most recent edition. 
(B)	The City of Hanahan accepts no roads for public maintenance. Meeting or achieving land development standards for roads in Hanahan implies no acceptance of such roads for public maintenance. The developer seeking to dedicate roads to a public entity shall meet or exceed road standards required by that entity, which may differ from or conflict with Hanahan standards. 
(C)	The developer may choose to deviate from standards of Berkeley County and South Carolina Department of Transportation with good cause, as determined by the planning commission. The developer shall then propose alternative designs for roads and indicate to the planning commission how the designs further the intent of this ordinance, provide better access for all users, are more compatible with adjacent existing and proposed land uses, and/or promote economic development. 
(D)	Proposed roads shall be designed to serve all users, including truckers, automobile drivers, bicyclists, pedestrians, and wheelchair operators. Where possible conflicts may emerge, the road shall be designed for context and proposed use. For example, road design in industrial areas shall promote truck access, whereas road design in neighborhoods shall promote pedestrian access and safety. 
(E)	Roads shall be located so as to minimize loss of natural resources, including trees and wetlands. 
(F)	Proposed road location and design shall account for soils, floodplains, and other natural conditions and adjust accordingly to ensure the longevity and durability of the road. 
(G)	The proposed road shall remain passable in inclement weather, resistant to ponding in travel lanes or flooding in low spots. 
(H)	The proposed road shall not cause flooding or erosive run-off on adjoining parcels. 
(I)	Roads shall be constructed to accommodate the type and weight of vehicles routinely expected within the proposed development once it is occupied by permanent users. 
(1)	Roads in wholesale commercial and industrial areas shall be constructed to accommodate heavy-truck traffic generated by the proposed development. 
(2)	Roads in neighborhood commercial, office, institutional, and residential areas shall be constructed to accommodate private automobile traffic generated by the proposed development. 
(3)	Alleys serving as secondary access to residences shall accommodate minimal local private automobile traffic and may therefore be constructed with a permeable surface, such as gravel, coquina, or other material that minimizes dust and erosion of the road base. 
(4)	All roads except alleys shall be constructed with a hard surface, except where the Developer can demonstrate specific benefits to the City of Hanahan from the construction of permeable surfaces. 
(J)	All roads proposed for construction and improvement shall be equipped with traffic signage consistent with the SC Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. 
5.6.2.   Road system design standards.
(A)	Proposed roads shall be part of a circulation plan within the proposed development and coordinated with the existing road system of the surrounding area. 
(B)	Proposed roads shall be integrated into the existing system and, where possible, provide for the continuation of the road system into adjacent undeveloped high lands for future development. Such continuations, called road tubs, shall be dedicated as transportation rights-of-way and/or easements that allow for use by the traveling public and utilities for future development of the adjacent land. Road stubs shall be constructed to the same specifications as those for bulk of the road system within the proposed land development. 
(C)	Criteria for provision of road stubs. 
(1)	The planning commission may require road stubs in any major land development to ensure the possibility of a connection to an adjacent undeveloped tract. 
(2)	The commission should require the construction of an existing road stub adjoining a major land development. The developer shall be responsible for completing the road system connection by constructing the road in the easement or right-of-way provided on adjoining property. The constructed road stub shall be integrated into the proposed road system of the major land development. 
(3)	The commission should require road stubs to ensure that blocks do not exceed eight hundred (800) feet in length. 
(4)	Road stubs shall be provided to ensure that no block length exceeds sixteen hundred (1,600) feet. 
(5)	The planning commission may waive road stub requirements so as not to impose undue hardship on the developer in light of the scale of the proposed land development. The commission may further waive this standard where the presence of natural resources or adjacent land use, whether current or future, make adherence to this standard impractical or undesirable. 
5.6.3.   Intersection standards.
(A)	All roads intersecting other roads shall either intersect directly opposite each other or shall be separated by at least one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from centerline to centerline. 
(B)	All street intersections shall occur at least one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from any railroad right-of-way, measured from the centerpoint of the intersection perpendicular to the centerline of the railroad right-of-way. 
(C)	All roads shall intersect at angles no less than seventy-five (75) degrees unless a traffic circle or movement controls are proposed to prevent awkward or unsafe turning movements. 
(D)	Turning movements shall be designed to serve the predominant land uses existing or proposed in the surrounding area. Pedestrian crossing distances shall be minimized to the greatest extent practical in residential and retail areas. Turning radii shall be designed to serve truck traffic in industrial areas. 
5.6.4.   Single-terminus road standards.
(A)	Proposed permanent single-terminus roads shall be no longer than four hundred (400) feet, measured from the centerpoint of its intersection, except to provide access to land accessible by no other means due to natural constraints, such as wetlands. 
(B)	Proposed permanent single-terminus roads shall end in a turn-around at least forty (40) feet in radius. The turn-around may have a traversable island of a durable surface and resistant to ponding bounded by a ribbon or mountable curb to ensure the stability and longevity of the adjacent roadway. The minimum lane width of a turnaround shall be sixteen (16) feet. 
(C)	Proposed temporary single-terminus roads providing access to future phases of the same proposed land development or to an adjacent developable tract shall be equipped with either a turn-around specified above or a hammerhead that enables emergency and service vehicles to perform a three-point turn. 
(D)	Proposed single-terminus alleys shall be equipped with a turn-around or a hammerhead. 
(E)	No turn-around or hammerhead feature is required for a temporary single-terminus road provided that such road is less than two hundred (200) feet long and that provides no access to a lot. 
5.6.5.   Existing roads.
(A)	To avoid undue hardship on small landowners and prospective homeowners, a pre-existing road need not be upgraded to meet current standards for a land development that is in all other respects a minor land development, as defined by this ordinance. 
(B)	A major land development relying upon a pre-existing substandard road shall upgrade the road as practical. The planning commission shall determine the extent of upgrades required in its review of the major land development based on the findings of a traffic study, as set forth in Section 3.3, and a cost estimate of upgrades recommended in the study. 
5.6.6.   Standards by road type.
Type Target

speedThrough/

left-turn 

lanesContinuous

lane widthTypical

curb 

radiusParkingDrainage 1 Sidewalks

(width) 2 Alley 10-15 mph 1-2/0 9-12 feet 10-20 feet Parallel, angled Inverted crown, curb-and-gutter Not required Internal Circulation 10-20 mph 1-2/0 10-15 feet 15-25 feet Parallel, angled, perpendicular Inverted crown, curb-and-gutter Required (4 feet) Local 20-30 mph 2/0 10-12 feet 15-25 feet Parallel, angled Curb-and-gutter, swale Required (4 feet) Residential Collector 25-35 mph 2/0-1 11-15 feet 20-25 feet Parallel Curb-and-gutter, swale Required (5 feet) Commercial Collector 20-35 mph 2-4/0-1 11-15 feet 20-30 feet Parallel, angled Curb-and-gutter Required (8 feet) Industrial Collector 20-35 mph 2-4/0-1 12-15 feet 25+ feet None Curb-and-gutter, swale Not required Arterial 30-40 mph 2-4/1 11-15 feet 25-40 feet Parallel Curb-and-gutter, swale Required (8 feet) Highway 45-60 mph 4/1 or 4 divided 12-14 feet 40+ feet None Swale Not required  
Notes:   1) Stormwater drainage standards are specified in Section 5.11, below. 
2) Sidewalk standards are specified in Section 5.7, below. 

(A)	An alley shall be no longer than three hundred (300) feet without intersecting a local or collector road. Alleys shall not intersect arterial roads or highways. 
(B)	Internal circulation roads provide off-site access to residential, commercial, office, and similar units in larger land developments, such as apartment complexes, shopping centers and malls, and office parks. Internal circulation roads link external roads to parking aisles or private garages. 
(C)	Collector roads shall be designed as through roads, where practical, to utilize their capacity and to reduce strain on intersecting collector and arterial roads and highways. Techniques to calm traffic and deter heavy trucks shall be utilized in residential areas. 
(D)	Lane widths shall be the narrowest width feasible to serve the land development to calm traffic and reduce pedestrian crossing times. The table provides wider lane widths for certain roads with medians, two-way left-turn lanes, or outside lanes to be shared with bicycle traffic. 
(E)	A landscaped median may be proposed in place of a two-way left-turn lane. 
(F)	"Typical" curb radius standards are intended for roads designed for bicycle and pedestrian access and safety as well as slower vehicle speeds. The planning commission may allow larger radii for existing roads with higher design speeds and/or an unusually high percentage of heavy truck traffic. 
5.6.7.   Bike lanes.
    Dedicated bike lanes four (4) to six (6) feet wide shall be provided on all proposed roads designed with a target speed greater than thirty (30) miles per hour. Bike lanes may coincide with emergency lanes, where applicable. 
5.6.8.   On-street parking.

(A)	Parking provided adjacent to the road, whether or not within a road right-of-way, shall be designed to allow safe and efficient movement into and out of travel lanes. Parking stalls shall be spatially separated from through-lanes to provide visibility for motorists driving, parking, or disembarking parked vehicles. This separation shall typically range from two (2) to ten (10) feet, depending on the target speed and traffic volume of the road. No such separation shall be required for parking aisles. 
(B)	No parking shall be designed to allow more than twenty (20) feet between the parking stall and the through-lane where motorists would back into the through-lane. Driveways to garages for single-family attached and detached homes shall be exempt. 
(C)	Parallel parking. On-street parallel parking spaces should be twenty (20) to twenty-two (22) feet in length and seven (7) to nine (9) feet in width from face of curb. 
(D)	Angled and perpendicular parking. Design standards for on-street angled and perpendicular parking shall be identical to those for on-site parking, Section 5.9.3, below. 
5.6.9.   Tree planting along roadways.

(A)	Street trees. The developer shall install street trees along arterial, commercial collector, and internal circulation roads in a major land development to calm traffic, buffer private property from light and noise of traffic, shade the road and sidewalks, and reduce urban heat island effect. If a road is maintained or is proposed to be maintained by a government entity that prohibits street trees, roadside trees shall be required. 
(1)	One (1) street tree shall be installed per forty (40) feet of road, on average, measured at edge of pavement, on each side of the road, exclusive of intersections with other roads. On-center spacing between street trees shall be thirty (30) to fifty (50) feet. 
(2)	If curb bulb-outs are proposed to define on-street parking, one (1) street tree may be planted in the bulb-out in place of two (2) street trees otherwise required per Subsection (A)(1), above. 
(3)	Street trees shall be upright growing hardwood trees with an average life expectancy of at least forty (40) years. 
(4)	Street trees shall be installed at three (3) inches in caliper in tree wells or in a verge (between the road and the sidewalk). 
(5)	Street trees shall be planted within the road right-of-way or easement and protected from vehicular traffic by curbs, swales, or pre-existing ditches. 
(a)	Street trees shall be planted at least two (2) feet from barrier (standing) curbs. 
(b)	Street trees shall be planted at least five (5) feet from rolled curbs. 
(6)	Conservation of an existing tree three (3) inches or more in caliper in the road right-of-way or easement may meet the requirement for a street tree. 
(B)	Roadside trees. The developer shall install roadside trees along local, residential collector, and industrial collector roads as well as highways in a major land development to calm traffic, buffer private property from light and noise of traffic, shade the road and sidewalks, and reduce urban heat island effect. 
(1)	One (1) roadside tree shall be planted per fifty (50) feet of road right-of-way, on average, measured at the edge of right-of-way, on each side of the road. On-center spacing between roadside trees shall be between twenty-five (25) and one hundred (100) feet. 
(2)	Roadside trees may be planted in the road right-of-way or easement or in the required front yard of adjoining lots. 
(3)	Roadside trees shall be upright growing hardwood trees, at least three (3) inches in caliper, with an average life expectancy of at least forty (40) years. 
(4)	At least every third roadside tree shall be a canopy tree, maturing to at least forty (40) feet in height. The remainder may be understorey trees. 
(5)	An existing tree protected by Hanahan zoning standards, within twenty-five (25) feet of the road right-of-way, shall meet the requirement for one (1) roadside tree. 
5.6.10.   Road names.
(A)	The developer shall submit road names for planning commission approval, typically within final plat review. The developer shall verify acceptability of the road names with Berkeley County E911 prior to submitting them for Hanahan Planning Commission review and approval. 
(B)	To prevent any confusion for emergency response vehicles, names for proposed roads shall be sufficiently audibly different from all other roads in the following postal zip codes, which cover Hanahan, as well as any future zip code area subdivided therefrom: 29406, 29408, and 29445. 
(C)	Road labels, such as place, street, drive, avenue, and boulevard, shall be applied to accurately represent the road. (e.g., a two-lane local road shall not be labeled a "boulevard" and a four-lane divided facility shall not be labeled a "place.") 
(D)	A road proposed to intersect a crossroad immediately opposite an existing road shall carry the same name. 
(E)	A proposed road crossing a more significant road (e.g., a local road crossing a collector) shall be labeled "East" and "West" or "North" and "South" according to the general compass orientation of the proposed road. 
5.7. - Design and improvements standards for pedestrian facilities. 
5.7.1.   General standards.
(A)	Proposed walkways shall provide at least six (6) feet lateral clearance from finished grade to seven (7) feet above finished grade. The clear distance shall be at least one (1) foot wider than the width of the walkway and shall not extend into travel lanes of adjacent roadways. 
(B)	Proposed walkways shall be at least four (4) feet wide. 
(C)	Proposed walkways shall be significantly differentiated from their surroundings by color, texture, materials, grade elevation, or any combination thereof, unless specifically stated otherwise, to prevent ponding in the walkway and to protect users from automobile traffic. 
(D)	Proposed walkways shall be constructed so as to prevent the erosion or deterioration of edges, to withstand wear and tear from expected users and adverse natural conditions and events, and to otherwise ensure their durability and longevity. 
5.7.2.   Sidewalks.
(A)	On roads with target speeds thirty (30) miles per hour or greater, sidewalks shall be separated from through-lanes on roads by at least five (5) feet, except as needed to access crosswalks. The interstitial space may be hardscaped or provided with vegetative ground cover. 
(B)	On roads with target speeds forty (40) miles per hour or greater, sidewalks shall be separated from through-lanes on roads by at least ten (10) feet, except as needed to access crosswalks. The interstitial space may be hardscaped or provided with vegetative ground cover. 
(C)	On single-loaded local roads, sidewalks shall only be required on the side of the street with proposed home sites, but shall be at least six (6) feet wide. 
(D)	On permanent single-terminus local roads, sidewalks shall only be required on one side of the street, but shall be at least six (6) feet wide. 
(E)	Proposed sidewalks shall meet or exceed standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended, including curb ramps and passing areas, as applicable. 
(F)	Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete, bricks, granite pavers or similar hardscape on a compacted base sufficient to support the surface and reasonably expected pedestrian traffic and outdoor furniture under all weather conditions. 
(G)	Proposed sidewalks shall be constructed to withstand automobile traffic entering driveways or parking alongside the road where they are not reasonably protected from such. 
5.7.3.   Bike/ped facilities.
(A)	Facilities designed for bicycle and/or pedestrian circulation independent of a road (i.e., not a sidewalk) may be constructed with asphalt or permeable or natural surfaces like gravel. Such facilities shall be designed to ensure minimal loss of loose material over time (e.g., edging) and constructed on ground or base that adequately supports the surface material in all weather conditions while meeting the demands of expected traffic. 
(B)	Internal blocks longer than eight hundred (800) feet shall be approximately bisected by mid-block walkways to ensure adequate pedestrian access throughout the neighborhoods, except where such walkways would end in wetlands or other inaccessible features. 
(C)	Multi-use facilities proposed for bicycle and pedestrian traffic shall be at least eight (8) feet wide. Proposed two-way multi-use facilities should be at least ten (10) feet wide, which the planning commission shall require for safety and access at any point the walkway enters a road right-of-way or easement. The width of the multi-use walkway may taper thereafter, although this is discouraged. 
5.7.4.   Crosswalks.
(A)	Crosswalks shall connect all opposing curb ramps at intersections of proposed residential and commercial collector roads, arterial roads, commercial internal circulation roads, and highways. All crosswalks shall be provided with signs indicating the presence of the crosswalk in accordance with minimum SCDOT standards. 
(B)	Crosswalks on residential collector roads and commercial internal circulation roads shall be comprised, at a minimum, of two four-inch white lines meeting SCDOT raised pavement marking standards. The lateral distance between the lines shall be the same as the width of the sidewalks connected. 
(C)	Other required crosswalks shall be articulated more significantly, as acceptable to the planning commission, and shall be linked with a pedestrian crossing signal at a traffic light or with flashing yellow lights that precede the crosswalk in both directions of vehicular traffic in accordance with SCDOT standards. 
5.7.5.   Courtyards.
    A proposed courtyard shall be a park space on which proposed residential lots front and are oriented toward. Wet and dry ponds (stormwater detention and retention facilities) may be incorporated into the court as design elements. 
(A)	The courtyard shall include walkways that meet or exceed standards for local roads. 
(B)	The courtyard shall include street trees that meet or exceed standards for commercial collector roads. 
(C)	The courtyard shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet wide. 
(D)	The courtyard shall abut and be open to local roads with on-street parking on at least fifteen (15) percent of its perimeter, measured at edge of pavement and the footprints of abutting homes. 
(E)	Vehicular access shall be provided to the rear of homes located on courtyards via two-way alleys or local roads that are hardscaped and designed and engineered to accommodate service vehicles (fire truck, garbage truck, school bus, etc.). 
5.7.6   Plazas.

    A proposed plaza shall be a park space on which proposed commercial storefronts or office units front and are oriented toward. The plaza shall typically include street furniture and articulated public spaces, including but not limited to some combination of benches, water features, gazebos, stages, planter boxes, and galleries. 
(A)	The plaza shall include walkways and street trees that meet or exceed standards for commercial collector roads. 
(B)	The plaza shall be at least forty (40) feet wide and no larger than one-half (1/2) acre in size, measured to heated walls of storefronts and curbs of adjoining streets. 
(C)	Vehicular access shall be provided to the rear of stores and offices located on plazas via two-way alleys or local roads that are hardscaped and designed to accommodate service vehicles (fire truck, garbage truck, school bus, etc.). 
(D)	Plazas shall be designed to prevent regular vehicle traffic but shall accommodate aerial fire trucks so that potential fires can be fought by firefighters. 
(E)	The plaza shall abut and be open to commercial collector roads with on-street parking on at least fifteen (15) percent of its perimeter, measured from edge of pavement and the footprints of abutting homes. Break-away bollards are recommended at the opening to deter motorists but to allow access by emergency response vehicles. 
5.8. - Sanitation service. 
(A)	Curbside pick-up. Land developments proposed for curbside trash pick-up shall be designed so as to minimize backtracking by sanitation vehicles by limiting single-terminus streets and providing two (2) routes of egress from each lot to the exterior of the land development, as practical. 

(B)	Community pick-up. Land developments proposed for community trash pick-up shall locate the dumpster(s) at convenient point(s) of access for users and sanitation vehicles. To the extent practical, dumpsters shall be located along alleys or internal circulation roads that can be easily accessed by sanitation vehicles but that are not easily visible from public view. Where practical, dumpsters shall be located to the rear, and not near the public face, of structures. Screening and buffering per landscaping standards, Section 6.5 of the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance, shall apply. 
5.9. - Parking. 
5.9.1.   General standards.
(A)	All proposed parking areas shall be designed as part of a unified circulation plan that safely and efficiently provides access to each lot, land use, residence, office, shop, or similar unit. Exclusive of natural constraints, parking areas for separate parcels and land uses in a proposed land development shall be accessible to one (1) another so as to allow motorists to pass from one (1) parking area into another without reentering collector or arterial roads or highways. 
(B)	All proposed parking areas shall be designed so that sanitation, emergency, and other public service vehicles can safely and efficiently serve the development for which parking is proposed. 
(C)	Circulation areas shall be designed so that vehicles can proceed safely without posing a danger to pedestrians or parked vehicles. 
(D)	Parking areas shall be constructed of durable all-weather surfaces resistant to ponding, adequate to accommodate regular use by vehicles routinely generated by the proposed development. 
(E)	Access points. 
(1)	A parcel with less than two hundred (200) feet of road frontage shall provide no more than one (1) access point onto the road(s). For the purpose of this provision, an ingress point and a separate egress point shall be considered one (1) access point. 
(2)	A parcel with two hundred (200) feet or more of frontage shall provide no more than two (2) access points onto the road(s). For the purpose of this provision, an ingress point and a separate egress point shall be considered one (1) access point. 
(3)	Multiple parcels in a proposed land development shall be provided with shared access points, where practical, to minimize encroachments into roads, on-street parking, sidewalks, and any required buffers. 

(F)	Parking area landscaping and canopy. Planting requirements for parking areas shall be those found in Section 6.5 of the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance. 
(G)	Loading zones. The developer of a non-residential land development shall make a parking space available to the development as needed by the proposed land use. 
(1)	Each space shall be at least forty (40) feet long and within two hundred (200) feet of the structure served. 
(2)	Loading zones may occur in on-street parking or off-street parking areas and shall be designed so as not to obstruct through-lanes of local, collector, and arterial roads, highways, and one-lane alleys. 
(3)	A loading zone in a parallel parking lane on a community or public road shall be posted with signage indicating a thirty-minute parking time limit. 
(H)	Stacking stalls for drive-through service . Land uses proposed with drive-through service, such as a bank, restaurant, pharmacy, school, or car wash, shall provide stacking stalls to accommodate vehicles awaiting in-car service. The drive-through service shall not be designed in such a way that vehicles will await service in the adjoining road. 
(1)	Stacking stalls shall be at least eight (8) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long. 
(2)	The point of service (e.g., service window) is not a stacking stall. 
(3)	Restaurants shall provide eight (8) stacking stalls. 
(4)	Other land uses with one (1) point of service shall provide two (2) stacking stalls. 
(5)	Other land uses with more than one (1) point of service shall provide one (1) stacking stall per point of service. 
(I)	Off-site parking. The developer who utilizes off-site parking to satisfy parking allocation requirements shall demonstrate to the City Planner, prior to final plat approval, and the Zoning Administrator, prior to receipt of a zoning permit, that off-site parking is available to the land use proposed. This shall be demonstrated by written, attested agreement or a legal easement on the property on which the parking occurs, or the parking area may be a community parking lot, owned and operated by the City of Hanahan or a private community association in accordance with one (1) of the maintenance vehicles provided in this ordinance. 
(J)	Parking as a land use. A parking lot may be the primary use of land on a parcel, per the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance. As long as nearby land uses rely on the off-site parking area per written, attested agreement or easement approved by the City of Hanahan, necessary parking stalls shall not be eliminated. The City of Hanahan shall not be held liable for a regulatory taking for requiring the parcel to remain in use for parking. 
5.9.2.   Parking allocation requirements.
    Each lot, land use, residence, office, shop, or similar unit shall be provided parking according to the schedule below. Parking stalls to satisfy these requirements shall be provided on site, on street, off site, or some combination thereof, as specified in the schedule. 
(A)	Individual zoning districts, including approved Planned Development Districts, may modify parking allocation requirements in this chapter to meet the needs of that zoning district. 
(B)	Off-site parking shall occur within four hundred (400) feet of the structure for which the parking is required. 
(C)	On-street parking shall occur within six hundred (600) feet of the structure for which the parking is required. 
(D)	Commercial and agency vehicles - trucks and company cars - shall be allotted parking stalls in addition to the required number specified in the allocation schedule. 
(E)	High-school administrators may choose to provide parking for high school students. Administrators shall implement a program to limit parking passes so as not to exceed capacity of parking provided. Documentation of such program shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for zoning permit review and approval. 
(F)	A portion of the required stalls shall be accessible to the handicapped to comply with the federal Americans with Disabilities Act. For the purposes of this ordinance, one (1) accessible stall shall be required for each land development. In addition, one (1) of every fifty (50) stalls provided shall be accessible. The developer is encouraged to consult standards promulgated by the Act for full compliance. 
(G)	For a land use not specified in the allocation schedule and for which no similar land use is listed, the minimum required number of parking stalls shall be eighty (80) percent of the maximum number of parked vehicles generated by the land use, as found in "Parking Generation," as amended, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. Alternatively, the developer may generate a study for parking demand specific to the site, the results of which the planning commission may approve as the required number of stalls for the land development. 
Parking Allocation Schedule Land Use On-site parking

stallsTotal parking stalls Single-family detached residence 2 2 per unit Row house 1 2 per unit Patio house 0 2.25 per unit Accessory dwelling unit 0 1 per unit Attached residence <1,000 SF 0 1.5 per unit Apartment above retail or office space 0 1.5 per unit Duplex 1 per residential unit 
(i.e., 2 per duplex) 2 per unit Other attached residence 0 2.25 per unit Lodging, boarding, group housing, and other accommodations 1 per employee 1 per accommodation + on-site req. Motor vehicle service 1 per employee + 1 per garage and other point of service On-site req. Retail sales and service 1 per employee 1 per 250 SF of sales area + 1 per 1,000 SF of outdoor sales area Food and beverage service 1 per employee 1 per 150 SF of seating area + 1 per 250 SF of outdoor seating area + on-site req. Laundromat 1 per employee 1 per 250 SF Other personal service 1 per employee 2 per employee Other sales and service, incl. office 1 per employee for first 6 employees 3 per 1,000 SF Manufacturing and wholesale trade 1 per 2 employees 1 per employee Communication, information, & utilities 1 per employee 1 per 400 SF Arts, entertainment, and recreation 1 per employee 1 per 400 SF Spectator sports 1 per employee 1 per 5 persons at max. capacity Child education 1 per employee On-site req. Adult education 1 per employee 1 per 2 persons at max. capacity Health care 1 per employee 1 per patient room + on-site req. Human services 1 per employee for first 6 employees 3 per 1,000 SF Religious institution 1 per employee 1 per 5 persons at max. capacity of assembly hall Death care 1 per employee 1 per 4 persons at max. capacity of assembly hall Associations and non-profit organizations 1 per employee 1 per 3 persons at max. capacity Construction-related business 1 per employee 3 per 1,000 SF of sales area + 1 per 1,000 SF of outdoor sales area  
Notes: For employers with more than one (1) shift, a requirement of one (1) parking stall per employee shall be achieved by providing the number of spaces equal to the number of employees working the largest shift (that utilizing the most employees). 
Some establishments have more than one (2) component with parking requirements. These shall be totaled. For example, a religious institution may have educational or day care service and an assembly hall. 
(H)	Shared parking. One (1) parking area may serve multiple land uses. One (1) land use sharing a parking area with another, disparate land use shall qualify for a reduction in parking stalls required, according to the sharing ratios in the following table. The reduction shall apply to the land use a lower total number of parking stalls otherwise required. 
Land uses Assembly Sales, etc. Office, etc. Lodging Residential 20% 20% 40% 10% >Lodging 20% 30% 70% Office, information, education, public administration, and health care 80% 20% >Sales and services, arts, entertainment, and recreation 30%  
  
Instructive example: Five thousand (5,000) SF of retail space shares a parking lot with ten thousand (10,000) SF of office space. Thirty (30) stalls are required for the office space. Twenty (20) stalls would be required for the retail space. The latter can be discounted twenty (20) percent, resulting in sixteen (16) required stalls for the retail space, plus thirty (30) stalls for the office space, equals a forty-six-stall parking area. 
5.9.3.   Parking dimensions.
(A)	Off-street parking shall meet the minimum dimensional standards specified in the following chart, except as elsewhere specified. 

  
PARKING DIMENSION STANDARDS A

Parking 

AngleB

Curb 

LengthC

Stall 

DepthD

Starting 

LossE

OverhangF

Aisle WidthOne-way Two-way 0° 21'-6? 7' 2'-6? 2'-6? 13' 20' 30° 16' 14'-8? 27'-7? 1'-3? 13'-6? 21' 45° 12' 17'-1? 16'-3? 1'-9? 13'-10? 22' 60° 9'-10? 18'-5? 9'-5? 2'-2? 15'-6? 23' 90° 8'-6? 17'-6? 0' 2'-6? - 25'  
  
(B)	Aisle width shall be at least fifteen (15) feet if parking stalls occur on only one (1) side of aisle. 
(C)	Minimum aisle width specified in the table above may be reduced by one (1) foot per three (3) inches of increased curb length. Maximum aisle reduction shall be two (2) feet. In no event shall a two-way aisle be narrower than twenty (20) feet. 
(D)	The planning commission shall uphold good engineering practices and ensure that wider spaces or aisles are incorporated in or near areas of conflict, such as entrances and curves. 
5.9.4. - Driveways. 
(A)	General standards. 
(1)	This section of the ordinance sets design standards for the facility providing access to private property; therefore the term "driveway" shall apply to an internal circulation road as well as a private single-family residential access for the purposes of this section. 
(2)	All land development proposals shall provide vehicular access to the parcel, which shall be accomplished via private access or community access and parking area. 
(3)	Driveways shall be designed with the minimum width necessary to provide safe and efficient vehicle access to the site so as to limit encroachment into pedestrian facilities, bike lanes, and on-street parking, where applicable. 
(4)	Where applicable, the developer shall obtain an encroachment permit from the entity maintaining the road. Successful receipt of an encroachment permit does not constitute approval by the City of Hanahan, which may require standards that differ from the entity issuing the encroachment permit. 
(5)	Stricter driveway standards may be imposed by zoning district. 
(B)	Standards for residential lot with on-site parking for single unit (including house, manufactured housing unit, and some townhouses). 
(1)	The driveway shall be at least eight (8) feet wide and twelve (12) feet wide at the edge of the road or alley serving the lot. 
(2)	The driveway shall be at least sixty (60) feet from the nearest intersection, measured between centerlines and shall be at least twenty (20) feet from the nearest tangent point of an intersection curb or pavement edge. 
(C)	Standards for off-street parking area with fewer than seven (7) stalls. 
(1)	A one-way driveway shall be at least twelve (12) feet wide, a two-way driveway twenty (20) feet wide. 
(2)	The driveway shall be equipped with turning radii, measured at edge of pavement, of at least ten (10) feet. 
(3)	The driveway shall be at least sixty (60) feet from the nearest intersection, measured between centerlines and shall be at least twenty (20) feet from the nearest tangent point of an intersection curb or pavement edge. 
(D)	Standards for off-street parking area with seven (7) stalls or more. 
(1)	A one-way driveway shall be at least twelve (12) feet wide, a two-way driveway twenty (20) feet wide. 
(2)	The driveway shall be equipped with turning radii, measured at edge of pavement, of at least fifteen (15) feet. 
(3)	The driveway shall be at least seventy-five (75) feet from the nearest intersection, measured between centerlines and shall be at least thirty-five (35) feet from the nearest tangent point of an intersection curb or pavement edge. 
5.10. - Illumination of vehicular and pedestrian facilities. 
(A)	The developer shall propose a system of illumination of all roads and adjacent sidewalks within a major land development. Illumination shall provide lighting for the safety of the traveling public without causing nuisances to adjoining land uses due to glare or intensity. The proposal shall meet or exceed the American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting, Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, 2000, as amended. 
(B)	Illumination of vehicular and pedestrian facilities in all proposed land developments shall be provided by fixtures appropriate to the facility and surrounding land uses in size, height, scale, and on-center spacing. 
5.11. - Stormwater and floodplain management. 
5.11.1.   General standards for erosion and sediment reduction and stormwater management.
(A)	The developer shall propose a stormwater management system that prevents damage to structures and land within the proposed land development, that prevents increases in stormwater run-off onto property downstream of the proposed development, and that prevents additional stormwater accumulation upstream of the proposed development. Moreover, the developer shall propose a stormwater management plan that minimizes water pollution discharges from the proposed land development to the extent practical. 
(B)	The land development shall be designed, to the extent practical, to minimize grading, filling, and alteration of land that disrupts natural drainage patterns. 
(C)	To the extent practical, structures shall not be located such that natural or artificial drainage patterns and facilities would be impeded in a manner detrimental to surrounding properties within or adjacent to the proposed land development. In addition, property boundaries shall not be platted such that future structures would impede drainage in the same manner. 
(D)	The proposed land development shall tie into the existing stormwater drainage system, where available, and shall ensure that the volume and pollution level of water drained do not adversely impact the drainage system or the receiving water body to which the system discharges. 
(E)	Primary drainage may be handled in the road system or to the interior of blocks. Bioretention swales are preferred conduits for run-off where drainage is handled to the interior of blocks. Drainage ditches are discouraged but may be used where advantageous for natural resource protection. 
(F)	Measures to promote filtration, percolation, and plant absorption of site run-off are preferred to minimize demand for centralized wet ponds. 
5.11.2.   Stormwater management features.
    In addition to bioretention swales and ditches, acceptable stormwater management devices include bioretention cells, retention and detention ponds, stormwater sewer pipes and box culverts, roadside gutters (valley gutters and gutters with standing or mountable curbs), perforated pipes, trench drains, and related inlet and discharge facilities. Common features appear below. The planning commission may approve other features. 

(A)	Bioretention features should be designed for two-year/twenty-four-hour storm events. Bioretention features should incorporate existing natural vegetation, where practical. 
(B)	Ponds, ditches, and swales should be cleared, grubbed and graded to function properly. Maintenance shelves shall be cleared of underbrush, but protected trees shall remain, where practical. 
(C)	Stormwater management features shall be protected as necessary from erosion with vegetation, rip-rap, or other stabilizing material. 
(D)	Pond banks shall be protected from erosion with vegetation or other stabilizing material which shall, at a minimum, be sod or hydroseed. Littoral vegetation to filter non-point-source pollution is preferred for the banks of wet ponds. Dry ponds shall be vegetated with sod or hydroseed, at a minimum. 
(E)	Land surrounding stormwater sewer pipes shall be cleared of underbrush, but protected trees shall remain and pipes shall be installed to minimize disturbance of tree root systems within required tree protection areas. 
(F)	Ditches and bioretention swales shall have a maximum side slope of 1:3 (three (3) feet of run per foot of rise) and a minimum flat-bottom width of two (2) feet. 
(G)	The bottoms of swales and ditches shall be at least one (1) foot above the water table to prevent stagnant water collection and allow for percolation. 
5.11.3.   Application of Berkeley County Standards.
(A)	Where practical, the proposed land development shall meet or exceed the requirements of the Berkeley County Stormwater Drainage Ordinance, as amended, and the "Berkeley County Engineering, Construction, and Development Standards Manual." 
(B)	The developer may choose to deviate from Berkeley County requirements with good cause, as determined by the planning commission, and in accordance with recognized professional engineering practices. The developer shall then propose alternative means of stormwater management and indicate to the planning commission how these means meet the intent of this ordinance, match or further reduce the risk of inundation from stormwater, and match or further reduce water pollution resulting from inundation and stormwater run-off, including erosion and sedimentation. 
5.11.4.   Application of state standards.
(A)	Where required by the South Carolina Codes and Regulations, the developer shall propose a plan that minimizes erosion and sedimentation during construction. The plan and its implementation shall meet or exceed the standards of the South Carolina Office of Ocean and Coastal Resources Management (OCRM), which has jurisdiction. The approved plans and letter denoting approval from OCRM shall be submitted to the city planner as part of an application for a land disturbance permit. 
(B)	Where applicable, the developer shall meet or exceed OCRM standards for stormwater management, which typically require that the proposed development provide for stormwater management that neither increases nor decreases existing stormwater run-off. The approved stormwater management plans and letter denoting approval from OCRM shall be submitted to the city planner as part of an application for a land disturbance permit. 
5.11.5.   Floodplain management standards.
(A)	The developer shall account for flood hazard areas that occur on the land proposed for development. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to locate boundaries of any floodplains delineated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) on the land and to indicate and label them in illustrations submitted during the land development review process. 
(B)	The proposed land development shall meet or exceed the standards of Hanahan City Code Chapter 5: Floodplain Damage Prevention Ordinance. 
(C)	Where practical, development shall be concentrated on land out of floodplains. Type "A" Planned Developments shall locate required open space in floodplains, where practical, to minimize intrusion. Type "B" Planned Developments shall be encouraged to achieve the same and to indicate so in its proposed master plan and text regulating development within the planned development district. 
(D)	Road standard related to flooding. The centerline elevation of proposed roads shall be above the ten-year floodplain. The planning commission may, however, modify this standard where necessary to prevent the filling of land resulting in loss of protected trees. 
5.12. - Water quality protection. 
5.12.1.   State and federal standards for wetlands protection and mitigation.
(A)	The developer shall survey land proposed for development and delineate wetlands where required by standards of S.C. Office of Ocean and Coastal Resources Management and/or U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Delineated wetlands shall be indicated on the appropriate development plan submitted to the City of Hanahan for review. 
(B)	The developer shall indicate all measures required by S.C. OCRM and U.S. ACE to protect wetlands or mitigate impacts thereto on the same development plan. 
5.12.2.   Wetlands protection standards.
(A)	Where practical, the developer shall incorporate wetlands and any required wetland buffering, whether by local or state standards, into commonly owned property and not into numerous individually owned lots. 
(B)	Maintenance shall be provided per Section 4.5. Deed restrictions restricting the disturbance and encroachment of wetlands and associated buffers shall be stated on each plat of a parcel containing these features. 
(C)	Rear yard setbacks shall be measured from the highland edge of the wetland buffer, where provided, to prevent encroachment by construction activity. 

5.12.3.   Goose Creek Reservoir Protection.
(A)	A major land development shall designate all land within thirty-five (35) feet of the OCRM-recognized critical line of the Goose Creek Reservoir as a wetland buffer to protect the water quality of the reservoir. State standards may require a deeper buffer. The buffer shall be indicated on the preliminary land development plan. 
(B)	Site redevelopment next to the reservoir. For a major land development proposed on an existing developed site cleared of vegetation, the proposed preliminary land development plan for redevelopment or expansion of the existing development shall propose planting the buffer. 
(1)	The planted buffer shall consist of six (6) canopy trees and thirty-five (35) shrubs per one hundred (100) linear feet, and natural groundcover to inhibit erosion, slow sheet run-off, and encourage permeation of run-off into the ground. 
(2)	The planning commission may modify this standard, where it deems necessary to ensure quality redevelopment that furthers the objectives of this ordinance, modernizes stormwater management, remedies site contamination, and takes alternative steps to mitigate water pollution. 
5.12.4.   Buffer design standards.
(A)	Pre-existing natural vegetation in buffers required by the City of Hanahan shall be preserved. These areas promote filtration of stormwater run-off, which inhibits non-point-source water pollution entering the Goose Creek Reservoir or other protected wetland. 
(B)	Disturbances shall be limited to routine maintenance to remove noxious weeds, invasive species, and litter, to prune trees and undergrowth, and to plant supplemental vegetation, if desired, to improve the buffer aesthetically or functionally. 
(C)	Encroachments into the buffer shall be limited to approved view corridors, which may access docks, and infrastructure that crosses the buffer and wetland, as approved by applicable county, state, and federal authorities as well as the City of Hanahan. 
(D)	View corridors up to twenty (20) feet wide may be cut through the buffer to afford views of wetlands. The corridor shall be cut on an angle of at least thirty (30) degrees relative to the general orientation of the critical line across the parcel to prevent channeling of stormwater run-off in the corridor. The cleared area shall be stabilized with grass, mulch, or other vegetative materials to prevent erosion and sedimentation of the wetland. Docks, where approved by applicable state and federal authorities, may be installed in the view corridor. 
(E)	Trees throughout the buffer may be limbed up, but no higher than one-third ( 1/3 ) of the height of the tree. The removal of lower limbs affords property owners views of the wetland between the trees. Shrubs and other low-lying vegetation may be pruned down to four (4) feet, provided no more than one-third ( 1/3 ) of each shrub is removed, to allow views as well. 
5.12.5.   Buffer design standards for recreational access.

    Buffers fifty (50) feet or more in depth provided voluntarily may be encroached by pervious walkways. 
(A)	Clearing and grubbing of vegetation and grading for the walkway shall be limited to the width of the walkway plus three (3) feet on both sides for shoulders. Twenty (20) feet shall be the maximum allowable width cleared and graded for the walkway. 
(B)	The shoulders of the walkway shall be revegetated, mulched, or otherwise stabilized to prevent erosion. 
(C)	The walkway shall be a pervious surface, including but not limited to a boardwalk with spaced boards, which may be raised for brief wetland crossings, where approved by appropriate state and federal authorities. 
5.13. - Green space. 
5.13.1.   Open space.

    Unencumbered, buildable land prior to proposed land development that is required for or otherwise committed to stormwater management, non-jurisdictional wetlands, wetland buffering, natural and cultural resource conservation, and landscaped common areas, shall be considered open space for purposes of this ordinance and the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance, which may encourage or require open space conservation for land development approval. Wetlands required to be preserved by other entities, including tidal marsh and the Goose Creek Reservoir, shall not be considered open space for these purposes. Land occupied by structures and vehicle circulation and parking is not open space. 
5.13.2.   Park space.

    Unencumbered, buildable land prior to proposed land development that is programmed for passive or active recreation and leisure shall be considered park space for the purposes of this ordinance and the Hanahan Zoning Ordinance, which may encourage or require provision of park space for land development approval. 
(A)	Park space shall include, at a minimum, one (1) of the following two (2) elements: 
(1)	A well-defined trail system for pedestrian access throughout the area indicated as park space, which may include dense vegetation or an open field; or 
(2)	An easily accessible open lawn passable by pedestrians throughout. The lawn may include shade trees, ornamental plantings, flowerbeds, park furniture, public art, and other outdoor amenities. 
(B)	Park space shall include a program for regular maintenance, including mowing, pruning, weeding, mulching, repaving, replanting, and irrigation, as needed to maintain the intended appearance and accessibility. 
(C)	Recreational wetland buffers, standards for which appear above, subsection 5.12.5, shall be considered park space. Other wetlands buffers shall be considered open space. 
(D)	Wet and dry stormwater management ponds shall be considered park space when they are incorporated into a pedestrian circulation system and utilized as an aesthetic design feature. Ponds located to the rear of structures shall typically be considered open space. 
(E)	Wetlands, including tidal marsh and the Goose Creek Reservoir shall not be considered park space for the purpose of land development review. 
(F)	For the purposes of the Hanahan Zoning and Land Development ordinances, park space is neither occupied by fully enclosed structures nor programmed for vehicle circulation and parking; however, adequate parking and facilities, such as restrooms, may be required or encouraged. 
5.14. - Potable water. 
(A)	Access to potable water. The developer shall demonstrate that each buildable lot within the proposed land development shall be provided access to potable water. The means of potable water provision shall meet or exceed the standards of the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control and the water service provider, where applicable, from which service is desired. 
(1)	The developer proposing a land development within five hundred (500) feet of a public water system shall extend the water system to the land development, if acceptable to the public water service provider. The developer shall then extend the public water supply system to each buildable lot in the land development. 
(2)	On-site water supply. The developer not required to extend public water system to a proposed land development may choose on-site water supply. This developer shall demonstrate that each proposed buildable lot can be served by a private on-site system. The developer shall make that system available prior to transferring the lot or shall make the installation of the system prior to issuance of a building permit a condition of sale for each lot. This condition shall be noted on the deed to the property transferred. 
(B)	Access to water for fire protection. The developer proposing extension of the public water supply system shall install fire hydrants as required by building and fire codes, as adopted by the City of Hanahan. 
5.15. - Sanitary sewerage. 
(A)	Ability to dispose of sewerage. The developer shall demonstrate that each buildable lot within the proposed land development shall be provided direct access to sanitary sewerage along the road frontage of the parcel or have the capacity - including soils and environmental conditions - required for an on-site disposal system. The means of sewage disposal shall meet or exceed the standards of the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control and the sanitary sewer service provider, where applicable, from which service is desired. 
(1)	The developer shall connect to sanitary sewerage as required by the Berkeley-Charleston-Dorchester Council of Governments under its regional water quality management plan. 
(2)	Where proposed to serve the land development, the sanitary sewer system shall be extended to each buildable lot in the proposed land development. The extension shall meet or exceed the standards of the service provider for inclusion in the sanitary sewer system as public infrastructure. 
(3)	Where connection to sanitary sewerage is not required or desired, the developer shall demonstrate that each buildable lot has the capacity to accommodate an on-site disposal system. 
(B)	Property redevelopment. A parcel proposed for development with an existing on-site disposal system shall demonstrate, where the redevelopment triggers compliance with this ordinance, that the system is functioning properly. Routine maintenance shall be performed on the system prior to the issuance of a zoning permit for the property served. In the event that the system is found deficient, the applicant for a zoning permit shall rectify the condition by repairing or replacing the system or connecting to a sanitary sewer system. 
(C)	Pump station. Where needed to adequately serve the land development, as determined by the service provider, the developer may include a pump station on a remnant parcel of land adjacent to a transportation right-of-way or ingress/egress easement. The pump station shall be readily accessible to utility staff but shall be located, to the extent practical, in an unobtrusive location away from areas of potentially heavy pedestrian traffic and away from the primary entrances of non-residential structures open to the public. 
5.16. - Other utilities. 
(A)	Electrical power. The developer shall demonstrate that each buildable lot within the proposed land development shall be provided access to electricity via written notice from the proposed provider that describes means of access and point of entry into the existing system. The means of electrical power provision shall meet or exceed the standards of the proposed service provider. 
(B)	Natural gas, telephone, television, and internet access. The developer who proposes natural gas, telephone, television, and internet access via pipeline, wire, and cable, as applicable, shall meet or exceed the requirements of the service provider. 
(C)	Utility lines. 
(1)	All utility lines proposed in a major land development shall be located underground and parallel to roads, except as necessary to cross bridges, connect to existing above-ground lines, and connect structures served. The lines and related equipment shall be readily accessible to utility staff. 
(2)	Utility lines shall be collected in easements or rights-of-way, to the extent practical, to use land more efficiently and to minimize disruption to and loss of natural vegetation. 
(D)	Utility equipment location. Equipment related to the transmission of the utility shall be located in discreet locations to the extent practical, such as lot corners. The developer shall ensure that equipment is in no danger of inundation from stormwater and shall not locate equipment in or too near drainage facilities. 
(E)	Major transmission. The standards of this section are intended for the developer installing service within a proposed land development. Major transmission lines and related equipment may be designed and constructed to meet the needs of the utility provider. The proposal shall not violate the objectives of this ordinance. 
5.17. - Rights-of-way and easements. 
5.17.1.   General standards.
(A)	All public improvements shall be incorporated into an easement or right-of-way dedicated to perpetual public use and assigned to an entity responsible for its maintenance per Section 4.5. This shall be noted on the final plat and any record drawing illustrating public improvements. 
(B)	Easements and rights-of-way shall be of such dimensions to incorporate the public improvements, including shoulders and banks, and to provide sufficient access for adequate maintenance of the improvements. 
5.17.2.   Roads and driveways.
(A)	All improvements intended for the traveling public shall be incorporated into a transportation right-of-way dedicated to S.C. Department of Transportation, Berkeley County, or a property owners association, representative of all properties reliant upon the improvements for access, established for the purposes of owning and maintaining the improvements. Exceptions shall be as follows: 
(1)	Land intended for the expansion of a pre-existing road and right-of-way shall be reserved as an easement dedicated for that purpose. Land intended for the future extension of an existing or proposed road and right-of-way shall be reserved as an easement dedicated for that purpose. Once constructed, the improvements may be dedicated and incorporated into a transportation right-of-way. 
(2)	Two (2) neighboring lots with one (1) primary structure each may share a driveway within an ingress/egress easement. The easement shall be centered along the common lot line with a width equal to the width of the driveway and any provided sidewalks plus two (2) feet, minimum, on both sides. 
(3)	Internal circulation roads in attached-unit residential community shall be incorporated into easements dedicated for perpetual access to the traveling public, except where rights-of-way are provided. A property owners association representative of all properties reliant upon the improvements for access shall be charged with responsibility for maintenance of these internal circulation roads. The easements shall occur on land owned by the same. 
(4)	Access management. The planning commission may encourage or the S.C. Department of Transportation or Berkeley County may require the developer of a large land development to implement "access management." The purpose is to coordinate the access to the public right-of-way from multiple parcels in a land development to reduce vehicular conflict points in the right-of-way. 
(a)	To accomplish access management, internal circulation roads in land developments shall be incorporated into easements dedicated for perpetual access to the traveling public, except where rights-of-way are provided. The improvements in the easement shall be maintained by the largest landowner relying on access, such as the anchor of a commercial land development, or by a property owners association representative of all properties reliant upon the improvements for access. 
(b)	Each parcel with frontage on the public right-of-way shall nevertheless provide pedestrian access directly to and along that right-of-way. 
(B)	No property shall be proposed to be solely reliant on an ingress-egress easement for access, except as provided for access management. 
(C)	An ingress-egress easement incorporating a road shall not encroach a required yard. Setbacks required by zoning district shall be measured from the boundaries of the ingress-egress easement. 
5.17.3.   Pedestrian facilities.
(A)	Sidewalks shall be incorporated into adjacent road right-of-way, where practical. 
(B)	Other walkways may be incorporated into easements or rights-of-way. Clear provisions for ownership and maintenance shall be provided. 
5.17.4.   Drainage.
(A)	Natural drainage courses as well as tidal marsh (saltwater wetlands) under the control of the State of South Carolina shall be incorporated into rights-of-way. 
(B)	Stormwater management features that discharge into or otherwise utilize freshwater wetlands in stormwater management plans shall be incorporated into a drainage easement, if they are not incorporated into a natural drainage course right-of-way. 
(C)	All artificial drainage improvements shall be incorporated into easements or rights-of-way adequate in width and condition to accommodate the improvements and allow for access for maintenance. 
(D)	Drainage easements shall be centered along lot boundaries where practical. Drainage easements may be located in required yards. Encroachment of drainage easements into building envelopes shall be minimized to the greatest extent practical. 
5.17.5.   Water and sewer.
(A)	Water and sewer improvements shall be generally located in rights-of-way or easements adequate in width and condition to accommodate the improvements and allow for access for maintenance. Improvements proposed for dedication to public utilities shall meet or exceed the standards thereof. 
(B)	Easements for water and sewer improvements shall be centered along lot boundaries where practical. Such easements may be located in required yards. Encroachment of water and sewer easements into building envelopes shall be minimized to the greatest extent practical. 
5.17.6.   Other utilities.
(A)	Utilities not specified above, including but not limited to telephone, electricity, and television, shall be located in rights-of-way or easements adequate in width and condition to accommodate the improvements and allow for access for maintenance. 
(B)	Easements shall collocate where practical to minimize encroachment into building envelopes and natural resources. 
5.18. - Adequate, oversized, and off-site improvements. 
(A)	Improvements shall be designed and constructed to serve all current and future phases of the major land development and the planned development district, as applicable. 
(B)	Oversized improvements. The planning commission may require the developer to install capital improvements adequate in size and capacity to serve future development on nearby land where the service provider determines that such improvements are needed to adequately serve future development in the vicinity of the proposed development. 
(1)	Oversized improvements required during development review. The developer shall be notified of the need for oversized improvements prior to approval of the preliminary land development plan, and the requirement shall not delay the development review timeline. The service provider (City of Hanahan, Berkeley County, or other) shall verify the need for oversized improvements and shall commit to accepting and maintaining the improvements upon completion. 
(2)	Infrastructure system connectivity. Road stubs and other improvements designed to ensure interconnected systems of infrastructure in Hanahan shall not be considered oversized improvements and shall be considered basic requirements for proposed improvements. 
(3)	Cost sharing. The developer shall be responsible only for costs associated with improvements needed to serve his development, including future phases and the Planned Development District. The developer shall install oversized improvements required by the planning commission. The service provider shall provide the materials and reimburse the developer for expenses incurred. The service provider and the developer may enter into a voluntary alternative arrangement achieving the goal of complete systems of infrastructure. 
(C)	Off-site improvements. The developer shall be responsible for all capital improvements to existing systems of infrastructure to which the development proposes to connect. 
(1)	The developer shall perform any studies needed (e.g., traffic study) to determine what improvements to systems will be necessitated by the proposed development. The study may be reviewed or performed by the service provider, if it accepts the responsibility, or an independent third party qualified to review or perform the study. 
(2)	The developer shall fully implement improvements that the study concludes are necessitated by the proposed development. 
(3)	The planning commission may require that off-site improvements also be oversized to serve future development outside the proposed Land Development or Planned Development District, in which case oversized improvements standards (above) shall apply. 
(D)	Limitations on city requirements. 
(1)	The City of Hanahan shall not require a developer to rectify pre-existing inadequate levels of service that are unrelated to, or out of scale and proportion with, the proposed land development and expected impacts thereof. The developer shall only be responsible to offset impacts reasonably expected from his proposal at build-out. 
(2)	The developer shall not be required to fund or provide equipment, maintenance, personnel, or other operating costs for public infrastructure or service providers. 
TABLE OF AMENDMENTS 
    This table gives the disposition of those ordinances amendatory of this Zoning and Land Development Ordinance. 
(Z)-Zoning Ordinance 
(LD)-Land Development Ordinance 
Ordinance No.  Date Section Disposition 3-2009(Z)  5-12-2009 1       Added 4.5.10 8.8(D) 9.4.1(E) 9.6.4       Added 9.7.1-9.7.3 10.3 5-2009(Z)  9- 8-2009 1 9.7.1-9.7.3 6-2009(Z)  9- 8-2009 1 9.3.2 3-2010(Z)  5-11-2010 1 4.3 5-2010(Z)  7-13-2010 1 4.4.1, 4.4.2, 4.5.1 5-2011(Z)  6-14-2011 1 4.5.1(C) 11-2011(Z) 12-13-2011 1       Rpld 4.5.12(D)(6)(b)       Rnbd 4.5.12(D)(6)(c), (d)       as 4.5.12(D)(6)(b), (c)       Rpld 8.9(B)       Rnbd 8.9(C)-(J)       as 8.9(B)-(I) 1-2012(Z)  3-13-2012 1       Added 8.3.7, 8.3.9 8.9(D), (G), (H) 10.3 5-2013(Z)  4- 9-2013 1 4.3 4.5.10 7-2012(Z)  1- 8-2013 1 6.4.2(A), (B)       Rpld 6.4.2(C), (D)       Added 6.6(A)       Rnbd 6.6(A)-(F)       as 6.6(B)-(G) 7.3 7.7 7.10.3(A), (B), (C)       Added 7, App. I 4-2014(Z)  6-10-2014 1 10.3 10-2014(Z)  1-13-2015 1 9.7.1-9.7.3       Added 9.7.4, 9.7.5 1-2015(Z)  3-10-2015 1 9.5.1-9.5.3 2-2016(Z)  4-12-2016 1 4.3 5.14 5.14.1-5.14.4  
