CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF MAULDIN, SOUTH CAROLINA 
____________ 
Published in 2004 by Order of the Mayor and Council 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MAULDIN, SOUTH CAROLINA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
R. C. Jones 
Mayor 
____________ 
Don Godbey 
Bob Cook 
Brian Daughhetee 
James Kennedy 
Cindy Jordan 
Randy Kuzniar 
City Council 
____________ 
Russell Treadway 
City Administrator 
____________ 
John Mann, Sr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Cindy Miller 
Municipal Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Mauldin, South Carolina. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1994 Code, as supplemented through November 17, 1997, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the mayor and council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1994 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jan N. Shekitka, Senior Code Attorney, and Robert MacNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Russell Treadway, City Administrator and Mr. John P. Mann, Sr., City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mauldin, South Carolina. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mauldin, South Carolina. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mauldin, South Carolina. 2004.  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Mauldin, South Carolina," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as "Mauldin City Code." 
(Code 1994, § 1-1) 
State Law reference— Codification of municipal ordinances, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-290.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
And; or. The term "and" may be read as "or," and the term "or" may be read as "and," where the sense requires it. 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
City; the city. The terms "city" and "the city" mean the City of Mauldin, in the County of Greenville and the State of South Carolina, except as otherwise provided. 
Code; this Code. Whenever the terms "Code" and "this Code" are used, they mean and refer to the Code of Ordinances, City of Mauldin, South Carolina, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, and if the last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded. 
Council; city council. The terms "council" and "city council" mean the city council of the City of Mauldin, South Carolina. 
County. The term "county" means the County of Greenville in the State of South Carolina. 
Gender. Terms importing the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter. 
Joint authority. All terms giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
May; shall. The term "may" is permissive; the term "shall" is mandatory. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Number. Terms used in the singular number include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
Oath; swear, sworn; affirm, affirmed. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officers; employees; departments. The title of any officer, employee or department used in this Code shall be construed as if the words "of the City of Mauldin, South Carolina," followed it, and shall include the officer's or employee's duly authorized representative. 
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are used, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
Owner. The term "owner," when applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as defined in this section. 
Preceding; following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Real property and real estate. The terms "real property" and "real estate" include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Roadway. The term "roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline, or the lateral lines of a roadway where there is no curb, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when a person cannot write. 
State; this state. The terms "state" and "this state" mean the State of South Carolina. 
Statute references. Whenever reference is made to state law or to the state statutes, it shall be construed to refer to the latest edition of the Code of Laws of South Carolina, as amended. 
Street. The term "street" includes avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and approaches thereto and all other public thoroughfares in the city, and shall mean the entire width thereof between abutting property lines. It shall be construed to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council. 
Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," when applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Writing; written. The terms "writing" and "written" include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1994, § 1-2)  
Sec. 1-3. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the 1994 Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the 1994 Code and included in this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1994, § 1-3)  
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1994, § 1-4)  
Sec. 1-5. - Catchlines, history notes and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, printed in boldface type, and the chapter, article and division headings are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, chapter, article or division and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such section, chapter, article or division, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such section, chapter, article or division, including the catchlines, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1994, § 1-5)  
Sec. 1-6. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
Whenever, in this Code or in any ordinance or resolution of the city, or in any rule, regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city under authority duly vested in him or it, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided for the violation thereof, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any other ordinance, resolution, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days; provided, however, that no penalty shall exceed the penalty provided by state law for similar offenses. In addition, a municipal judge may order restitution in an amount not to exceed $5,000.00. In determining the amount of restitution, the judge shall determine and itemize the actual amount of damage or loss in the order. The judge may set an appropriate payment schedule. A municipal judge may hold a party in contempt for failure to pay the restitution ordered if the judge finds the party has the ability to pay. Except where otherwise provided, each day any violation of this Code or any other ordinance, rule, regulation or order shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1994, § 1-6) 
State Law reference— Penalty limits for violation of municipal ordinances, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 5-7-30, 14-25-65.  
Sec. 1-7. - Municipal uniform ordinance summons. 
(a)  Any person or entity violating any provision of the Code of the city or any code adopted pursuant thereto, within the corporate limits of the city may be issued a uniform ordinance summons. Issuance of the uniform ordinance summons shall vest jurisdiction in the municipal court to hear and dispose of the charge for which the uniform ordinance summons was issued and served. The uniform ordinance summons may be issued by any city law enforcement officer or any other city employees designated by the city administrator as code enforcement officers. The bond amount for violations shall be prescribed by the chief municipal court judge. City law enforcement or code enforcement officers are prohibited from accepting bonds. Bonds are to be posted in the manner prescribed in the uniform ordinance summons. The uniform ordinance summons shall not be used to perform a custodial arrest. 
(b)  This section does not apply to any ordinance which regulates the use of motor vehicles on the public roads. 
(Code 1994, § 1-7) 
State Law reference— Authorization for municipalities to adopt by ordinance summonses for violation of municipal ordinances other than those regulating the use of motor vehicles on the public roads, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-7-80.  
Sec. 1-8. - Liability of corporations and officers, agents, and others for violations. 
Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. The individual shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provision of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
(Code 1994, § 1-8)  
Sec. 1-9. - Effects of repeal or expiration of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued, any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When an ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
(Code 1994, § 1-9)  
Sec. 1-10. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, when numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed or typed for inclusion herein, shall, as numbered and printed or typed or omitted, in the case of repeal, be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. Such amendments may be in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Mauldin, South Carolina, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Mauldin, South Carolina, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which section shall read as follows: …." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1994, § 1-10)  
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the mayor and council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, when necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1994, § 1-11)  
Sec. 1-12. - Certain ordinances and rights not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city. 
(2)  Containing any administrative provisions of the council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(3)  Prescribing rates for city utility services. 
(4)  Granting any right or franchise and establishing any rates therefor. 
(5)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(6)  Making any appropriation. 
(7)  Levying or imposing taxes, not inconsistent with this Code. 
(8)  Adopting community antenna television system regulations. 
(9)  Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(11)  Adopting, extending or contracting the boundaries of the city. 
(12)  Prescribing the number, classification, or compensation of any city officers, employees or agents, not inconsistent herewith. 
(13)  Pertaining to zoning or subdivision regulations. 
(14)  Which is not of a general and permanent nature. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the office of the muncipal clerk. 
(Code 1994, § 1-12)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-12(1); any ordinance containing any administrative provisions of the council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-12(2); civil emergencies, ch. 14; elections, ch. 16; law enforcement, ch. 22; municipal court, ch. 24; utilities, ch. 40. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Form of government adopted. 
The council form of municipal government, with a mayor and six councilmembers with four-year staggered terms, elected at large, as provided in S.C. Code 1976, §§ 5-11-10—5-11-40, is hereby adopted for the city. 
(Code 1994, § 2-1)  
Sec. 2-2. - Fee for checks for insufficient funds. 
City departments which handle city funds are authorized and directed to charge a fee for handling and processing checks which are returned because of insufficient funds. The amount of such fee shall be set from time to time, and a schedule of such fees is on file and available in the municipal clerk's office. 
(Code 1994, § 2-2)  
Secs. 2-3—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Mayor and council, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-11-20 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-31. - Appointment of special committees. 
All special committees shall be appointed by the mayor, unless a vote is called for by one member of the council, in which case the special committee in question shall be elected by a majority vote of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1994, § 2-31)  
Sec. 2-32. - Meetings generally. 
The city council, after public notice, shall meet regularly at least once in every month at such times and places as the council may prescribe by rule. Special meetings may be held on the call of the mayor or a majority of the members. 
(Code 1994, § 2-32) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-250.  
Sec. 2-33. - Mayor presiding officer; quorum. 
Immediately at the hour appointed for council meetings, the mayor shall take the chair and, if a quorum is present, shall proceed to business. A majority of the members of council shall constitute a quorum. In order to participate and vote at a council meeting the mayor or a councilmember must be physically present at the location where the meeting takes place unless a councilmember has extenuating circumstances, such as a medical condition; death of an immediate family member or official city business which prohibits him or her from being present. In those cases, attendance via technological means may be permitted provided that the councilmember participating through technological means makes that technology available. Physical presence is required to preside over a meeting. 
(Code 1994, § 2-33; Ord. No. 753, 5-20-2013)  
Sec. 2-34. - Authority of mayor to vote. 
The mayor shall vote on all questions coming before the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 2-34) 
State Law reference— Authority of mayor to vote in council meetings, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-11-30.  
Sec. 2-35. - Mayor pro tempore; absence or inability of both mayor and mayor pro tempore. 
The city council shall, at their discretion, at either the first regular or special called meeting after their inauguration, appoint one of the councilmembers as mayor pro tempore. It shall be the duty of the mayor pro tempore to act as mayor in the absence of the mayor from the city or when the mayor is incapable of performing the duties of his office. In the absence or inability to act of both the mayor and mayor pro tempore, the duties of the mayor shall devolve on and be performed by such councilmember as the council shall name. 
(Code 1994, § 2-35; Ord. No. 730-2012, 3-19-2012) 
State Law reference— Mayor pro tempore, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-190.  
Sec. 2-36. - Rules of order generally. 
Unless specifically covered elsewhere within this article, the proceedings of the city council shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised. 
(Code 1994, § 2-36) 
State Law reference— Authority of council to determine rules, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-250(b).  
Sec. 2-37. - Order of proceedings. 
The order of the proceedings of the city council shall be as follows: 
(1)  Reading of the proceedings of the last meeting of the council. 
(2)  Petitions received and disposed of. 
(3)  Reports or communications from city officers. 
(4)  Reports from standing committees. 
(5)  Reports from special committees. 
(6)  Taking up and consideration of ordinances already in possession of council and not acted upon. 
(7)  Introduction of ordinances and resolutions. 
(8)  Miscellaneous business not included in any of the preceding categories. 
(9)  Adjournment. 
(Code 1994, § 2-37)  
Sec. 2-38. - Method of addressing mayor and speaking. 
Every member of the city council, when about to speak, shall address the mayor as "Mr./Ms. Mayor" and, in speaking, shall avoid all disrespect to the council and all personalities and shall confine himself to the subject under consideration. 
(Code 1994, § 2-38)  
Sec. 2-39. - Recognition of speakers. 
The mayor, when addressed by a member of the city council who rises in order, shall name the member, using no title but that of "mister or madame" The member who shall rise first in order shall be first heard. If several members rise about the same time, the mayor shall decide who shall speak first. 
(Code 1994, § 2-39)  
Sec. 2-40. - Limitation as to how often members to speak. 
No member of the city council shall speak more than twice on the same question without leave of the council, except to explain. 
(Code 1994, § 2-40)  
Sec. 2-41. - Method of voting. 
The "yeas" and "nays" of any question shall always be recorded, when required by any member of the city council. When the question has been stated and the first response has been made to the call of the municipal clerk, all debate shall cease, and no member shall say more than "yea" or "nay." During the call, no member shall leave the council chamber. No attempt by a member to refrain from voting either for or against a proposal shall be valid and any vote such as "abstain," "present," or any other phrase designating a position other than yea or nay shall be recorded as a yea vote unless such abstention is required or permitted by this Code or state law. 
(Code 1994, § 2-41)  
Sec. 2-42. - Recording of reasons for voting. 
Any member of the city council may, if he desires, have his reasons for voting for or against any measure recorded on the minutes. 
(Code 1994, § 2-42)  
Sec. 2-43. - Ordinances. 
(a)  Duty to enact in best interest of city. It shall be the duty of the city council to pass, from time to time, such ordinances as in its judgment shall best promote the interest of the citizens and property holders of the city. 
(b)  Style. The style of all ordinances shall be "Be it ordered and ordained by the City Council of the City of Mauldin, South Carolina, in council assembled and by the authority thereof:". 
(c)  Ordinance book. The municipal clerk shall enter in a well-bound book copies of all ordinances passed by the council. The book in which ordinances are thus entered shall be known as the "Ordinances at Large of the City of Mauldin" and shall be indexed. 
(d)  Notations of amendment or repeal. The municipal clerk shall write on the first page of every ordinance, if the same has been amended or repealed, as the case may be, the word "amended" or "repealed," with a reference to the page of the ordinance book where the amending or repealing ordinance can be found. 
(Code 1994, §§ 2-43—2-46)  
Sec. 2-44. - Suspension of rules; rules and procedures of council meetings on file in clerk's office. 
(a)  Any of the provisions of this article pertaining to meetings, rules of order, readings for ordinances or amendments and conduct of meetings may be suspended at any meeting of the city council by the consent of the majority of city council. 
(b)  The rules and procedures of city council meetings adopted on February 18, 2002, are not printed in this Code but are on file and available for inspection in the municipal clerk's office. 
(Code 1994, § 2-47; Ord. No. 626, § 1, 4-17-2006)  
Sec. 2-45. - Salaries for mayor, mayor pro tem and city councilmembers. 
The annual salaries and documented expenses to be paid to the mayor, mayor pro tem and members of the city council shall be set from time to time in accordance with state law, and a schedule of such salaries and expenses is on file in the office of the municipal clerk. 
(Code 1994, § 2-48) 
State Law reference— Salaries of mayor and councilmembers, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-170.  
Sec. 2-46. - Standing committees. 
Committee standing rules may be changed periodically at the pleasure of the city council. Rules of standing committees are hereby established by resolution and retained in the clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 607, § 1, 6-20-2005; Ord. No. 622, §§ 1—5, 3-16-2006; Ord. No. 676, 7-16-2008; ; Ord. No. 721, 1-24-2011)  
Secs. 2-47—2-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification, or compensation of any city officers, employees or agents, not inconsistent herewith saved from repeal, § 1-12(12); mayor and council, § 16-31 et seq.; officers of the fire department, § 20-81; clerk of court, § 24-4; municipal judge, appointment, qualifications, term, § 24-7. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-71. - At-will employment. 
All employees of the city are employees at will, and have the right to cease employment at any time without cause. The city has the right to terminate employment at any time with or without cause. 
(Code 1994, § 2-71)  
Sec. 2-72. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 818, adopted Feb. 20, 2017, repealed former § 2-72 which pertained to personnel policies and procedure, and derived from the 1994 Code, § 2-72.  
Sec. 2-73. - Compliance with article. 
No statement by any city official, and no policy or procedure, shall alter the at-will employment relationship for any city employee. Any employment contract which varies from the terms of this article shall be in writing and specifically approved by the city council in formal session and signed by the employee and the city official designated by the city council to sign on behalf of the city. The term "employee," as used in this article, shall include every official and employee of the city other than the mayor and members of city council. 
(Code 1994, § 2-73)  
Sec. 2-74. - Filling of vacancies. 
Whenever any of the officers of the city elected by the council shall be removed from office, die, resign or be incapacitated to perform the duties incident thereto any longer, a new election by the council to fill the vacancy during the unexpired term for which the office has been conferred on the person so removed, dead, resigned or incapacitated shall be held after notice to each member of the council. 
(Code 1994, § 2-74)  
Sec. 2-75. - Compensation of officers elected by council. 
Except as otherwise provided, the salary of each officer of the city elected by the council shall be fixed, designated and regulated by resolution of the council from time to time, as the council shall deem fit. 
(Code 1994, § 2-75)  
Sec. 2-76. - Duty to enforce Code, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations or orders. 
All officers and employees of the city shall enforce obedience to such statutes, provisions of this Code or any ordinances, resolutions or rules and regulations, or orders issued thereunder, as may relate to their regular duties and any other statutes, provisions of this Code or ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations or orders with whose enforcement they are properly chargeable, by the proper report of any violation thereof and by instituting such proceedings as may be necessary to such enforcement. 
(Code 1994, § 2-76)  
Sec. 2-77. - Resisting in discharge of duty; authority to summon aid. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits to assault or by any physical act to resist a police officer or any other officer or employee of the city in the discharge of his duty, with the intent to hinder or impede such officer or employee in the discharge of his duty. To aid such officer or other person in the discharge of his duty as herein specified, such officer or other person shall have the authority to summon and call to his aid the bystanders or posse comitatus. All persons shall obey the summons or call of the officer or other person specifically empowered to make an arrest. 
(Code 1994, § 2-77)  
Sec. 2-78. - Terms and removal. 
Each officer or employee of the city elected by the city council shall be elected for such term as the council may designate and shall be subject to removal from office or employment for any cause that the council may deem sufficient. Each election or appointment to any office or position is made and accepted subject to the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1994, § 2-78)  
Secs. 2-79—2-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Employment of administrator authorized, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-11-40. 
 
Sec. 2-101. - Appointment; compensation; qualifications. 
The city council shall appoint a city administrator and fix his compensation. He shall be appointed solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. 
(Code 1994, § 2-91)  
Sec. 2-102. - Term. 
The city administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the city council for an indefinite term. 
(Code 1994, § 2-92)  
Sec. 2-103. - Bond. 
The city administrator shall enter into an approved bond in such sum as prescribed by the city council, conditioned for the faithful and honest performance of the duties of such office. The cost of such bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 2-93)  
Sec. 2-104. - Powers and duties generally. 
The city administrator shall be responsible to the city council for the proper administration of the policies and affairs of the city and to that end shall have the power and authority and be required to: 
(1)  Direct, supervise and coordinate administrative activities and operations. 
(2)  Appoint department heads with the approval of the city council. 
(3)  Appoint other city employees with the approval of department heads. 
(4)  Suspend or dismiss department heads with the approval of the city council. 
(5)  Suspend or dismiss other city employees with the approval of heads of departments or council committees. 
(6)  Prepare a proposed annual operating budget and submit the proposed budget to the city council for review and consideration. 
(7)  Have the responsibility for the administration of the annual operating budget after adoption. 
(8)  Prepare and annually update a five-year capital improvements program and budget. 
(9)  Be primarily responsible for the overall administration of the city's personnel policies and procedures under the policy direction of the city council. However, the head of each department shall be responsible for ensuring that personnel policies and procedures are carried out day-by-day in his department. 
a.  Except as provided elsewhere in this Code, the city administrator shall have the responsibility for the administration of the personnel program including interpretation of the various provisions of the personnel policies and procedures. Decisions regarding the employment of individuals with the city organization shall be based on the policies defined in the personnel, policy and procedures manual. The salary of each position within the city organization shall be determined by the position classification system. The salary of all employees at the time of employment, as well as increases which result from promotions or decreases which result from discipline or other adverse actions, shall be approved by the city administrator. 
b.  The city council may, as necessary, require changes, amendments or additions to the policies and procedures and direct the administrator to implement such changes. 
(10)  Monitor the financial condition of the city and estimate present and future financial needs. 
(11)  Prepare a quarterly analysis on the financial position of the city. 
(12)  Prepare a quarterly analysis on personnel and administrative activities, with the approval of the departmental council committees. 
(13)  Combine or consolidate job positions within departments as necessary or prudent to maximize manpower utilization and efficiency. 
(14)  Recommend and administer policies governing purchasing procedures and inventory control. 
(15)  Authorize the purchase of services, materials, supplies and equipment which do not require the taking of formal bids; provided, however, that such items are appropriated in the annual operating budget or capital improvements budget. 
(16)  Authorize shifts in departmental budget line items; provided that overall departmental budget appropriations do not change. 
(17)  Authorize shifts in departmental budgets; provided that overall budget appropriations do not change without the approval of the city council. 
(18)  Investigate complaints concerning administrative matters and personnel performance with heads of departments, departmental council committees or the mayor. 
(19)  Prepare and submit to the city council at the end of each fiscal year a complete annual report on the finances and administrative activities of the city. 
(20)  With the approval of the city council and as he deems advisable, delegate to other administrative officers subject to his direction and supervision the authority to exercise specified duties and responsibilities as may be considered appropriate. 
(21)  Provide the city council with information, guidance and leadership in matters of policy determination. 
(22)  Actively investigate the opportunities and position of the city in relation to federal grants, state and county shared services and money and prepare the necessary papers, etc., upon approval of the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 2-94; Ord. No. 547, § 1(2-94(15)), 10-15-2001)  
Sec. 2-105. - Removal from office. 
The city administrator may be removed from office by a majority vote of the members of the city council. Those members voting for removal shall state their reasons for such vote. The action of the city council in removing the city administrator shall be final. In all cases the city administrator shall receive 90 days' notice of his removal or severance pay for 90 days where such removal is made effective immediately by a majority vote of all members of the city council; provided, however, that the city council may change the terms and conditions of the administrator's employment so as to vary from the provisions of this section. Any such change must be done by a signed written contract duly authorized by a majority vote of the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 2-95)  
Sec. 2-106. - Communications between administrator and city council. 
The city administrator shall relate to and communicate with the mayor and the chairperson of standing council committees, and with the city council as a whole, all problems, situations and conditions which arise concerning any department or activity of the city which, in the opinion of the city administrator, are of significance. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the members of the city council shall communicate directly with the city administrator in all matters concerning any department or activity of the city. No member of the city council or mayor shall give orders to any subordinate of the city administrator, except in case of an emergency. 
(Code 1994, § 2-96)  
Secs. 2-107—2-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CITY ATTORNEY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Appointment or election of city attorney, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-230. 
 
Sec. 2-131. - Appointment; qualifications; term; not to be considered officer of city. 
The city council shall appoint a lawyer of good and reputable standing who is a member of the county bar association as the city attorney. The city attorney must have had at least two years' experience at the bar. The attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The city attorney shall not be considered an officer of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 2-106)  
Secs. 2-132—2-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - MUNICIPAL CLERK[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Appointment and duties, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-220. 
 
Sec. 2-151. - Appointment; term. 
The city council shall appoint an officer to be known as the municipal clerk, who shall hold office at the pleasure of the council. 
(Code 1994, § 2-116)  
Sec. 2-152. - Bond. 
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the municipal clerk shall enter into a bond in such sum as may be required and with such surety company as shall be approved by the council, for the faithful performance of his duties. 
(Code 1994, § 2-117)  
Sec. 2-153. - Duties generally. 
The municipal clerk shall: 
(1)  Deposit funds in a bank designated by the council. 
(2)  Give notice to all members of the council of special meetings. 
(3)  Perform such other duties as may be required by the council. 
(Code 1994, § 2-118)  
Sec. 2-154. - Minutes of council meetings. 
The municipal clerk shall attend all meetings of the council and keep minutes of the proceedings of the council. He shall write such minutes out in a book designated as "The Minutes of the City Council of Mauldin" and make an index thereto. 
(Code 1994, § 2-119)  
Secs. 2-155—2-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - CITY PROSECUTOR 
 
Sec. 2-171. - Appointment; qualifications; term. 
The city council shall appoint a lawyer of good and reputable standing who is a member of the South Carolina Bar as prosecutor for the municipal court. The attorney shall have at least two years' experience at the Bar. The attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The city prosecutor shall not be considered an officer of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 2-131)  
Secs. 2-172—2-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Board of zoning appeals, § 32-50; tree board, § 42-41 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-201. - Appointment of members of boards, commissions, committees or other entities. 
The mayor and council may appoint citizens to serve on boards, commissions, committees, or other entities to serve the public. 
(Ord. No. 668, § 1, 12-17-2007)  
Sec. 2-202. - Suspension or removal of appointees. 
Citizens appointed by the mayor and council to serve on boards, commissions, committees, etc., may be suspended or removed for cause. The existence of cause shall be discussed by the mayor and council in executive session as permitted by the Freedom of Information Act, S. C. Code 1976, § 30-4-70(a)(1) and the determination of removal shall be by vote in public session declaring a vacancy in the position without a statement of cause. 
Any fact which, in the discretion of the mayor and council, is deemed to adversely affect the public interest including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Poor attendance at meetings. Members who miss four meetings per year or three consecutive meetings without cause will result in dismissal; 
(2)  Charged with or conviction of a criminal offense; 
(3)  Acts of moral turpitude; 
(4)  Poor health; 
(5)  Conduct which creates or constitutes a conflict of interest; 
(6)  Conduct which causes an appointee to be disqualified to serve, etc., may constitute cause. 
(Ord. No. 668, § 1, 12-17-2007; Ord. of 7-21-2008)  
Secs. 2-203—2-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Local planning commissions, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-7-310 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-221. - Created; purpose. 
In order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and harmonious development of the city which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, the Mauldin planning commission referred to as the "planning commission," is created and established, to be organized, empowered and governed by the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1994, § 2-161)  
Sec. 2-222. - Composition; appointment of members; terms; vacancies; compensation. 
The planning commission shall consist of seven members, to be appointed by the city council. Members shall be residents of the city at the time of their appointment and shall maintain residency throughout their term of office. The term of office of the members shall be three years. Planning commission seats shall be designated by number. Upon initial appointment, the term of office for seats 1, 4, and 7 shall expire on June 30, 2005. The term of office for seats 2 and 5 shall expire on June 30, 2004. The term of office for seats 3 and 6 shall expire on June 30, 2003. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for three-year terms to expire on June 30 of the appropriate year. No person shall be eligible for more than two consecutive terms, except that any member who is first appointed to less than a full three-year term shall not have that term counted toward the consecutive term limitation. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the city council. The city council shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause including, but not limited to, unexcused absence from three meetings. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 1994, § 2-162; Ord. No. 563, § 1(2-162), 8-19-2002)  
Sec. 2-223. - Organization; rules; records; meetings; employees and staff; expenditures. 
(a)  The planning commission shall elect a chair and vice-chair from among its members. The term of the chair and other officers shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. The commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or an employee of the city council or of the planning commission. 
(b)  The planning commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its recommendations, transactions, findings and determinations and shall meet at the call of the chair and at such times as the chair or commission may determine. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public, and all records of the commission shall be a public record. 
(c)  The commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may make expenditures for salaries of any employees and staff, contracts with consultants and purchases of required equipment and supplies. The expenditures of the commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for such purpose by the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 2-163)  
Sec. 2-224. - Powers and duties generally. 
From and after the time when the planning commission shall have organized and selected its officers and shall have adopted its rules or procedures, the commission shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth in S.C. Code 1976, §§ 6-7-10—6-7-1280. In general, the planning commission shall have the power to: 
(1)  Prepare and revise periodically a comprehensive plan and program for the development of its jurisdiction as provided in S.C. Code 1976, § 6-7-330. 
(2)  Prepare and recommend for adoption to the city council as a means for implementing the plan and program: 
a.  Zoning ordinances or resolutions, and maps and appropriate revisions thereof for its jurisdiction. 
b.  Regulations for the subdivision of land and appropriate revisions thereof within its jurisdiction and to administer the regulations that may be adopted. 
c.  An official map and appropriate revision thereof, showing the exact location of existing or proposed public street, highway and utility rights-of-way and public building sites, together with regulations to control the erection of buildings or other structures or changes in land use within such rights-of-way, building sites or open spaces within its political jurisdiction or a specified portion thereof. 
d.  A capital program for its jurisdiction, based on the comprehensive plan and the capital improvements necessary to implement the plan. Such a capital program shall include an annual capital budget, based on estimates of the cost of proposed projects and the means of financing them. The commission shall submit the capital program, including the capital budget, to the city council as directed. 
(3)  Establish principles and policies for guiding action in the development of the area. 
(4)  Prepare and recommend to the city council for adoption ordinances promoting orderly development in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
(5)  Determine whether specific proposed developments conform to the principles and requirements of the comprehensive plan for the growth and improvement of the area. 
(6)  Review and recommend to the city council any needed changes in the zoning ordinance and the map of the city. 
(7)  Prepare and recommend for adoption subdivision regulations, and to administer such regulations. 
(8)  Keep the city council and the general public informed and advised as to these matters. 
(Code 1994, § 2-164)  
Secs. 2-225—2-260. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CODE OF ETHICS 
 
Sec. 2-261. - Declaration of policy. 
The proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials and employees be independent, impartial, and responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, there is hereby established a code of ethics for all officials and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid. The purpose of this code is to establish ethical standards of conduct for all such officials and employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the city and by directing disclosure by such officials and employees of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the city. The provisions and purpose of this code and such rules and regulations as may be established are hereby declared to be in the best interests of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 2-186)  
Sec. 2-262. - Responsibilities of public office. 
Public officials and employees are agents of public purpose and hold office for the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the Constitution of the United States and the constitution of this state and to carry out impartially the laws of the nation, state and city and thus to foster respect for all government. They are bound to observe in their official acts the highest standards of morality and to discharge faithfully the duties of their office regardless of personal considerations, recognizing that the public interest must be their primary concern. Their conduct in both their official and private affairs should be above reproach. 
(Code 1994, § 2-187)  
Sec. 2-263. - Avoidance of impression of corruptibility. 
Public officials and employees, whether appointed or elected, full-time or part-time, paid or unpaid, should conduct their official duties with integrity, impartiality and in the public interest. They also should conduct both their official and private affairs so as not to give a reasonable basis for the impression that any such official or employee can be improperly influenced in the performance of his official duties and in so doing comply with all disclosure requirements of this article. Such official or employee should so conduct himself as to maintain public confidence in his performance of his public trust and in the government he represents. He should not be a source of embarrassment to that government and should avoid even the appearance of conflict between his public duties and private interests. 
(Code 1994, § 2-188)  
Sec. 2-264. - Dedicated service. 
(a)  All officials and employees of the city should be loyal to the political objectives expressed by the electorate and the programs developed to attain those objectives. Appointive officials and employees should adhere to the rules of work and performance established as the standard for their positions by the appropriate authority. 
(b)  Officials and employees should not exceed their authority or breach the law or ask others to do so, and they should work in full cooperation with other public officials and employees unless prohibited from so doing by law or by officially recognized confidentiality of their work. 
(Code 1994, § 2-189)  
Sec. 2-265. - Fair and equal treatment. 
(a)  Interest in appointments. Canvassing of members of the council, directly or indirectly, in order to obtain preferential consideration in connection with any appointment to the municipal service shall disqualify the candidate for appointment except with reference to positions filled by appointment by the council. 
(b)  Use of public property. No official or employee shall request or permit the use of city-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or property for personal convenience or profit, except when such services are available to the public generally or are provided as municipal policy for the use of such official or employee in the conduct of official business. 
(c)  Obligations to citizens. No official or employee shall grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen. 
(Code 1994, § 2-190)  
Sec. 2-266. - Discrimination in appointments. 
No person shall be appointed to or removed from, or in any way favored or discriminated against with respect to any appointive administrative office because of his race, religion, sex, age, national origin or political opinions or affiliations, if otherwise qualified for the position or office. However, this provision does not impair administrative discretion in determining the requirements of a position or in job assignment of a person holding such position, subject to review as provided by city policy. 
(Code 1994, § 2-191)  
Sec. 2-267. - Trust of public funds. 
No elected or appointive official or employee shall misuse the public funds entrusted to his care. All reimbursed expenses should be accompanied by valid documentation and be consistent with the city policy. 
(Code 1994, § 2-192)  
Sec. 2-268. - Conflict of interest. 
No councilmember, other city official or city employee, whether full-time or part-time, paid or unpaid, shall engage in any business or transaction or shall have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties in the public interest or would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his official duties. Personal or indirect as distinguished from financial interests include an interest arising from blood or marriage relationships or close business or political association. In any such instances in which a conflict of interest is possible, the councilmember shall disclose in writing the matter requiring action or decision and the nature of the potential conflict of interest with respect to such action or decision and deliver a copy of such statement to the city administrator, mayor or presiding officer of the city council and further shall disqualify himself from voting, participating in any discussion or deliberations regarding the matter and further disqualify himself from acting in any official capacity with regard to the matter. Any nonelected city official or city employee shall disclose in writing the matter requiring action or decision and the nature of the potential conflict of interest with respect to such action or decision and deliver a copy of such statement to the city administrator and further shall disqualify himself from participating in any discussion or deliberations regarding the matter and further disqualify himself from acting in any official capacity with regard to the matter. No councilmember, other city official or city employee, whether full-time or part-time, paid or unpaid, shall directly or indirectly participate in any contract with the city. He shall not benefit from any transaction, which is to be paid in whole or in part by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 2-193) 
State Law reference— Conflict of interest of municipal officer or employee, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-130.  
Sec. 2-269. - Disclosure of income. 
An official or employee, whether paid or unpaid, who has a direct or indirect financial or other interest in any transaction, the disposition of which may be influenced by his official position or action, shall disclose all sources of income and the nature and extent of any personal interest in such transaction as an officer, agent, member or owner of any business entity or other association which is subject to regulation by the city when such income or interest may represent a substantial conflict of interest with his official duties. Such disclosure shall be made on the records of the authority constituted for that purpose or to the appointing authority. Such disclosure may be made periodically at the time designated for all such classes of officials or employees. Such disclosure shall remove any presumption of conflict of interest for any transaction where the information disclosed is pertinent. 
(Code 1994, § 2-194)  
Sec. 2-270. - Political activity. 
(a)  No appointive official or employee shall use the prestige of his position in behalf of any political party or candidate. 
(b)  No appointive official or employee shall orally, by letter, or otherwise, solicit or be in any manner concerned in soliciting any assessment, subscription or contribution to any political party; nor shall he be a party to such solicitation by others. Such appointed officials and employees shall not take an active part in political campaigns for candidates while at work for the city. 
(c)  No official or employee, whether elected or appointed, shall promise an appointment to any municipal position as a reward for any political activity. 
(d)  No councilmember, appointive official, candidate, or city employee may utilize city property in any manner in a political campaign; however, public facilities may be rented or used for political meetings and other campaign-related purposes if they are available on similar terms to all candidates. 
(Code 1994, § 2-195; Ord. No. 629, § 1, 6-26-2006)  
Sec. 2-271. - Applicability of Code. 
(a)  When a councilmember or other official or employee has doubt as to the applicability of a provision of this code to a particular situation, he should advise, seek counsel from the city attorney or state attorney general on ethical conduct constituted for the implementation of this code for an advisory opinion and be guided by that opinion when given. The councilmember or other official or employee shall have the opportunity to present his interpretation of the facts at issue and of the applicable provision of this code before such advisory decision is made. This code shall be operative in all instances covered by its provisions except when superseded by an applicable statutory or charter provision and statutory or charter action is mandatory, or when the application of a statutory or charter provision is discretionary but determined to be more appropriate or desirable. 
(b)  If an employee requests such an opinion, the city administrator must be advised and promptly forward that request as noted in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1994, § 2-196)  
Sec. 2-272. - Sanctions. 
(a)  Violation of any provision of this code should raise conscientious questions for the councilmember, other official or city employee concerned as to whether voluntary resignation or other action is indicated to promote the best interest of the city. Violation may constitute a cause for suspension, removal from office or employment, or other disciplinary action. 
(b)  Any councilmember, city employee or official who is indicted in a general sessions court or a federal court for a crime that is a felony, a crime that involves moral turpitude, a crime that has a sentence of two or more years, or a crime that violates election laws shall be suspended immediately. This suspension will remain in effect until such individual is acquitted or convicted. In case of conviction, the position shall be declared vacant, once appeals are exhausted. 
(c)  For members of council, if an election intervenes between the time of the suspension and final conclusion of the indictment, he shall again be suspended at the beginning of the term. The suspended councilmember will not, at any time, participate in the business of the city council or operation of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 2-197)  
Secs. 2-273—2-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PURCHASING 
 
Sec. 2-301. - Purchasing agent; specified duties. 
The city administrator or an employee designated by the city administrator shall be the purchasing agent for the city. He shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Compliance of the purchasing policy included in the Accounting Manual as adopted by city council. 
(2)  Approval of all large purchase orders. 
(3)  Notification of committee on all nonbudgeted large purchases that require shifts of budgeted funds within a department. 
(4)  Notification of council on all budgeted large purchases where the following exists: 
a.  Bid is more than budgeted amount. 
b.  Low bid is not accepted. 
(5)  Presiding over all formal bid openings. 
(Code 1994, § 2-221)  
Sec. 2-302. - Formal contract procedure. 
All supplies and contractual services regardless of funding source, except as otherwise provided, shall be bid in accordance with the purchasing policy. No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this section. All sales of personal property which has become obsolete or unusable, when the estimated value shall exceed five thousand dollars, shall be sold by formal written contract to the highest responsible bidder, after due notice inviting proposals. 
(Code 1994, § 2-222)  
Sec. 2-303. - Bidding; competitive; required exception. 
Ample opportunity for competitive bidding will be given in accordance with the purchasing policy. However, in the event of an emergency affecting the public welfare, health or safety, the provisions of this section shall not apply. A full report of the circumstances of a nonbudgeted emergency purchase shall be filed by the purchasing agent with the city council and shall be entered in the minutes of the council. 
(Code 1994, § 2-223)  
Sec. 2-304. - Award to lowest bidder; advertising; when required. 
All contracts for city improvements, materials, equipment, or services shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder; provided, however, in the case of professional services or consultants, this section shall not apply. Newspaper notices, when required by the procedures manual, shall include a general description of the articles or services to be purchased, and shall state where specifications may be secured and the time and place for opening the bid. 
(Code 1994, § 2-224)  
Sec. 2-305. - Bid deposits. 
When deemed necessary by the purchasing agent, bid deposits may be required. Upon entering a bid or proposal, bidders shall be entitled to the return of the bid deposit. A successful bidder shall forfeit any bid deposit required upon failure on his part to enter into a contract within ten days after the award; provided, however, that the city, in its uncontrolled discretion, may waive this forfeiture. 
(Code 1994, § 2-225)  
Sec. 2-306. - Sealed bid procedures. 
(a)  Sealing. Bids shall be submitted to the purchasing agent securely in an envelope, and shall be identified on the envelope in accordance with bid instructions. 
(b)  Opening. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. 
(c)  Tabulation. A tabulation of all bids received shall be available for public inspection. 
(d)  Rejection of bids. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to reject all bids, parts of all bids, or all bids for any one or more supplies or contractual services included in the proposed contract, when the public interest will be served thereby. 
(e)  Bidders in default to city. The purchasing agent shall not accept the bid of a vendor or contractor who is delinquent in the payment of any moneys due the city. 
(f)  Award of contract. The contract shall be awarded as follows: 
(1)  Authority in agent. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to award contracts within the purview of this article; provided, however, that contracts are budgeted items. 
(2)  Lowest responsible bidder. Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. In determining the "lowest responsible bidder," in addition to price, the purchasing agent shall consider: 
a.  The ability, capacity, skill, and financial resources of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required; 
b.  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
c.  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder; 
d.  The quality of performance and compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to previous contracts or services; 
e.  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to the particular use required; 
f.  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance, parts, and service for the use of the subject of the contract; 
g.  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
h.  The quality and the suitability of a product for the intended use based on past performance. 
i.  The initial cost and related costs for the life of the item. 
j.  The ability, capacity and skill of the vendor to train personnel. 
(g)  Award to other than low bidder. When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons for placing the order elsewhere shall be prepared by the purchasing agent and filed with the papers relating to the transaction and reported to council. 
(h)  Tie bids; local vendors . In the tabulation of bids by the city administrator to ascertain the lowest responsible bidder, the city administrator shall, as to each local vendor, tabulate the local vendor's bid as if it were two percent below the figure actually set forth in the bid, up to a maximum of $2,500.00. The local vendor preference shall be utilized solely for the purpose of determining the lowest responsible bidder and shall not have the effect of altering the bid of any such local vendor. For the purpose of this section, a local vendor shall be a person or legal entity, which has its principal place of business located within the corporate limits of the City of Mauldin and has held a valid city business license for at least three consecutive years. The certificate claiming the local vendor preference shall accompany the bid and shall be notarized. If tie bids are received, the contract shall be awarded by drawing lots in public. 
(i)  Performance bonds. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to require a performance bond, before entering into a contract, in such form and amount as he shall find reasonable and necessary to protect the best interest of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 2-226; Ord. No. 630, § 1, 6-19-2006)  
Sec. 2-307. - Materials testing. 
The purchasing agent shall have the authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with the specifications. In the performance of such tests, the purchasing agent shall have the authority to make use of laboratory facilities of any agency of the city government or any outside laboratory. 
(Code 1994, § 2-227)  
Sec. 2-308. - Financial interest of city official and employees. 
The financial interest of city officials and employees is discussed in article V of this chapter, Code of Ethics. 
(Code 1994, § 2-228)  
Sec. 2-309. - Records of open market orders and bids. 
The purchasing agent shall keep a record of all open market orders and the bids submitted in competition thereon, and such records shall also be open to public inspection. 
(Code 1994, § 2-229)  
Sec. 2-310. - Stock reports. 
All offices, departments or agencies of the city government shall submit to the purchasing agent, at such times and in such form as he shall prescribe, reports showing stocks of all supplies which are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn-out or scrapped. 
(Code 1994, § 2-230)  
Sec. 2-311. - Surplus stock. 
The purchasing agent shall have authority to transfer surplus stock to other offices, departments or agencies of the city government. 
(Code 1994, § 2-231)  
Sec. 2-312. - Supplies unsuitable for public use, sale or exchange. 
The purchasing agent shall have the authority to sell all supplies which have become unsuitable for public use, or to exchange the same for, or trade in the same on, new supplies. Such sales shall be made at auction or by bid. All moneys received from such sales shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 2-232)  
Sec. 2-313. - Cooperative purchasing. 
The purchasing agent shall have authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of the city would be served thereby; provided that the purchasing agent of the city has approval to make cooperative purchases of supplies, equipment, and services from the cooperating governmental agency where the cooperating agency operates under generally accepted governmental procurement standards. 
(Code 1994, § 2-233)  
Sec. 2-314. - Gifts and rebates. 
Gifts and rebates shall be in accordance with state statutes. 
(Code 1994, § 2-234)  
Sec. 2-315. - [Method to procure public infrastructure and/or public services by private development pursuant to a development agreement.] 
Whenever the city enters into a development agreement with a private developer, private property owner, or other private party or entity (hereinafter "private developer") which involves the installation of public infrastructure improvements or public services or a combination thereof then, in order to achieve efficiencies for such projects and to avoid delay in the completion of the respective projects, the city may enter into a written agreement with a private developer which permits the private developer's procurement practices to be utilized to procure the public infrastructure and/or public services to be provided by the city provided that the procurement practices ensure that the costs to the city are reasonable. Any such arrangement must be designed to secure the greatest value with the most efficient means available in accordance with reasonable business standards in order to ensure that the public investment associated with the project is reasonable and benefits the public, the city, its citizens and the private developer. Any written agreement relating to such projects must provide for the city's consent and approval of the procurement practices for the infrastructure, materials, or services to be paid for by the city and be subject to audit by the city. Such practices must assure adherence to principals of fairness, efficiency, and value for the use of public funds to benefit the public. The procurement process utilized by the private developer must include a competitive bid procedure which will ensure that the costs to the city are reasonable and will secure the greatest value for the public investment. The city will designate a representative to participate in the procurement process from its inception until the conclusion of the project. In this respect, the city shall retain the right to reject any proposals obtained for the infrastructure, materials, or services to be provided by the city. To the extent performance bonds or payment bonds are required by the general law of this state for public subdivisions, these practices shall assure their use for public improvements funded by the city. 
(Ord. No. 913, 6-17-2019)  

Chapter 3 - ADVERTISING[1]

Footnotes:
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Advertising closing-out sales, § 11-86; advertising in lodging establishments, § 11-105.


Sec. 3-1. - Reserved.
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-34, adopted May 13, 2003, repealed § 3-1, which pertained to permit required for distribution of handbills and other advertising on streets, alleys and other public property and derived from Code 1980, § 7-9-1.

Sec. 3-2. - Placing advertising in or on automobiles.
No person in the city shall place or cause any commercial handbill to be placed within or upon, or under the windshield wiper of any private automobile parked upon any of the public streets of the city or in any public parking area. This shall not preclude the delivery of any handbill to an owner, occupant or person present and in charge of the vehicle willing to accept and receive the same.

(Code 1980, § 7-9-2)

Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12.

Sec. 3-3. - Use of radios, mechanical musical instruments, etc., for purposes of advertising.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to maintain and operate in any building or on any premises in the city any radio or television device or mechanical musical instrument or device of any kind whereby the sound therefrom is cast directly upon the public streets and places in such a manner as to create unreasonably loud, excessive or disturbing noises, where the device is maintained and operated for advertising purposes or for the purpose of attracting the attention of the passing public, or which is so placed and operated that the sounds coming therefrom can be heard to the annoyance or inconvenience of travelers upon any street or public place or of persons in neighboring premises.

(Code 1980, § 7-9-3)

Cross reference— Noise generally, § 14-62.

Sec. 3-4. - Sound trucks and sound amplifying devices.
(a)Sound amplifying devices or equipment defined. The words "sound amplifying devices or equipment," as used in this section, shall mean any machine or device for the amplification of any sound.(b)Permit required for operation. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated in the city any sound amplifying devices or equipment for any purpose whatever, whether the same is stationary or operated from a vehicle or other carriage, unless a permit therefor has been obtained to do so from the city clerk, upon the approval of the city manager.(c)Loud and raucous noise prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person using any sound amplifying devices or equipment to make any loud and raucous noise to the disturbance of the peace. Any person to whom a permit has been issued under this section who abuses his discretion and causes or permits loud and raucous noises shall, in addition to any penalty imposed for the violation of this section, be subject to immediate revocation of the permit issued pursuant to this section.
(Code 1980, §§ 7-9-11—7-9-13)

Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 12; noise generally, § 14-62.

Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 10; possession, consumption of alcoholic beverages in parks, § 30-3. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, S.C. Code 1976, § 61-6-10 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic liquors means any spirituous malt, vinous, fermented, brewed or other liquors or any compound or mixture thereof, by whatever name called or known, which contains alcohol and used as a beverage, except those beverages specifically exempted from such definition by S.C. Code 1976, § 61-6-30. 
Nonalcoholic and nonintoxicating (as applied to beverages) means all beers, ales, porter and other similar malt or fermented beverages containing not in excess of five percent of alcohol by weight, and all wines containing not in excess of 21 percent of alcohol by volume. 
(Code 1994, § 3-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definition of alcoholic liquors, S.C. Code 1976, § 61-6-20; definition of nonalcoholic and nonintoxicating beverages, S.C. Code 1976, § 61-4-10.  
Sec. 4-2. - Jurisdiction of municipal court; penalties. 
The municipal court and those lawfully acting as judges thereof shall try and determine all cases involving any violation of this chapter occurring within the city limits where the penalties do not exceed a fine of $100.00 or imprisonment of 30 days, except as provided in S.C. Code 1976, § 61-6-4500, and such court and judges shall have jurisdiction over such criminal cases the same as that had by magistrates, with the right and duty of sending such cases occurring within the city limits but beyond their jurisdiction to try to the higher courts. Any person convicted under this chapter in the municipal court shall be treated as a municipal prisoner. 
(Code 1994, § 3-2) 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of municipal courts relative to enforcement of state Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, S.C. Code 1976, § 61-6-4500.  
Sec. 4-3. - Violations generally. 
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, and anyone violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished at the direction of the court as provided in section 1-6 or as limited by the state statutes. 
(Code 1994, § 3-3)  
Sec. 4-4. - What constitutes prior offense. 
A conviction, plea of guilty, plea of nolo contendere or forfeiture of bond for the violation on or after March 28, 1956, of any of the laws of the state or of the United States relating to alcoholic liquor shall constitute a prior offense for the purpose of any prosecution, or for the purpose of imposition of sentence for any subsequent violation of this chapter, except as provided in S.C. Code 1976, § 61-6-4220. 
(Code 1994, § 3-4) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 61-6-4220.  
Sec. 4-5. - Unlawful purchase. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase or otherwise procure any alcoholic liquor other than that purchased from licensed dealers within the state, the first offense of which is a misdemeanor pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, §§ 61-6-4010—61-6-4170 and within the jurisdiction of the municipal court. 
(Code 1994, § 3-5) 
State Law reference— Unlawful purchase of alcoholic liquor, S.C. Code 1976, § 61-6-4050.  
Sec. 4-6. - Drinking on premises of liquor establishment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink alcoholic liquors on the premises of any retail, wholesale or manufacturing alcoholic liquor business or business establishment, the first offense of which is a misdemeanor pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, §§ 61-6-4010—61-6-4170 and within the jurisdiction of the municipal court. 
(Code 1994, § 3-6) 
State Law reference— Drinking alcoholic liquors on premises of liquor establishments, S.C. Code 1976, § 61-6-4700.  
Sec. 4-7. - Drinking in public conveyances. 
Any person who shall drink alcoholic liquor in any public conveyance in the city shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. This section shall not apply to any railroad dining or club car or to any aircraft of a commercial airline transporting passengers for hire. 
(Code 1994, § 3-7) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 61-6-4720.  
Sec. 4-8. - Open containers of alcohol while in vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any alcoholic liquor in an open container in a moving vehicle of any kind, licensed to travel in this state or any other state, that may travel upon the public highways of this state, except in the trunk or luggage compartment. 
(Code 1994, § 3-8) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 38.  
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Animals, livestock and poultry, S.C. Code 1976, tit. 47. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise provided, the following terms and phrases shall have the following meanings in this chapter: 
Abandonment: Deserting, forsaking, or intending to give up absolutely any animal without provided adequate food, water, and sanitary shelter for 48 hours or longer. 
Animal: Any nonhuman living vertebrate, whether wild or domesticated. 
Animal control officer: The person or office designated by the city to enforce this chapter. 
Animal shelter: Any facility or premises designated by the city for the purpose of the impoundment, care, or destruction of animals help pursuant to this chapter. 
Cat: All members of the feline family. 
Contract enforcement agency: The South Carolina Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, doing business as Greenville Humane Society, or such other organization or business, designated by the city manager to administer and enforce this chapter. 
Domesticated animal: A dog or cat as defined herein. 
Dog: All members of the canine family. 
Euthanasia: The act of putting to death in a humane manner. 
Impound: To confine humanely while providing adequate food, water and ventilation. 
Kennel: Any facility wherein a person, business entity, or organization regularly keeps six or more dogs or other animals for any purpose and receives compensation for the service or for the sale of animals. 
Neutered male: Any male animal which has been operated on to prevent reproduction. 
Owner or keeper: Any person who: 
(a)  Has a right of property in an animal; 
(b)  Keeps or harbors an animal or has it in the person's care, or acts as its custodian for ten days or more; or 
(c)  Permits for 48 hours or longer an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by the person. 
Running at large: Being off the premises of the owner or keeper and not under the physical control of the owner or keeper by means of a leash or other similar restraining device. 
Spayed female: Any female animal which has been operated on to prevent conception. 
Stray animal: An animal running at large with no identifiable owner. 
Swine: Any hog, boar, pig (including pot-bellied pigs), peccary, or like animal of the suidae or tayassuidae families. 
Under restraint: An animal is under restraint when it is on the premises of its owner or keeper or when it is accompanied by its owner or keeper and under control of such person by means of a leash or other similar restraining device. 
Vicious or dangerous animal: As used in this section "vicious or dangerous animal" means an animal of the canine or feline family which the owner knows or reasonably should know has a propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked, cause injury, or otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals which: 
(a)  Makes an unprovoked attack that causes bodily injury to a human being and the attack occurs in a place other than the place where the animal is confined as required by Mauldin Municipal Code section 6-55(a); 
(b)  Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than the place where the animal is confined as required by Mauldin Municipal Code section 6-55(a) and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the animal will attack and cause bodily injury to a human being; 
(c)  Which is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of fighting or which is trained for fighting; or 
(d)  Whose owner or keeper has received written notice of a violation of Mauldin Municipal Code section 6-13(a)(2) in accordance with the provisions set forth in Mauldin Municipal Code section 6-13(b). 
"Vicious or dangerous animal" does not include an animal used exclusively for agricultural purposes or an animal which attacks a person who is trespassing or who appears to be trespassing. A trespasser is a person who is not lawfully upon the premises of the owner, as set forth in Mauldin Municipal Code section 6-55(j). An animal is not a "vicious or dangerous animal" solely by virtue of its breed or species. 
Wild animal: Untamed animal, living in its natural state, including but not limited to alligators, crocodiles, bears, cat family, canine family, non-human primates, and venomous snakes. This definition excludes non-venomous snakes. 
(Code 1994, § 4-1; Ord. No. 632, 6-19-2006) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 6-2. - Beekeeping. 
The keeping of bees within residential areas of the city shall be unlawful. 
(Code 1994, § 4-2)  
Sec. 6-3. - Bird sanctuary. 
(a)  The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to shoot, molest, trap or hunt any songbird or to rob any bird or wild fowl nest in the city. 
(c)  If at any time birds are found to be congregating in such number in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property, the city officials will have authority to correct this problem in any manner feasible. 
(Code 1994, § 4-3)  
Sec. 6-4. - Animals running at large or grazing on streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  All cows, meat cattle, goats or other animals are prohibited from running at large or grazing on the streets of the city, except when any such animal is properly haltered and under the immediate control of a responsible person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to lead or drive a cow or cattle on sidewalks; and it shall be unlawful, negligently or wilfully, to allow a cow or cattle to run on any sidewalk in the city. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1994, § 4-4) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36. 
State Law reference— Livestock running at large, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-7-110 et seq.  
Sec. 6-5. - Exhibiting animals kept for service on streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit upon the public streets of the city any stallion, jackass, bull or other animal kept for service. No person shall, within the city, exhibit in an indecent manner any stallion, jackass, bull, boar or ram, or cause or permit any such animal to be let to any animal of the opposite sex, unless the animals are in some enclosed shed or stable and entirely out of public view and hearing. 
(Code 1994, § 4-5) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36.  
Sec. 6-6. - Dead animals. 
(a)  Whenever any animal or poultry shall die from any natural or other cause, except from being slaughtered or killed for the use of man, or the dead body thereof is found upon the premises of any person, such person, whether he is the owner of such dead animal or poultry or the owner or tenant of the lands or premises upon which such dead body may be found, shall immediately and not later than 24 hours after discovery burn or bury or cause to be burned or buried such dead animal or poultry. When buried, the animal shall be put not less than three feet and poultry not less than one foot under the ground. 
(b)  Any owner of any such animal or poultry, or any owner or tenant of premises having knowledge that such animal or poultry is lying dead on his premises, and who refuses or fails to bury such dead animal or poultry, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 4-6) 
Cross reference— Solid waste management, ch. 34.  
Sec. 6-7. - Keeping or bringing diseased animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring or keep within the city limits any horse or other animal having a disease known as glanders or farcy or an animal having a disease known as hydrophobia. The person having an animal so affected shall forthwith report the same to the board of health, and appropriate action will be taken by the board. 
(Code 1994, § 4-7)  
Sec. 6-8. - Cruelty to animals. 
Whoever overloads, overdrives, overworks, tortures, torments, needlessly mutilates, cruelly kills, ill-treats, deprives of necessary sustenance or shelter or inflicts unnecessary pain or suffering upon any animal, or causes the same to be done, whether such person is the owner of such animal or has the charge of custody of such animal, shall, for every such offense, upon conviction, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 4-8) 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-1-10 et seq.  
Sec. 6-9. - Possession of wild or exotic animals. 
(a)  No person shall keep or be permitted to keep on his premises any wild or exotic animal for display or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions, or circuses. 
(b)  No person shall keep or be permitted to keep any wild or exotic animal as a pet. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the term "wild or exotic animal" means any member of the following families, including hybrids thereof, which, due to their inherent nature, may be considered dangerous to humans, and further defined as follows: 
(1)  Class Mammalia. 
a.  Order Artiodactyla (hippopotamuses, giraffes, camels, deer, not cattle or swine or sheep or goats). 
b.  Order Carnivora. 
1.  Family Felidae (lions, tigers, cougars, leopards, ocelots, servals, not domestic cats). 
2.  Family Canidae (wolves, coyotes, foxes, jackals, not domestic dogs). 
3.  Family Ursidae (all bears). 
4.  Family Mustelidae (weasels, skunks, martins, minks, not ferrets). 
5.  Family Procyonidae (raccoons, coatis). 
6.  Family Hyaenidae (hyenas). 
7.  Family Viverridae (civets, genets, mongooses, binturongs). 
c.  Order Edentatia (anteaters, armadillos, sloths). 
d.  Order Marsupialia (opossums, kangaroos, wallabies, not sugar gliders). 
e.  Order Perissodactyla (rhinoceroses, tapirs, not horses or donkeys or mules). 
f.  Order Primates (lemurs, monkeys, chimpanzees, gorillas). 
g.  Order Proboscidae (elephants). 
(2)  Class Reptilia. 
a.  Order Squamata. 
1.  Family Varanidae (only water monitors and crocodile monitors). 
2.  Family Iguanaidae (only green iguanas and rock iguanas). 
3.  Family Boidae (all species whose adult length has the potential to exceed eight feet in length). 
4.  Family Colubridae (only boomslangs and African twig snakes). 
5.  Family Elapidae (such as coral snakes, cobras, mambas, etc.)—all species. 
6.  Family Natricidae (only keelback snakes). 
7.  Family Viperidae (such as copperheads, cottonmouths, rattlesnakes, etc.) — all species. 
b.  Order Crocodilia (such as crocodiles, alligators, caimans, gavials, etc.) — all species. 
(Code 1994, § 4-9; Ord. No. 591, § 4-9, 1-28-2004)  
Sec. 6-10. - Confining animals in heat. 
Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or secured enclosure so that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with another animal except for planned breeding purposes. 
(Code 1994, § 4-10)  
Sec. 6-11. - Animal waste. 
The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of any excreta deposited by his animal on public walks, recreation areas or on private property. 
(Code 1994, § 4-11) 
Cross reference— Solid waste management, ch. 34.  
Sec. 6-12. - Keeping of swine. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any swine within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 4-12)  
Sec. 6-13. - Nuisance animals; acts deemed a public nuisance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess or maintain within the city an animal in a manner so as to constitute a public nuisance. By way of example and not of limitation, the follow acts or actions by an owner or keeper are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and are, therefore, unlawful: 
(1)  Allowing or permitting an animal to damage the property of anyone other than its owner or keeper, or to impede the property owner's ordinary use and enjoyment, even if the property is not physically damaged; 
(2)  Maintaining an animal that habitually or repeatedly chases, snaps at, or attacks persons, bicycles, or vehicles, or maintaining any animal whose behavior constitutes a reasonable risk of injury to a human or domesticated animal; 
(3)  Damages or destroys public property or the private property of another (including garden and flower beds and trees); 
(4)  Intrudes into waste containers; 
(5)  Trespasses onto school grounds, public parks, or other private property; 
(6)  Maintaining property in a manner which results in an environment of unsanitary conditions causing offensive odors, filth, vermin, or disease; or is dangerous or unhealthy to the animal or the public health, safety or welfare of the community because of the number, type, variety, density, or location of the animals on the property; or 
(7)  Allowing or permitting an animal to bark, bay, whine, howl, crow or cackle in an excessive, continuous, or unreasonable fashion, or to make other noise in a manner so as to result in a serious interference with the reasonable use and enjoyment of neighboring premises. 
(b)  Upon the receipt of two written and signed affidavits from individuals either residing in separate households or employed by separate businesses in proximity to the offender that a person is violating the provisions of this section, the animal control officer or other appropriate law or codes enforcement officer shall investigate the complaint. If the investigating officer determines that the complaint is justified, the animal control officer or other appropriate law or codes enforcement officer shall notify the owner or keeper of the animal, in writing, to correct the violation within ten days. In addition to this procedure, the animal control officer shall have the discretion to investigate other types of complaints that an owner or keeper is violating this section and take action consistent with this section. 
(c)  Should the owner or keeper of any animal found to be in violation of this section fail to correct the violation within ten days after the date of notice, the animal may be seized and impounded and the owner or keeper shall be charged with a violation of this section shall be fined not more than $200.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days. Upon conviction, the owner or keeper shall be responsible for the payment of all expenses including, but not limited to, shelter, food, necessary veterinary expenses, boarding expenses, and those expenses necessitated by the seizure of the animal for the protection of the public. This penalty is in addition to any other remedies contained in this chapter or provided for under statutory or common law. 
(Ord. No. 580, § 5(4-13), 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 632, 6-19-2006) 
Cross reference— Nuisances, § 18-31 et seq.  
Secs. 6-14—6-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal powers re dogs, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-3-70. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-51. - Running at large. 
The running at large of all dogs in the city is hereby prohibited. Any person owning, keeping, possessing or harboring any dog in the city who shall suffer or permit the running at large in the city of such dog whether licensed or unlicensed, wearing a registration tag or without a tag, shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 4-36) 
State Law reference— Quarantine of dogs found running at large, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-3-40.  
Sec. 6-52. - Leash required. 
No dog shall be permitted off the premises of the owner or the person keeping or harboring such dog, unless such dog shall be placed on a leash held by a person over the age of 12 years who shall have complete control of the dog. Such leash shall not exceed eight feet in length. 
(Code 1994, § 4-37)  
Sec. 6-53. - Impoundment and redemption procedures. 
(a)  A police officer, animal control officer or any person appointed for the purpose by the city, shall take into custody and impound or cause to be taken into custody and impounded, and thereafter destroyed or disposed of as provided in this section, any animal running at large in the city or any animal within the city not wearing a current and proper registration tag. 
(b)  Any animal impounded by the city shall be detained for a period of five days for redemption by the owner. If such animal is not redeemed by the owner within such period of five days, it may be offered for adoption to any member of the public or disposed of in such a manner as the city deems appropriate. When the name and address of the owner appears on the collar of the animal, the city shall notify the owner within two days of the time the animal was seized. 
(c)  Any owner of or the person keeping or harboring an animal which has been impounded may claim the animal upon paying the fee listed on the schedule of violation fees as adopted by the city council and by procuring a license and registration tag, if applicable. 
(Code 1994, § 4-38)  
Sec. 6-54. - Impoundment fees. 
Fees which may be imposed for the impoundment and redemption of dogs under this article shall be as determined by the city council from time to time and on file in the office of the municipal clerk. 
(Code 1994, § 4-39)  
Sec. 6-55. - Vicious or dangerous animals. 
(a)  No person owning or harboring or having the care or the custody of a dangerous animal may permit the animal to go unconfined on his premises. A dangerous animal is "unconfined" as used in this section if the animal is not confined securely indoors or confined in a securely enclosed fence or securely enclosed and locked pen or run area upon the person's premises. The pen or run area must be clearly marked as containing a dangerous animal and must be designed to prevent the entry of the general public, including children, and to prevent the escape or release of the animal. However, this section does not apply to an animal owned by a licensed security company and on patrol in a confined area. Nothing in this chapter is designed to abrogate any civil remedies available under statutory or common law. 
(b)  No person owning or harboring or having the care of a dangerous animal may permit the animal to go beyond his premises unless the animal is safely restrained and the requirements of subsection (i) herein are met. 
(c)  No person may own or harbor an animal for the purpose of fighting or train, torment, badger, bait, or use an animal for the purpose of causing or encouraging the animal to unprovoked attacks upon human beings or domestic animals. 
(d)  No person may possess with intent to sell, offer for sale, breed, or buy or attempt to buy a known dangerous animal; however, this subsection does not apply to a person who is licensed to possess and breed an animal under the classifications specified and regulated by the United States Department of Agriculture under the Animal Welfare Act as codified in Title 7 of the United States Code. 
(e)  Seizure and impoundment of vicious or dangerous animal: 
(1)  If a law enforcement agent, animal control officer, or animal control officer under contract with a county or municipal government to provide animal control services has probable cause to believe that a dangerous animal is being harbored or cared for in violation of subsections (a), (c), (d), or (i) of this section, the agent or officer may petition the court having jurisdiction to order the seizure and impoundment of the dangerous animal while the trial is pending. 
(2)  If a law enforcement agent, animal control officer, or animal control officer under contract with a county or municipal government to provide animal control services has probable cause to believe that a dangerous animal is being harbored or housed in violation of subsection (b) of this section, the agent or officer may seize and impound the dangerous animal while the trial is pending. 
(f)  Penalties; registration of dangerous animals. 
(1)  A person who violates subsection (a), (b), or (e) of this section or who is the owner of a dangerous animal which attacks and injures a domestic animal is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, for a first offense, must be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned not more than 30 days. 
(2)  A person who is the owner of a dangerous animal which attacks and injures a human being in violation of Mauldin Municipal Code section 6-1 "vicious or dangerous animal" subsection (a) or a person who violates Mauldin Municipal Code subsections 6-55(c) or (d) shall be prosecuted under state law in accordance with S.C. Code 1976 § 47-3-760. 
(g)  A dangerous animal which attacks a human being or domestic animal may be ordered destroyed when in the court's judgment the dangerous animal represents a continuing threat of serious harm to human beings or domestic animals. 
(h)  A person found guilty of violating this section shall pay all expenses, including, but not limited to, shelter, food, veterinary expenses for boarding and veterinary expenses necessitated by the seizure of an animal for the protection of the public, medical expenses incurred by a victim from an attack by a dangerous animal, and other expenses required for the destruction of the animal. 
(i)  A person owning a dangerous animal shall register the animal with the Greenville County Animal Control or other appropriate law enforcement authority. The requirements of the registration must be determined by the county governing body. However, the registration application must be accompanied by proof of liability insurance or surety bond of at least $50,000.00 insuring or securing the owner for personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous animal. The county governing body shall provide to the owner registering the dangerous animal a metal license tag and a certificate. The metal license tag at all times must be attached to a collar or harness worn by the dangerous animal for which the certificate and tag have been issued. 
(j)  A person lawfully is upon the premises of the owner within the meaning of this article when he is on the premises in the performance of a duty imposed upon him by the laws of this state, by the laws or postal regulations of the United States, when he is on the premises upon invitation, expressed or implied, of the owner, or when he is in the performance of a duty relative to public safety, which includes policemen, firemen, or other authorized personnel. A person may ingress to and egress from the premises for a purpose connected with the performance of the public safety duty. 
(k)  A person who lawfully is on the owner's premises and who is attacked by a dangerous animal or witnesses the attack may use reasonable force to repel the attack. A person is not liable in damages or otherwise for action to repel or action taken to restrain or control an animal from an unprovoked attack. 
(Code 1994, § 4-41; Ord. No. 632, 6-19-2006) 
State Law reference— Regulation of dangerous dogs, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-3-710 et seq.  
Sec. 6-56. - Applicability of article to dogs of nonlicensing age. 
All portions of this article, with the exception of the sections dealing with license fees and registration tags, shall apply to all dogs, including dogs under the licensing age of four months. 
(Code 1994, § 4-42)  
Sec. 6-57. - Dogs permitted in public parks. 
Dogs shall be permitted at any time during operating hours in any public park under specific conditions. 
(Code 1994, § 4-43; Ord. No. 750, 3-18-2013; Ord. No. 830, 7-30-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 830, adopted July 30, 2017, changed the title of § 6-57 from "Dogs prohibited in public parks" to read as herein set out. 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, ch. 30.  
Secs. 6-58—6-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE; REGISTRATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Registration of dogs, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-3-510 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-81. - Required. 
(a)  Every person who shall own, keep or harbor any dog of licensing age within the city limits shall obtain a dog license. The license shall run concurrent with the dog's inoculations required by state law. Licenses shall be renewed within 30 days of when the dog receives its latest inoculation. The owner shall have the dog registered and numbered with the municipal clerk. A license and official metal registration tag is required for each such dog owned, kept or harbored. The owner of each dog shall place upon such dog a collar or harness with the registration tag securely fastened thereto. 
(b)  New residents shall have 60 days to register their dog. 
(Code 1994, § 4-56; Ord. No. 580, § 1(4-56), 6-16-2003)  
Sec. 6-82. - Application of division provisions. 
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor any dog of licensing age for a period of ten days or more shall be deemed to be the owner of the dog so kept and harbored. Any dog over four months old shall be of licensing age. 
(Code 1994, § 4-57)  
Sec. 6-83. - Fees. 
Fees for the licensing and registration of dogs which may be imposed under this division shall be as determined by the city council from time to time and on file in the office of the municipal clerk. 
(Code 1994, § 4-58)  
Sec. 6-84. - Application generally. 
All applications for dog licenses shall be made to the municipal clerk and shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the dog for which such license and registration are sought, whether it is a long-haired or short-haired variety, and the name, street and post office address of the owner or person who shall harbor such dog. 
(Code 1994, § 4-60)  
Sec. 6-85. - When application required; proration. 
The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog which attains licensing age shall make application for a license and registration tag for such dog within ten days after such acquisition or age attainment. 
(Code 1994, § 4-61; Ord. No. 580, § 3(4-61), 6-16-2003)  
Sec. 6-86. - Causing or permitting unlicensed dog to wear registration tag. 
Any person who shall cause or permit any unlicensed dog to wear a registration tag shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 4-63)  
Sec. 6-87. - Proof of rabies vaccination prerequisite to licensing. 
No dog shall be licensed by the city unless and until adequate proof is furnished showing that the dog has been vaccinated against rabies and that such vaccination is current. 
(Code 1994, § 4-64)  
Secs. 6-88—6-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RABIES CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Rabies control, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-5-10 et seq. 
 
Sec. 6-121. - Inoculation and tag required. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog which is four months of age or older to allow such dog to roam at large on streets, roadways or highways of the city or off the premises of the owner or keeper of the dog. The dog shall wear around his neck at all times a tag evidencing that such dog has been inoculated against rabies by a qualified veterinarian or duly authorized person administering the vaccine. Upon the inoculation being made, the veterinarian shall file a copy of the same with the county health department. Such inoculation shall be effective for the period stated on the inoculation certificate prepared by the veterinarian. 
(Code 1994, § 4-86; Ord. No. 580, § 6(4-86), 6-16-2003) 
State Law reference— Inoculation of all pets required, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-5-60.  
Sec. 6-122. - Order to confine or restrain. 
Whenever a case or suspected case of rabies has occurred in the city, the police department shall have the power, and it shall be its duty, to prevent the spread of the disease by ordering that all dogs or other domestic pets in the city shall be locked up, restrained by a leash or muzzled, or to order all owners or keepers of the same to take such preventive measures as the police department may deem necessary, or both. The police department shall exercise this power subject to state law governing the duties of the county health department in like situations. 
(Code 1994, § 4-87)  
Sec. 6-123. - Enforcement of order. 
If any owner or keeper of any dog or domestic pet shall knowingly fail or refuse to comply with the order of the police department duly given under the authority of section 6-122, it shall be the prerogative of the police department to seize the dog and take whatever action it deems appropriate and which is not inconsistent with state law governing the duties of the county health department in like situations. 
(Code 1994, § 4-88)  
Sec. 6-124. - Duty of owner detecting rabies symptoms. 
It shall be the duty of any person owning or having in his possession any dog or animal within the city which develops any symptoms of rabies to immediately notify the health officer of such condition and to immediately confine the dog or animal securely in such a manner that there will be no opportunity for it to come into contact with other animals and keep it segregated until notification by the health officer of proper disposition. 
(Code 1994, § 4-89)  
Sec. 6-125. - Animal bites; quarantine. 
Any domestic animal or other animal which bites a person or causes the skin to be broken in such a way as to cause bleeding shall be quarantined by the city for ten days, at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1994, § 4-90) 
State Law reference— Liability of owner or person controlling dogs who bite, S.C. Code 1976, § 47-3-110.  
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 18; fire prevention and protection, ch. 20; flood damage prevention, ch. 21; soil erosion and sedimentation control, ch. 32; solid waste management, ch. 34; removal of construction debris, § 34-7; litter at construction sites, § 34-86; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36; utilities, ch. 40; vegetation, ch. 42. 
State Law reference— Building codes and fire prevention, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-25-10 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Master's card required for certain trades. 
(a)  All persons engaging in business or a trade that are exempt from licensure by the currently enacted state legislation governing contractor licensing as set forth in S.C. Code, tit. 40, Professions and Occupations, S.C. Code, § 40-50-260 for Residential Home Builders, and S.C. Code, § 40-11-360 for commercial contractors, will be required to obtain a Masters Card from the Municipal Association of South Carolina to engage in the practice of electrical, mechanical, gas piping, and plumbing services performed within the city limits. 
(b)  Those persons obtaining a permit for electrical, heating and air conditioning, mechanical or plumbing work shall have a current master's card on the job site at all times when engaged in their trade. No master's card in electrical, heating and air conditioning, mechanical and plumbing shall be loaned to any other person so that he might do work in the city. 
(Code 1994, § 5-1; Ord. No. 471, § 5.1, 4-20-1998; Ord. No. 755, § 1, 8-19-2013)  
Sec. 8-2. - Violations. 
Any person who is convicted of violating any provision of this chapter or of the regulatory codes adopted herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-6. All persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that the protested conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The application of such penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions by court order. 
(Code 1994, § 5-2)  
Sec. 8-3. - Fire district. 
For the purpose of enforcing the regulatory codes adopted in this chapter, the fire district of the city shall be defined as the corporate limits of the city and the fire service area pursuant to contract with the county. 
(Code 1994, § 5-3) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 20. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to establish fire limits, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-25-20; municipalities to pass fire limits ordinance, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-25-1110.  
Secs. 8-4—8-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REGULATORY CODES 
 
Sec. 8-31. - Adoption. 
The currently adopted building codes enforced in the City of Mauldin are those, which the State of South Carolina has mandated by legislation and as posted by the South Carolina Labor, Licensing and Regulation Building Codes Council (www.llr.state.sc.us/POL/BCC/.). In addition, the City of Mauldin, by local ordinance also adopts Chapter I Administration in its entirety as referenced in the enacted International Codes. 
(Code 1994, § 5-31; Ord. No. 755, § 2, 8-19-2013; Ord. No. 769, § 1, 6-16-2014) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to adopt technical codes by reference, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-9-60.  
Sec. 8-32. - Business and development services director to enforce technical codes. 
The business and development services director or his or her designee shall be deemed the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of such codes adopted in section 8-31. 
(Code 1994, § 5-33; Memo. of 3-5-2012; Ord. No. 769, § 2, 6-16-2014) 
Editor's note— A memorandum dated March 5, 2012, changed the title of § 8-32 from "Building and zoning director to enforce technical codes" to "Business and development services director to enforce technical codes."  
Sec. 8-33. - Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code. 
As permitted by S.C. Code 1976, § 6-9-60, "permissive codes" defined as the latest edition, may be used and adopted by a local jurisdiction's government body. The currently adopted permissive code, entitled, "International Property Maintenance Code" is hereby adopted and enforced in the City of Mauldin. In addition, the City of Mauldin, by local ordinance also adopts Chapter I Administration as referenced in the enacted International Property Maintenance Code. References to the "code official" shall be designated as the city administrator or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 769, § 3, 6-16-2014)  
Sec. 8-34. - Violations; enforcement. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of the codes adopted in sections 8-31 and 8-33. The city administrator and or his or her designee shall investigate suspected violations and shall take appropriate action to prosecute violations. 
(Code 1994, § 5-34; Memo. of 3-5-2012; Ord. No. 769, § 4, 6-16-2014) 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 769, adopted June 16, 2014, amended and renumbered former § 8-33 as § 8-34.  
Secs. 8-35—8-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Flood damage prevention, ch. 21. 
State Law reference— Building permits, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-25-310. 
 
Sec. 8-61. - Required; fees. 
(a)  The city council may change building permit fees by resolution when deemed necessary to amend or update such fees. These fees shall remain in effect until such time as further amended and shall include, but not be limited to, building and related permits subject to this chapter. 
(b)  A reinspection fee will be charged by the building department for any inspections performed on the third and subsequent inspection during the course of construction when it is necessary to return to a job site for the following reasons: 
(1)  The contractor or his representative is not present on the job site at the agreed upon time when the inspector arrive to perform the inspection. 
(2)  An inspection has been ordered by the contractor for a specific time but the work is not ready for inspection. 
(3)  An inspection has been ordered by the contractor and the work has not been done according to standard codes. 
Such reinspection fee shall be set from time to time by the council, and a schedule of such fees is on file and available in the city offices. 
(Code 1994, § 5-56)  
Sec. 8-62. - Compliance with laws, rules, regulations prerequisite to approval of a building permit. 
No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has complied with all applicable municipal, county and state regulations. The real estate or subdivision involved must fully comply with all city requirements, including land development regulations, and all other governing bodies and agencies having jurisdiction. 
Applications for building permits shall be distributed to and reviewed by the development review team which shall consist of appropriate staff and applicable governmental agencies. Appropriate staff shall generally entail the following, where applicable: the fire marshal, the building official, the business and development services director, and the public works director, or their designees. Other governmental agencies may include the Greenville County Land Development Division, Greenville Water, ReWa, and SCDOT, among others, as applicable. 
The appropriate staff and applicable governmental agencies shall review the building permit application for compliance with the requirements and standards under their jurisdiction. The staff and agencies involved in the review may request additional information necessary to demonstrate compliance. Review time frames may vary by agency. Review time frames for City of Mauldin staff are established in the Mauldin Zoning Ordinance and the Land Development Regulations, and vary by application type. 
(Code 1994, § 5-57; Ord. No. 931, § 1, 1-21-2020) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 931, § 1, adopted Jan. 21, 2020, changed the title of § 8-62 from "Compliance with laws, rules, regulations of county planning commission prerequisite to issuance" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 8-63. - Street paving prerequisite to issuance. 
No building permit will be issued by the city for any building to be constructed on any lot facing a public street which has not first been paved with suitable and approved hard surfacing. 
(Code 1994, § 5-58)  
Sec. 8-64. - Mobile home permits. 
No mobile home shall be set down or parked in the city for occupancy purposes, unless and until a mobile home permit has been obtained from the city. The city shall charge a fee for each mobile home permit and a schedule of such fees is on file in the municipal clerk's office. 
(Code 1994, § 5-59)  
Sec. 8-65. - Permits in areas of special flood hazard. 
Any applicant desiring to build or development with an identified area of special flood hazard shall be required issuance of a flood permit in accordance with the provision of chapter 21, flood damage prevention ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 1, 7-21-2014) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 771, adopted July 21, 2014, repealed former §§ 8-65—8-68, and enacted new provisions as set out herein. Former §§ 8-65—8-68 pertained to elevation and floodproofing data; flood elevation data for subdivision proposals; flood protection for mobile homes; and permits in floodplain management area; and derived from the 1994 Code §§ 5-60—5-63.  
Chapter 10 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 4; commercial, business and multifamily waste disposal, § 34-41 et seq.; wreckers, § 38-161 et seq.; utilities, ch. 40. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to levy a business license tax, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-30. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 628, adopted June 19, 2006, amended the Code by repealing Art. II, §§ 10-31—10-51 in its entirety and enacted similar new provisions to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 10-31. - License required. 
Every person engaged or intending to engage in any calling, business, occupation or profession, in whole or in part, within the limits of the City of Mauldin, South Carolina, is required to pay an annual license fee for the privilege of doing business and obtain a business license as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 928, § 1, 11-18-2019)  
Sec. 10-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed herein: 
Business means a calling, occupation, profession, or activity engaged in with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, either directly or indirectly. 
Charitable organization means an organization that is determined by the Internal Revenue Service to be exempt from federal income taxes under 26 U.S.C. section 501(c)(3), (4), (6), (7), (8), (10) or (19). 
Charitable purpose means benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary purpose which does not result in personal gain to a sponsor, organizer, officer, director, trustee or person with ultimate control of the organization. 
Classification means that division of businesses by major groups subject to the same license rate as determined by a calculated index of ability to pay based on national averages, benefits, equalization of tax burden, relationships of services, or other basis deemed appropriate by town council. 
Gross income means the gross receipts or gross revenue of a business, received or accrued, for one calendar year collected or to be collected from business done within the city, excepting therefrom income earned outside of the city on which a license tax is paid by the business to some other city or a county and fully reported to the city. Gross income for agents means gross commissions received or retained, unless otherwise specified. Gross income for insurance companies means gross premiums written. Gross income for business license tax purposes shall not include taxes collected for a governmental entity, escrow funds, or funds which are the property of a third party. The value of bartered goods or trade-in merchandise shall be included in gross income. The gross receipts or gross revenues for business license purposes may be verified by inspection of returns and reports filed with the Internal Revenue Service, the South Carolina Department of Revenue, the South Carolina Department of Insurance, or other government agencies. 
License official means a person designated to administer this article. 
Licensee means the business, the person applying for the license on behalf of the business, an agent or legal representative of the business, a person who receives any part of the net profit of the business, or a person who owns or exercises control of the business. 
Municipality means the City of Mauldin, South Carolina. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, LLP, LLC, cooperative non-profit membership, corporation, joint venture, association, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, holding company, or other group or combination acting as a unit, in the singular or plural, and the agent or employee having charge or control of a business in the absence of the principals. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 884, § 2, 1-22-2019; Ord. No. 928, § 1, 11-18-2019)  
Sec. 10-33. - Purpose and duration. 
The business license levied by this article is for the purpose of providing such regulation as may be required for the business subject thereto and for the purpose of raising revenue for the general fund through a privilege tax. Each license shall be issued for one year and shall expire on December 31. All license renewals shall be accompanied by a copy of the previous year's South Carolina Income Tax Return and the Federal Income Tax Return. The provisions of this article and the rates herein shall remain in effect from year to year as amended by council. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 6-19-2006)  
Sec. 10-34. - License fee. 
(a)  The required license fee shall be paid for each business subject hereto according to the applicable rate classification on or before the 30th day of April in each year, except for those businesses in rate class 8 for which a different due date is specified. In the event April 30 falls on a weekend or holiday, or in the event the city is closed due to inclement weather on April 30, said license fee shall be due the following business day. 
(b)  A separate license shall be required for each place of business and for each classification or business conducted at one place. If gross income cannot be separated for classifications at one location, the license fee shall be computed on the combined gross income for the classification requiring the highest rate. A license fee based on gross income shall be computed on the gross income for the preceding calendar or fiscal year, and on a 12-month projected income based on the monthly average for a business in operation for less than one year. The fee for a new business shall be computed on the estimated probable gross income stated in the license application for the balance of the license year. The initial fee for an annexed business shall be prorated for the number of months remaining in the license year. No refund shall be made for a business that is discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 736, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 928, § 1, 11-18-2019)  
Sec. 10-35. - Registration required. 
(a)  The owner, agent or legal representative of every business subject to this article, whether listed in the classification index or not, shall register the business and make application for a business license on or before the due date of each year; provided, a new business shall be required to have a business license prior to operation within the municipality. 
(b)  Application shall be on a form provided by the license official which shall contain the Social Security Number and/or the federal employer's identification number, the business name as reported on the South Carolina income tax return, the business name as reported on the South Carolina income tax return, and all information about the applicant, the licensee, and the business deemed appropriate to carry out the purpose of this article by the license official. Applicants are required to submit copies of tax returns filed with the Internal Revenue Service or the South Carolina Department of Revenue that verify the gross income of the business. Where the return or report does not match the gross income reported on the business license application, other acceptable documentation may be requested by the license official. 
(c)  The applicant shall certify under oath that the information given in the application is true, that the gross income is accurately reported, or estimated for a new business, without any unauthorized deductions, and that all assessments and personal property taxes on business property due and payable to the municipality have been paid. 
(d)  Insurance agents and brokers shall report the name of each insurance company for which a policy was issued and the total premiums collected for each company for each type of insurance coverage on a form approved by the license official. An insurance agent not employed by a company shall be licensed as a broker. 
(e)  Businesses which have filed an extension for their income tax may be allowed to renew their business license. At the time of their business license renewal, business shall submit a copy of their income tax filing extension application and shall base their gross income on the best information they have available. The licensee shall be responsible for paying any additional business license fees assessed upon receipt and processing of the business's income tax filing. Late penalties and processing fees set forth in this article shall apply to any additional business license fees owed to the municipality. Businesses which fail to submit their income tax filing on or before October 31 shall be served a formal citation and court summons in the amount of $750.00 as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 928, § 1, 11-18-2019)  
Sec. 10-36. - Deductions, exemptions, and charitable organizations. 
(a)  No deductions from gross income shall be made except income from business done wholly outside of the municipality on which a license tax is paid by the business to some other municipality or a county and fully reported to the municipality, taxes collected for a governmental entity, or income which cannot be included for computation of the tax pursuant to state or federal law. The applicant shall have the burden to establish the right to exempt income by satisfactory records and proof. 
(b)  No person shall be exempt from the requirements of the article by reason of the lack of an established place of business within the municipality, unless exempted by state or federal law. The license official shall determine the appropriate classification for each business in accordance with the latest issue of the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) for the United States published by the Office of Management and Budget. No person shall be exempt from this article by reason of the payment of any other tax, unless exempted by state law, and no person shall be relieved of liability for payment of any other tax by reason of application of this article. 
(c)  A charitable organization shall be exempt from the business license fee on its gross income as provided in this section. A charitable organization, or any for-profit affiliate of a charitable organization, that reports income from for-profit activities, or unrelated business income, for federal income tax purposes to the Internal Revenue Service shall be deemed a business subject to a business license fee on the part of its gross income from such for-profit activities or unrelated business income. 
A charitable organization shall be deemed a business subject to a business license fee on its total gross income if (1) any net proceeds of operation, after necessary expenses of operation, inure to the benefits of any individual or any entity that is not itself a charitable organization as defined in this article, or (2) any net proceeds of operation, after necessary expenses of operation, are used for a purpose other than a charitable purpose as defined in this article. Excess benefits or compensation in any form beyond fair market value to a sponsor, organizer, officer, director, trustee, or person with ultimate control of the organization shall not be deemed a necessary expense of operation. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 928, § 1, 11-18-2019)  
Sec. 10-37. - False application unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the provisions of this article to make a false application for a business license, or to give or file, or direct the giving or filing of any false information with respect to the license or fee required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 6-19-2006)  
Sec. 10-38. - Display and transfer. 
(a)  All persons shall display the license issued to them on the original form provided by the license official in a conspicuous place in the business establishment at the address shown on the license. A transient or nonresident shall carry the license upon his person or in a vehicle used in the business readily available for inspection by any authorized agent of the municipality. 
(b)  Any change of information on the original license application must be reported immediately. A change of address must be reported to the license official within ten days after removal of the business to a new location and the license will be valid at the new address upon written notification by the license official and compliance with zoning and building codes. Failure to obtain the approval of the license official for a change of address shall invalidate the license and subject the licensee to prosecution for doing business without a license. A business license shall not be transferable and a transfer of controlling interest shall be considered a termination of the old business and the establishment of a new business requiring a new business license, based on old business income. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 6-19-2006)  
Sec. 10-39. - Administration of article. 
The license official shall administer the provisions of this article, collect license fees, issue licenses, make or initiate investigations and audits to insure compliance, initiate denial, suspension or revocation procedures, report violations to the municipal attorney, assist in prosecution of violators, produce forms, make reasonable regulations relating to the administration of this article, and perform such other duties as may be duly assigned. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 928, § 1, 11-18-2019)  
Sec. 10-40. - Inspection and audits. 
(a)  For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article the license official or other authorized agent of the municipality is empowered to enter upon the premises of any person subject to this article to make inspections, examine and audit books and records. It shall be unlawful for any such person to fail or refuse to make available the necessary books and records. In the event an audit or inspection reveals that the licensee has filed false information, the costs of the audit shall be added to the correct license fee and late penalties in addition to other penalties provided herein. Each day of failure to pay the proper amount of license fee shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The license official shall make systematic inspections and random audits of all businesses within the municipality to insure compliance with the article. Financial information obtained by inspections and audits shall not be deemed public records, and the license official shall not release the amount of license taxes paid or the reported gross income of any person by name without written permission of the licensee. Statistics compiled by classifications are public records. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 6-19-2006)  
Sec. 10-41. - Assessments, payment under protest, appeal. 
(a)  If a person fails to obtain a business license or to furnish the information required by this article or the license official, the license official shall examine such records of the business or any other available records as may be appropriate, and conduct such investigations and statistical surveys as the license official may deem appropriate to assess a license tax and penalties as provided herein. 
(b)  A notice of assessment shall be served by certified mail or personal service. An application for adjustment of the assessment may be made to the license official within five days after the notice is mailed or personally served or the assessment will become final. The license official shall establish a uniform procedure for hearing an application for adjustment of assessment and issuing a notice of final assessment. 
(c)  A final assessment may be appealed to the municipal council only by payment in full of the assessment under protest within five days and the filing of written notice of appeal within ten days after payment pursuant to the provisions of this article relating to appeals to council. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 928, § 1, 11-18-2019)  
Sec. 10-42. - Delinquent license fees, partial payment. 
(a)  For non-payment of all or any part of the correct license fee, the license official shall levy and collect a $25.00 processing fee and a late penalty of ten percent of the unpaid fee for each month or portion thereof after the due date until paid. Penalties shall not be waived. Should the license fee and assessed penalties remain unpaid for 90 days after its due date, the business license official or appointed designee shall issue a written citation warning with an order that payment of the license fee and assessed penalties be made within ten business days. 
After being issued a written warning citation any person or business that fails to make payment within the time allotted shall be served a formal citation and court summons in the amount of $750.00 with a prescribed date to appear before the Mauldin Municipal Court. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. Punishment for violation shall not relieve the offender of liability for delinquent fees, penalties and costs provided for herein. 
(b)  Partial payment, including payments made by applicants who have not supplied all of the required documentation, may be accepted by the license official to toll imposition of penalties on the portion paid; provided however, no business license shall be issued or renewed until the information and documentation required by this article and the full amount of the tax due, with penalties, has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 700, § 1, 1-25-2010; Ord. No. 785, § 2, 2-23-2015; Ord. No. 928, § 1, 11-18-2019)  
Sec. 10-43. - Notices. 
The license official may, but shall not be required to, send notices by postal, electronic or other effective means that license fees are due. Failure to receive notice shall not constitute a defense to prosecution for failure to pay the tax due or grounds for waiver of penalties. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 928, § 1, 11-18-2019)  
Sec. 10-44. - Denial of license. 
The license official may deny a license to an applicant when the license official determines: 
(a)  The application is incomplete, contains a misrepresentation, false or misleading statement, evasion or suppression of a material fact; 
(b)  The activity for which a license is sought is unlawful or constitutes a public nuisance per se or per accidens; 
(c)  The applicant, licensee or prior licensee or the person in control of the business has been convicted, within the previous ten years, of an offense under a law or ordinance regulating business, a crime involving dishonest conduct or moral turpitude related to a business or a subject of a business, or an unlawful sale of merchandise or prohibited goods; 
(d)  The applicant, licensee, or prior licensee or the person in control of the business has engaged in an unlawful activity or nuisance related to the business or to a similar business in the municipality or in another jurisdiction; 
(e)  The applicant, licensee, or prior licensee or the person in control of the business is delinquent in the payment to the municipality of any tax or fee; or 
(f)  The license for the business or for a similar business of the licensee in the municipality or another jurisdiction has been denied, suspended or revoked in the previous license year. 
A decision of the license official shall be subject to appeal to council as herein provided. Denial shall be written with reasons stated. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 928, § 1, 11-18-2019)  
Sec. 10-45. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
When the license official determines: 
(a)  A license has been mistakenly or improperly issued or issued contrary to law; 
(b)  A licensee has breached any condition upon which the license was issued or has failed to comply with the provisions of this article; 
(c)  A licensee has obtained a license through a fraud, misrepresentation, a false or misleading statement, evasion or suppression of a material fact in the license application; 
(d)  A licensee has been convicted, within the previous ten years, of an offense under a law or ordinance regulating business, a crime involving dishonest conduct or moral turpitude related to a business or a subject of a business, or an unlawful sale of merchandise or prohibited goods; or 
(e)  A licensee has engaged in an unlawful activity or nuisance related to the business; or 
(f)  A licensee is delinquent in the payment to the municipality of any tax or fee. 
The license official shall give written notice to the licensee or the person in control of the business within the municipality by personal service or certified mail that the license is suspended pending a hearing before council for the purpose of determining whether the license should be revoked. 
The notice shall state the time and place at which the hearing is to be held, which shall be at a regular or special council meeting within 30 days from the date of service of the notice, unless continued by agreement. The notice shall contain a brief statement of the reasons for suspension and proposed revocation and a copy of the applicable provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 928, § 1, 11-18-2019)  
Sec. 10-46. - Appeals to council. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a decision, final assessment, revocation, suspension, or a denial of a proposed business license by the license official may appeal the decision to the municipal council by written request stating the reasons therefore, filed with the license official within ten days after the payment of the assessment under protest or notice of denial is received. Payment under protest shall be a condition precedent to appeal. 
(b)  An appeal or a hearing on proposed revocation shall be held by the municipal council within 30 days after receipt of a request for appeal or service of notice of suspension at a regular or special meeting of which the applicant or licensee has been given written notice, unless continued by agreement. At the hearing all parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel, to present testimony and evidence and to cross-examine witnesses. The proceedings shall be recorded and transcribed at the expense of the party so requesting. The rules of evidence and procedure prescribed by council shall govern the hearing. Council shall by majority vote of members present render a written decision based on findings of fact and application of the standards herein which shall be served upon all parties or their representatives and shall be the final decision of the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 928, § 1, 11-18-2019)  
Sec. 10-47. - Permission to use streets required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, maintain or operate in, on, above or under any street or public place under control of the municipality any line, pipe, cable, pole, structure or facility for utilities, communications, cablevision or other purposes without a consent agreement or franchise agreement issued by the municipal council by ordinance which prescribes the term, fees and conditions for use. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 6-19-2006)  
Sec. 10-48. - Consent, franchise or business license fee required. 
The annual fee for use of streets or public places authorized by a consent agreement or franchise agreement shall be set by the ordinance approving the agreement and shall be consistent with limits set by state law. Existing franchise agreements shall continue in effect until expiration dates in the agreements. Franchise and consent fees shall not be in lieu of or be credited against business license fees unless specifically provided by the franchise or consent agreement. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 6-19-2006)  
Sec. 10-49. - Confidentiality. 
Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for any official or employee to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of income or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any report or return required under this article. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns. Any license data may be shared with other public officials or employees in the performance of their duties, whether or not those duties relate to enforcement of the license ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 6-19-2006)  
Sec. 10-50. - Violations. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be subject to a fine of up to $750.00 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days or both, upon conviction. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. Punishment for violation shall not relieve the offender of liability for delinquent taxes, penalties and costs provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 6-19-2006)  
Sec. 10-51. - Separability. 
A determination that any portion of this article is invalid or unenforceable shall not affect the remaining portions. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 6-19-2006)  
Sec. 10-52. - Classification and rates. 
(a)  The classifications of businesses included in each rate class are listed with the United States North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) codes, by sector, sub-sector, group or industry. The business license class schedule is a tool for classification and not a limitation on businesses subject to a license tax. The business classification, pursuant to the most recent version of the business license class schedule adopted by the council, most specifically identifying the subject business, shall be applied to the business. The license official shall have the authority to make the determination of the business classification most specifically applicable to a subject business. 
(b)  The license fee for each class of businesses subject to this ordinance shall be computed in accordance with the following rates, [which have not been set out in the Code, but are on file in the office of the municipal clerk]. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 1, 6-19-2006; Ord. No. 928, § 1, 11-18-2019)  
Sec. 10-53. - Business license fee abatement incentive program. 
The City of Mauldin has developed a new business license fee abatement program to incentivize and encourage private capital investment and reinvestment opportunities in the community. The development of the program is intended to recognize the benefits of new investment and its contribution to the economic health and stability of the city. The program also provides a tool that furthers the economic development strategies outlined in the city's comprehensive plan, and further promotes the regional strategies of the Greenville Area Development Corp. 
Businesses which meet the qualifying requirements established in subsection (2) of this section shall be considered a "new business qualifying for incentives" and shall have their business license fee abated under one of the following options: 
(1)  Options. 
a.  Qualifying businesses that will be in operation for a period of six months or more during the calendar year shall have their business license fee abated as follows: 
1.  One hundred percent for the first taxable year of operation; 
2.  Sixty-six percent for the second taxable year of operation; 
3.  Thirty-three percent for the third taxable year of operation. 
b.  Qualifying businesses that will be [in] operation for a period of less than six months during the calendar year may have their business license fee abated under one of the following abatement options: 
Option I. 
1.  One hundred percent for the first taxable year of operation; 
2.  Sixty-six percent for the second taxable year of operation; 
3.  Thirty-three percent for the third taxable year of operation. 
Or 
Option II. 
1.  One hundred percent for the second taxable year of operation; 
2.  Sixty-six percent for the third taxable year of operation; 
3.  Fifty percent for the fourth taxable year of operation. 
(2)  Qualifying requirements. Businesses as defined by subsection (4) and meet one the following qualifiers, shall be designated as a "new business qualifying for incentives" and shall receive the business license tax abatements provided in subsection (1) options. 
a.  Qualifier I: 
1.  Requirement 1: Business types. 
• Corporate and regional headquarters. 
• Advanced materials manufacturing. 
• Transportation equipment manufacturing. 
• Bioscience. 
• Research and development. 
• High technology growth businesses. 
• Business centers. 
2.  Requirement 2: Company size. 
(i)  A company employing 100 employees or more and falls into one of the qualifying business type categories (above) and also having an annual increase in gross revenues of ten percent or more during the duration of the abatement period; 
(ii)  A company employing less than 100 employees and falls into one of the qualifying business type categories (above) and also having an annual increase in gross revenues of 15 percent or more during the duration of the abatement period. 
b.  Qualifier II: Has an annual gross income of $10,000,000.00 or more; and makes a $300,000.00 or more capital investment with at least 33 percent towards physical improvements (i.e. building up-fit, renovation, addition or other physical improvement, etc.) 
(3)  Administrative criteria and terms of delivery. 
a.  The person, firm, or corporation must apply for the business license fee abatement program through the Business and Development Services Department of the City of Mauldin. 
b.  The applicant shall provide sufficient documentation as deemed necessary to substantiate the qualifying criteria for which the abatement is being requested. Such documentation may include: a business plan showing the projected revenue growth over a three- to five-year period, a detailed description of business processes, and construction bid and contract costs. 
c.  The abatement incentive shall require annual monitoring by the City of Mauldin to ensure continued program compliance; monitoring during the abatement period shall be performed during the annual business license renewal process, which requires verification of annual gross revenue for tax year. 
d.  The three-year abatement term shall commence with the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, issuance of a business license and/or other criteria corresponding to the eligibility factors. 
e.  If at anytime during the incentive period the development's use or business does not meet the eligibility criteria for which the abatement was established, then the city shall deem the agreement null and void. 
f.  If at any time during the incentive period the development is sold, then the city shall deem the agreement null and void. 
g.  If at anytime during the incentive period the real property is sold, the city shall deem the agreement null and void. 
h.  No business and no successor or affiliated business entity having one or more of the same principles and substantially the same business activity may cease business operations in the name of one business and then resume business operations in another name if the effect of such resumption is to circumvent this section or to prolong the incentives provided beyond the third taxable year. 
i.  A new business that qualifies under this section becomes eligible for the abatement in the tax year during which it commences business operations within the city. 
j.  The director of business and development services shall be responsible for the interpretation and application of the business license abatement program. 
(4)  Definitions relative to the abatement program. The following words, terms and phrases, when used for determining a qualifying business shall have the meaning ascribed herein: 
Advanced material manufacturing. This industry includes companies manufacturing textile, plastic, and metal products used in a variety of downstream manufacturing. It also includes manufacturing of high-quality textiles that supports downstream automotive and aerospace manufacturing. 
Biosciences. This industry includes companies developing and producing pharmaceuticals as well as manufacturing medical devices including: orthopedic instruments, surgical instruments, diagnostic tools, catheters and stents, etc. 
Business centers. This industry includes uses such as: office centers, data centers, shared services, financial services, consumer customer care services, information technology/software, data support for financial and insurance services and engineering services. It also includes: applications related to cloud computing, development of software applications for automotive or aerospace industries, medical-related software, open-source software, consumer customer services. 
Capital investment [is] defined as an activity that adds value to the city's tax base through property acquisition, and/or improvement of real property. 
Corporate and regional headquarters [is] defined as the national or regional operations of a corporation, real estate investment trust, general or limited partnership, or comparable business entity, provided the business operations has offices, production facilities, shipping locations, wholesale facilities or retail outlets in other states. A majority (more than 50 percent) of the management, legal, planning, marketing and personnel operations must be handled or supervised from the corporate headquarters. The headquarters must have responsibility for an area including South Carolina and two other states. 
High technology growth businesses [is] defined as those enterprises, which have as a primary revenue component of their business activity, earnings derived from the design, engineering, development, or production of innovative technology in businesses, which are expanding significantly in the world economy. Examples include companies primarily engaged in activities such as: Internet technology, digital media, biotechnology research and development, wireless and high speed communication, computerized technologies and equipment design, medical device and engineering, and propriety electronic equipment, with micro chip components, or businesses providing systems for computer software design or hardware design, or both, based on the assessment of customers' business or organizational needs. This category does not include the mere sale or installation of standard retail software packages or individual hardware components. 
Manufacturing [is] defined as doing any kind of business as manufacturers, which includes any goods, wares, or products manufactured, processed, assembled or produced with the city in whole or in part, regardless of where ultimately sold, distributed, or disposed of and not herein specifically taxed in another classification under the city's business license ordinance. 
Research and development [is] defined as those facilities or enterprises devoted directly and primarily to research and development in the experimental or laboratory sense for new products, new uses, for existing products, or for improving existing products. The facility must be a separate facility devoted primarily to research and development as defined in this section. The abatement does not include facilities used in connection with efficiency surveys, management studies, consumer surveys, economic surveys, advertising, promotion, or research in connection with literacy, historical, or similar projects. 
Transportation equipment manufacturing. Industries in the transportation equipment manufacturing subsector produce equipment for transporting people and goods. Transportation equipment is a type of machinery. Establishments in this subsector utilize production processes similar to those of other machinery manufacturing establishments - bending, forming, welding, machining, and assembling metal or plastic parts into components and finished products. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 1(36), 3-17-2014)  
Sec. 10-54. - Early payment discount for annual resident business license renewals commencing in year 2015. 
A two-percent discount deducted from the calculated business license remittance shall be allowed for resident businesses that are "in good standing" with the city and also submit or mail their annual business license renewal (with supporting documentation) on or before February 15 of each year. Renewals payments received by mail must be postmarked on or before the early discount deadline. 
The term "in good standing" shall be defined as those businesses that have not been delinquent in paying their annual business license fee during the previous business license year and who do not carry an outstanding fee or balance on their account. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 1(37), 3-17-2014; Ord. No. 768, § 1(37), 6-16-2014)  
Secs. 10-55—10-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - POOLROOMS 
 
Sec. 10-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Pool table means those tables known as billiard tables or pocket billiard tables, and such tables as are known as miniature pool tables. 
Poolroom means any room, hall, building or place kept for the purpose of operating billiard or pocket billiard tables for the purpose of permitting games to be played thereon for profit. 
(Code 1994, § 10-41) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-82. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not be construed to include billiard tables or billiard rooms operated by private homes, fraternal orders, bona fide clubs, industrial concerns, religious orders or charitable institutions, when no fees are charged for the use of such tables. Should fees be charged for the use of such tables, all of the provisions of this article shall apply. 
(Code 1994, § 10-42)  
Sec. 10-83. - Licensing generally. 
Every person operating a billiard room in the city shall secure a license for such business in accordance with the provisions of article II of this chapter; provided, however, that the city shall not issue a license for such business until such billiard room shall have first been licensed by the state in accordance with S.C. Code 1976, § 52-11-190. 
(Code 1994, § 10-43)  
Sec. 10-84. - Forfeiture of license upon sublease of business. 
Any applicant securing a license under this chapter who shall sublease or farm out the billiard or poolroom business to any other person shall forfeit such license. 
(Code 1994, § 10-44) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 52-11-100.  
Sec. 10-85. - Violations. 
(a)  Generally. Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction in the municipal court, be punished as provided in section 1-6. The owner of any such poolroom, or the manager, clerk or operator thereof, shall be subject to such penalties. 
(b)  Revocation of license. If a poolroom shall be operated in violation of this chapter or shall be operated in any other manner as to be detrimental to the best interests of the city, the city council shall revoke the license for the operation of such poolroom, after notice to the owner or manager thereof or the person to whom the license shall have been issued and a hearing thereon before the city council. If such license shall be revoked, it shall be unlawful for any person to thereafter operate such poolroom. 
(Code 1994, §§ 10-45, 10-46)  
Secs. 10-86—10-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-121. - Purpose and intent of article. 
It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the continued deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market, neither is it the intent of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(Code 1994, § 10-61)  
Sec. 10-122. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the image so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult bookstore and adult video store mean a commercial establishment that as one of its principle business purposes offers for sale or rental any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion picture, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
A commercial establishment may have other business purposes that do not involve their offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult video store so long as one of its business purposes is the offering for sale or rental of the specified materials which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
Establishment means any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration 
Nudity and state of nudity mean the appearance of human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast. 
Permittee means a person in whose name a permit to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit. 
Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
Seminude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprises that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between persons of the opposite sex or persons of the same sex or both when one or more persons is in a state of nudity or is seminude. 
Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
Specified anatomical areas means the male genitals in a state of sexual arousal or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female genitals. 
Specified sexual activities means any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or stimulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1)—(3) of this definition. 
Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25 percent, as the floor areas exist on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in their business, whether by sale, exchange, or other similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Code 1994, § 10-62) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-123. - Classification. 
The following are classified as sexually oriented businesses: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motels; 
(5)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(6)  Adult theaters; 
(7)  Nude model studios; and 
(8)  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Code 1994, § 10-63)  
Secs. 10-124—10-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 10-141. - Required. 
(a)  A person commits a misdemeanor if he operates a sexually oriented business without a valid permit issued by the city for the particular type of business. 
(b)  An application for a permit must be made on a form provided by the city license inspector. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the total floor space occupied by the premises including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. 
(c)  The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the health department, fire department, and building and services department. The health department, fire department, and business and development services department shall complete their inspections and certify some to the license inspector within 21 days of receipt of the application by the license inspector. 
(d)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has ten percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a permit as an applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the entity which wishes to operate such a business, each individual having a ten percent or greater interest in the corporation must sign the application for a permit as an applicant. 
(e)  The fact that a person possesses other types of state or county or city permits and/or licenses does not exempt him from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business permit. 
(Code 1994, § 10-64; Memo. of 3-5-2012)  
Sec. 10-142. - Issuance. 
(a)  The city license inspector shall approve the issuance of a permit to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application unless he finds one or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in his payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against him or imposed upon him in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the permit or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(4)  An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a permit by the city to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding 12 months, or residing with a person whose permit to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months. 
(5)  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business has not been approved by the health department, fire department, and the business and development services department as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(6)  The permit fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(7)  An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(Code 1994, § 10-65;; Memo. of 3-5-2012)  
Sec. 10-143. - Fees. 
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit is $1,000.00. This fee is in addition to any other fees which may be in connection with the operation of a business within the city. 
(Code 1994, § 10-66)  
Sec. 10-144. - Inspections. 
(a)  An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, business and development services department, or other city departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits a misdemeanor if he refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(Code 1994, § 10-67; Memo. of 3-5-2012)  
Sec. 10-145. - Expiration. 
(a)  Each sexually oriented business permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making an application as provided in section 10-141. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration date of the permit will not be affected. 
(b)  When the city license inspector denies renewal of a permit, the applicant shall not be issued a permit for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the city license inspector finds that the basis for denial of the renewal permit has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a permit if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial become final. 
(Code 1994, § 10-68)  
Sec. 10-146. - Suspension. 
The city license inspector shall suspend a permit for a period not to exceed 30 days if the license inspector determines that a permittee or an employee of a permittee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article; 
(2)  Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(3)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article; 
(4)  Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises. 
Such determination may be based upon information obtained independently by the license inspector, a conviction under section 10-176, a separate criminal conviction that would constitute a violation of this article, or other information from low enforcement, the health department, the fire department, business and development services department or other official charged with enforcing the law. 
(Code 1994, § 10-69; Memo. of 3-5-2012)  
Sec. 10-147. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city license inspector shall revoke a permit if a cause for suspension in section 10-146 occurs and that permit has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The city license inspector shall revoke a permit if the license inspector determines that: 
(1)  A permittee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the license inspector during the application process. 
(2)  A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises. 
(3)  A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises. 
(4)  A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sexual conduct to occur in or on the premises. 
(5)  A permittee or an employee has knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the permittee's permit was suspended. 
(6)  A permittee is delinquent in payment to the city, county, or state for any taxes or fees past due. Such a determination may be based upon information obtained independently by the license inspector, a conviction under section 10-176, a separate criminal conviction that would constitute a violation of this article, or other information from low enforcement, the health department, the fire department, business and development services department or other official charged with enforcing the law. 
(c)  When the city license inspector revokes a permit, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the permittee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business permit for one year from the date of revocation, the city license inspector finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a permit if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation become effective. 
(Code 1994, § 10-70; Memo. of 3-5-2012)  
Sec. 10-148. - Transfer. 
A permittee shall not transfer his permit to another, nor shall a permittee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a permit at any other place than the address designated in the application. 
(Code 1994, § 10-71)  
Secs. 10-149—10-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OPERATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS 
 
Sec. 10-171. - Location of businesses. 
(a)  A person commits a misdemeanor if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business outside of the designated S-1 district. All sexually oriented businesses shall be located within a S-1 district. 
(b)  A person commits a misdemeanor if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of the nearest property line of: 
(1)  A church; 
(2)  A public or private elementary or secondary school; 
(3)  A boundary of a residential district; 
(4)  A public park adjacent to any residential district; 
(5)  The property line of lot devoted primarily to residential use; 
(6)  A continuous care retirement center or nursing care facility; 
(7)  A family oriented recreation facility including, but not limited to, a roller skating rink, an ice rink or a public swimming pool; 
(8)  A day nursery or licensed child care facility; 
(9)  A public library. 
(c)  A person commits a misdemeanor if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(d)  A person commits a misdemeanor if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the some building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor areas of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
(e)  For the purpose of this article, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of any land use listed in subsection (c) of this section. 
(f)  For purposes of subsection (d) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(Code 1994, § 10-72)  
Sec. 10-172. - Operating hours. 
No sexually oriented business shall open to do business before 10:00 a. m. Monday through Saturday or remain open after 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday. No sexually oriented business shall open for business on a Sunday. This section shall not apply to an adult motel, nor to business which its hours of operation are regulated by the state. 
(Code 1994, § 10-73)  
Sec. 10-173. - Additional regulations for adult motels. 
(a)  It may be inferred from evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time less than ten hours that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this article. 
(b)  A person commits a misdemeanor if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business permit, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the terms "rent" and "subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Code 1994, § 10-74)  
Sec. 10-174. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business permit, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blue print shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated scale or with marked dimensions of all areas of plus or minus six inches. The city license inspector may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the license inspector or his designee. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which a patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operators, and of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display rocks or other materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(7)  No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at a time. 
(8)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access to an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor level. 
(9)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described in subsection (a)(8) of this section is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsection (a) of this section commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Code 1994, § 10-75)  
Sec. 10-175. - Exemptions. 
It is a defense to prosecution under sections 10-141 through 10-174 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school, licensed by the state; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicated a nude person is available for viewing; 
b.  Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where not more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(Code 1994, § 10-76)  
Sec. 10-176. - Injunction and penalty. 
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid permit or in violation of section 10-171 is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Such violations shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1994, § 10-77)  
Secs. 10-177—10-210. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CONSENT AGREEMENT FOR PLACING LINES IN STREETS OR SIMILAR PUBLIC PLACES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36. 
 
Sec. 10-211. - Permission to use streets required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install, maintain or operate in, on, above or under any street or public place under control of the municipality any line, pipe, cable, pole, structure or facility for utilities, communications, cablevision or other purposes without a consent agreement or franchise agreement issued by the city council by ordinance which prescribes the term, fees and conditions for use. 
(Ord. No. 464, § 10-50, 1-19-1999)  
Sec. 10-212. - Consent, franchise, or business license fee required. 
The annual fee for use of streets or public places authorized by a consent agreement or franchise agreement shall be set by the ordinance approving the agreement and shall be based on gross revenues derived from activities in the municipality, the length of lines installed in streets and public places, or other formula deemed appropriate by the council. No consent fee or franchise fee shall be construed to be in lieu of a business license tax based on gross revenue unless specifically provided for by ordinance. Credits for business license taxes paid may be applied to fees set by ordinance granting consent or a franchise when specifically authorized by this article. 
(Ord. No. 464, § 10-51, 1-19-1999)  
Sec. 10-213. - SIC 481-Telephone communication companies not using public streets under franchise or consent. 
Establishments providing local or long distance communications as described in Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) group 481, including voice and data communications; radiotelephone services; cellular telephone services; paging and beeper services; leasing lines, fiber optic cables, microwave or satellite facilities; selling access and reselling use of facilities or methods to others, shall pay the current annual business license tax from all communications activities conducted in the municipality and for communications services billed to customers located in the municipality on which a business license tax has not been paid to another municipality. The amount of such license tax shall be set from time to time but shall be in accordance with current state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 464, § 10-52, 1-19-1999)  
Secs. 10-214—10-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALES 
 
Sec. 10-251. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Inspector means the license clerk of the city. 
License means a license issued pursuant to this article. 
Licensee means any person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to this article. 
Publish, publishing, advertising and advertisements means any and all means of conveying to the public notice of a sale, or notice of intention to conduct a sale, whether of word of mouth, newspaper advertisement, magazine advertisement, handbill, circular, pamphlet, written notice, printed notice, printed display, billboard display, poster, radio or television announcement, radio or television program, recordings, or any and all other means, including oral, written, or printed means. 
Sale means the sale or an offer to sell to the public goods, wares, and merchandise of any and all kinds and descriptions on hand and in stock in connection with a declared purpose, as set forth by advertising on the part of the seller that such sale is anticipatory to the termination, closing, liquidation, removal, revision, wind-up, discontinuance, conclusion, or abandonment of the business in connection with such sale. The term shall also include any sale advertised, either specifically or in substance, to be a fire sale, smoke and water damage sale, adjustment sale, creditor's sale, trustee's sale, bankrupt sale, save-us-from bankruptcy sale, insolvent sale, insurance salvage sale, mortgage sale, assignee's sale, adjuster's sale, loss-of-lease sale, receiver's sale, forced-out-of-business sale, or removal sale, and any and all sales advertised in such a manner as to reasonably convey to the public that upon the disposal of stock of goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 10-20, 4-17-2000) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-252. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following persons: 
(1)  Persons acting pursuant to an order of process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officers, such as sheriffs, bailiffs or marshals. 
(3)  Duly licensed auctioneers selling at auction. 
(4)  Executors, guardians, assignees of insolvent debtors, bankrupts or other personnel required by law to sell such property. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 10-21, 4-17-2000)  
Sec. 10-253. - License required. 
No person shall publish or conduct any sale coming under the provisions of this article without first having procured a license therefor. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 10-22, 4-17-2000)  
Sec. 10-254. - Authority of building official. 
The building official is hereby authorized and empowered to supervise or regulate sales or special sales coming under the provisions of this article, and to issue appropriate licenses thereof upon proper application. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 10-23, 4-17-2000)  
Sec. 10-255. - Application for license; submission of inventory. 
(a)  Application for a license required by this article shall be made to the building official on a form to be approved by the council, and shall be in writing and verified by the applicant. Such application shall contain a description of the place where such sale is to be held, the nature of the occupance, whether by ownership, lease, or sublease, and the effective date of termination of such occupant, and the means to be employed in publicizing such sale, together with the proposed language contained in any advertisement. 
(b)  Such application shall further contain, as in part thereof, an itemized list of the goods, wares, and merchandise to be offered for sale, why such goods, wares and merchandise are to be sold under such descriptive name or title, and in what manner such name is truthfully descriptive of such sale, the place where such stock was purchased or acquired, and if not purchased, the manner of such acquisition and when acquired, and also the date of delivery thereof to the applicant. It shall be unlawful for any applicant to submit information in such application which is incorrect, inaccurate, fraudulent, or misleading. Any license issued on the basis of such application shall be immediately canceled by the building official and surrendered by the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 10-24, 4-17-2000)  
Sec. 10-256. - Goods that may be included in inventory. 
(a)  All goods included in the inventory filed with the application for a license required by this article shall have been purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without cancellation privileges and shall not comprise goods purchased on consignment. 
(b)  Such inventory shall not include goods ordered in contemplation of conducting a sale regulated by this article. Any unusual purchase or additions to the stock or goods of the business affected by this article within 15 days before the filing of an application under this article shall be deemed to be of such character. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 10-25, 4-17-2000)  
Sec. 10-257. - Bond. 
Before a license shall be issued by the building official under an application filed pursuant to this article, the applicant shall execute and deliver to the city a bond in the currently required amount, signed by such applicant, and also signed by a surety compact duly authorized to transact business in the state, which bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful observance of the provisions of this article, and also conditioned to reimburse and indemnify any purchaser at any such sale, as provided for in this article, duly held by such licensee, for any loss incurred or damage sustained by such purchaser by reason of misrepresentation or fraud in the sale of such goods, wares or merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 10-26, 4-17-2000)  
Sec. 10-258. - License fee. 
Upon filing an original application for a license to advertise and conduct a sale or special sale, the applicant shall pay the currently required license fee, which is set by council. If any such application is disapproved, one-half of such payment shall be forfeited to the city as and for the cost of investigating the statements in such application or renewal application. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 10-27, 4-17-2000)  
Sec. 10-259. - Investigation of applicant; issuance of license. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application filed pursuant to this article and payment of the fee prescribed in this article, the building official shall use the application to be examined and investigated. 
(b)  If, upon investigation, the facts as represented by the application are found to conform to the representations thereof, and the advertising proposed to be used truly represent such facts and is not fraudulent or misleading to the public, the building official shall issue a license permitting the publication of conduct of such sale. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 10-28, 4-17-2000)  
Sec. 10-260. - Display of license; inspection of merchandise; required language in advertisements; records of sale. 
Upon commencement of any sale, the license issued by the building official shall be prominently displayed at or near the entrance to the premises. A duplicated original of the application and inventory pursuant to which such license was issued shall at all times be available to the building official or to the license clerk and the licensee shall permit such inspector to examine all merchandise in the premises for comparisons with such inventory at any and all times during the period of such sale. All advertisements or advertising, and the language contained therein, shall be in accordance with the purpose of the sale as stated in the application pursuant to which a license was issued, and the wording of such advertisement shall not vary from the wording as indicated in the application. Such advertising shall contain a statement in these words: "Sale held pursuant to License No. _____ of the building official, granted the _____ day of ___________." And in such blank spaces shall be indicated the license and the requisite dates. Books and records of the sales shall be kept by the licensee and shall at all times be available to the license clerk. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 10-29, 4-17-2000)  
Sec. 10-261. - Expiration of license. 
A license issued pursuant to this article shall be for a period not to exceed 30 days; provided, however, that if the stock of goods on hand inventories at cost or less in an amount in excess of $50,000.00, the license provided for in this article shall be for a period not to exceed 60 days. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 10-30, 4-17-2000)  
Sec. 10-262. - Fraudulent or misleading advertising. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee pursuant to this article to advertise or cause to be advertised goods, wares, or merchandise for a sale which do not live up to the representations of the advertisement. It shall be unlawful for any such licensee to publish or cause to be published advertising falsely representing the reason for such sale. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct such a sale to add any goods to the inventoried stock thereof, or to sell any goods, except those in the original inventory, while representing the goods, by advertising, information or otherwise as being a part of the goods advertised for sale as authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 10-31, 4-17-2000)  
Sec. 10-263. - Weekly reports to the license clerk. 
At the conclusion of each week of a sale, or the continuation thereof, the licensee shall report to the city license clerk the approximate proportion of the original inventory of the goods sold, and shall provide him with a revised inventory thereof. 
(Ord. No. 515, § 10-32, 4-17-2000)  
Secs. 10-264—10-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - LOCAL ACCOMMODATIONS TAX AND HOSPITALITY TAX  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-301. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accommodations means any rooms (excluding meeting and conference rooms), campground spaces, lodgings, or sleeping accommodations furnished to transients by a hotel, inn, tourist court, tourist camp, motel, campground, residence or any other place in which rooms, lodging, or sleeping accommodations are furnished to transients for consideration within the city. The gross proceeds derived from the lease or rental of sleeping accommodations supplied to the same person or persons for a period of 90 continuous days are not considered proceeds from transients. 
Establishment means any business required to obtain a business license as provided in article II of this chapter. 
Local accommodations tax means a tax on the gross proceeds derived from the rental or charges for accommodations furnished to transients as provided in S.C. Code 1976, § 12-36-920(A), and which is imposed on every person engaged or continuing within the jurisdiction of the imposing local governmental body in the business of furnishing accommodations to transients for consideration. 
Local hospitality tax means a tax on the sales of prepared meals and beverages sold in establishments or sales of prepared meals and beverages sold in establishments licensed for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages, beer, or wine within the city. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 1, 2-20-2001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-302. - Inspections, audits, and administration. 
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, the code enforcement officer or other agent authorized is empowered to enter upon the premises of any person subject to this article and to make inspections, examine and audit books and records. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to make available the necessary books and records during normal business hours upon 24 hours' written notice. If an audit reveals that false information has been filed by the remitter, the costs of the audit shall be added to the correct amount of tax determined to be due. All operational and administrative costs associated with the billing and collection of the local accommodations tax and the local hospitality tax will be charged to the respective special revenue fund. The code enforcement officer may make systematic inspections of all service providers which are governed by this article within the city to ensure compliance with this article. Records of inspections shall not be deemed public records. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 10, 2-20-2001)  
Sec. 10-303. - Violations and penalties for delinquent payment. 
It shall be a violation of this article to: 
(1)  Fail to collect local accommodations tax in connection with the rental of any accommodations to transients; 
(2)  Fail to remit to the city the local accommodation tax, collected pursuant to this article; 
(3)  Fail to collect the local hospitality tax as provided in this article; 
(4)  Fail to remit to the city the local hospitality tax collected, pursuant to this article; 
(5)  Knowingly provide false information on the form of return submitted to the city; or 
(6)  Fail to provide books and records to the city code enforcement officer for the purpose of an audit upon 24 hours' written notice. 
For non-payment of all or any part of the correct fee, the accommodation and hospitality official or an appointed designee shall levy and collect a late payment of five percent of the unpaid fee for each month or portion thereof after the due date until it is paid. Penalties shall not be waived. Should the accommodation and/or hospitality tax and penalty fees remain unpaid for a period of 90 days after its due date, the official or appointed designee shall issue a written warning citation with an order that payment of the tax and assessed penalties be made within ten businesses days. 
After being issued a written citation warning any person or business that fails to make payment within the time allotted shall be served a formal citation and court summons in the amount of $500.00 with a prescribed date to appear before the Mauldin Municipal Court. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. Punishment for violation shall not relieve the offender of liability for delinquent taxes, penalties and costs provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 11, 2-20-2001; Ord. No. 785, § 1, 2-23-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 785, § 1, adopted Feb. 23, 2015, changed the title of § 10-303 from "Violations and penalties" to read as herein set out.  
Secs. 10-304—10-320. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LOCAL ACCOMMODATIONS TAX 
 
Sec. 10-321. - Imposed; rate. 
A uniform tax equal to three percent is hereby imposed on the gross proceeds derived from the rental of any accommodation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 2, 2-20-2001)  
Sec. 10-322. - Payment. 
(a)  Payment of the local accommodations tax established in this division shall be the liability of the consumer of the services. The tax shall be paid at the time of delivery of the services to which the tax applies, and shall be collected by the provider of the services. The city shall promulgate a form of return which shall be utilized by the provider of services to calculate the amount of local accommodation taxes collected and due. This form shall contain a sworn declaration as to the correctness thereof by the provider of services. 
(b)  The tax provided for in this division must be remitted to the city on a monthly basis when the estimated amount of average tax is more than $50.00 a month, on a quarterly basis when the estimated amount of average tax is $25.00 to $50.00 a month, and on an annual basis when the estimated amount of average tax is less than $25.00 a month. 
(c)  The provider of services shall remit the local accommodations tax, when due, to the city on the 20th of the month, or on the next business day if the 20th is not a business day. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 3, 2-20-2001)  
Sec. 10-323. - Special revenue fund. 
An interest-bearing, segregated and restricted account to be known as the "City of Mauldin Local Accommodations Tax Special Revenue Fund" is hereby established. All revenues received from the local accommodations tax shall be deposited into this fund. The principal and any accrued interest in this fund shall be expended only as permitted by this division. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 4, 2-20-2001)  
Sec. 10-324. - Distribution of funds. 
The city council shall distribute the local accommodations tax collected and placed in the "City of Mauldin Local Accommodations Tax Special Revenue Fund" to be used for tourism-related capital projects, the support of tourism and tourist services in a manner that will best serve the tourists from whom it was collected including being pledged as security for indebtedness issued by the city for public purposes. It shall be the responsibility of the city council to ensure that any and all money expended from the "City of Mauldin Local Accommodations Tax Special Revenue Fund" shall be spent to build capital projects which will serve and attract tourists and benefit those tourists who regularly seek accommodations in the city. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 5, 2-20-2001)  
Secs. 10-325—10-340. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LOCAL HOSPITALITY TAX 
 
Sec. 10-341. - Imposed; rate. 
A uniform tax equal to two percent is hereby imposed on the sales of prepared meals and beverages sold in establishments within the city. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 6, 2-20-2001)  
Sec. 10-342. - Payment. 
(a)  Payment of the local hospitality tax established in this division shall be the liability of the consumer of the services. The tax shall be paid at the time of delivery of the services to which the tax applies, and shall be collected by the provider of the services. The city shall promulgate a form of return which shall be utilized by the provider of services to calculate the amount of local hospitality tax collected and due. This form shall contain a sworn declaration as to the correctness thereof by the provider of the services. 
(b)  The tax provided for in this division must be remitted to the city on a monthly basis when the estimated amount of average tax is more than $50.00 a month, on a quarterly basis when the estimated amount of average tax is $25.00 to $50.00 a month, and on an annual basis when the estimated amount of average tax is less than $25.00 a month. 
(c)  The provider of services shall remit the local hospitality tax, when, due, to the city on the 20th of the month, or on the next business day if the 20th is not a business day. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 7, 2-20-2001)  
Sec. 10-343. - Special revenue fund. 
An interest-bearing, segregated and restricted account to be known as the "City of Mauldin Local Hospitality Tax Special Revenue Fund" is hereby established. All revenues received from the local hospitality tax shall be deposited into this fund. The principal and any accrued interest in this fund shall be expended only as permitted by this article. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 8, 2-20-2001)  
Sec. 10-344. - Distribution of funds. 
The city council shall distribute the local hospitality tax collected and placed in the "City of Mauldin Local Hospitality Tax Special Revenue Fund" to be used for tourism-related capital projects, the support of tourism and tourist services in a manner that will best serve the tourists from whom it was collected including being pledged as security for indebtedness issued by the city for public purposes. It shall be the responsibility of the city council to ensure that any and all money expended from the "City of Mauldin Local Hospitality Tax Special Revenue Fund" shall be spent to build capital projects which will serve and attract tourists and benefit those tourists who regularly visit the city. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 9, 2-20-2001)  
Chapter 12 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to acquire, operate, etc., cemeteries, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-39-10. 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Permit for place for burial of dead. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or use, within the city, any place for the burial of the dead without permission of the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 6-1)  
Sec. 12-2. - Damaging shrubbery. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface any ornamental shrubbery or any other thing put, placed or growing on any lot in any cemetery in the city by plucking flowers or otherwise tearing, cutting or removing any part thereof. 
(Code 1994, § 6-2) 
Cross reference— Vegetation, ch. 42.  
Sec. 12-3. - Damaging or defacing tombstones or monuments. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface a tombstone or monument in any cemetery in the city by shooting the same or otherwise chipping, breaking or in any way marring the surface thereof. 
(Code 1994, § 6-3) 
State Law reference— Destruction or desecration of human remains, etc., S.C. Code 1976, § 16-17-600.  
Sec. 12-4. - Firing pistols or guns. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fire a pistol or gun in any cemetery or graveyard within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 6-4) 
Cross reference— Discharge of firearms within city, § 26-3.  
Chapter 14 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, ch. 20; law enforcement, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Emergency preparedness, S.C. Code 1976, § 25-1-420 et seq.; duties of municipal governments for mutual assistance in emergencies, S.C. Code 1976, § 25-1-450. 
 
Sec. 14-1. - States of emergency. 
(a)  In the event of a state of emergency, which shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times of great public crisis, disaster, rioting, civil disturbance, catastrophe or for any other reason, municipal public safety authorities are unable to maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives, safety, health, welfare or property, the mayor may: 
(1)  Issue a public proclamation declaring to all persons the existence of such a state of emergency. 
(2)  In order to more effectively protect the lives, safety and property of people within the city, define and impose a curfew applicable to all persons within the jurisdiction of the city, during which it shall be unlawful for anyone subject to curfew to: 
a.  Be or travel upon any public street, alley or roadway or upon public property, unless such travel is necessary to obtain medical assistance. 
b.  Possess off his own premises, buy, sell, give away or otherwise transfer or dispose of any explosives, firearms, ammunition or dangerous weapon of any kind. 
c.  Sell beer, wine or intoxicating beverages of any kind, or possess or consume the same off his own premises. 
d.  Sell gasoline or any other similar petroleum products or any other combustible or inflammable substances, except as expressly authorized by the provisions of the curfew imposed. 
(3)  Limit the application of such curfew to any area specifically designated and described within the jurisdiction of the city and to specific hours of the day or night. 
(4)  Exempt from such curfew police officers, firefighters, doctors, nurses and such other classes of persons as may be essential to the preservation of public order and immediately necessary to serve the safety, health and welfare needs of the people within the city. 
(b)  The mayor shall: 
(1)  Call the city council into session within 24 hours after a state of emergency has been proclaimed. 
(2)  Proclaim the end of any state of emergency and curfew as soon as circumstances warrant or when directed to do so by the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 8-1)  
Chapter 16 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Elections, S.C. Code 1976, tit. 7. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Compliance with state law. 
All municipal elections in the city shall be held in accordance with the laws, rules and regulations as adopted by the city and the laws of the state. 
(Code 1994, § 7-1)  
Sec. 16-2. - When polls open; polling place. 
All regular elections in the city shall be conducted in accordance with the election laws of the state, with the polls open from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. The polling places for the city shall be designated in the public notice of election. 
(Code 1994, § 7-2)  
Secs. 16-3—16-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-71 et seq. 
 
Sec. 16-31. - Elections nonpartisan. 
(a)  All regular and special elections for the offices of mayor and city council shall be nonpartisan general elections pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, §§ 5-15-60(2) and 5-15-62. Eligible persons desiring to run for mayor or city council shall file a statement of candidacy with the municipal clerk and the city elections commission no later than 60 days prior to the election. The statement shall state what office the candidate is seeking, i.e., mayor or city council seat number, in the next municipal election. It shall set forth the name and address of the candidate and be signed by the candidate. No statement of candidacy shall be accepted without the payment by the candidate of a filing fee of $150.00 for mayor or $100.00 for city council, which shall be paid to the municipal clerk. Upon the timely receipt of the statement of candidacy and the payment of the filing fee, the candidate's name shall be placed on the ballot. No nominating petition shall be required or accepted. 
(b)  No political party affiliation shall be placed on any ballot for any candidate for mayor or councilmember. 
(Code 1994, § 7-31; Ord. No. 501, § 7-31(a), 6-21-1999)  
Sec. 16-32. - Qualification of candidates. 
Each candidate seeking election to the city council shall qualify with the municipal election board in accordance with the laws of the state and the city. 
(Code 1994, § 7-33)  
Sec. 16-33. - Composition of council; council seats; terms. 
The city council shall be composed of a mayor and six councilmembers. The mayor shall be elected for a term of four years. At the election to be held during the year 1975, the candidates offering for seats 1, 3, and 5 of the city council shall be elected for a term of two years, and the candidates offering for seats 2, 4 and 6 for the city council shall be elected for a term of four years; at the election to be held during the year 1977, the candidates offering for seats 1, 3 and 5 shall be elected for a term of four years; and at the election to be held during the year 1979, the candidates offering for seats 2, 4 and 6 shall be elected for a term of four years, so that three councilmembers will be elected each two years thereafter and shall hold office for a term of four years, so as to stagger the election of members of the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 7-34)  
Sec. 16-34. - Council seats at large, residency; designation of seat sought. 
Candidates offering for the office of city council shall not be required to be residents of any particular area of the city but shall run at large and shall be elected at large by all of the qualified electors of the city. Each council office shall constitute a separate and distinct office to which a separate number shall be assigned, and each candidate offering for the office of city council shall specify whether he is offering for seat 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 or 6. Each candidate offering for election shall specify and qualify for one of the six seats enumerated in section 16-33. No candidate shall be permitted to qualify or run for more than one seat or office in any one general or special election. 
(Code 1994, § 7-34)  
Sec. 16-35. - Eligibility of candidates. 
To be eligible for the position of mayor or of councilmember of the city, a person shall be a duly qualified elector of the city under the constitution and statutes of the state. 
(Code 1994, § 7-36)  
Sec. 16-36. - When held. 
Municipal elections for mayor and councilmember, other than special elections, shall be held in odd-numbered years on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November. 
(Code 1994, § 7-37)  
Sec. 16-37. - Runoff elections. 
A runoff election shall be conducted two weeks after the first election pursuant to the provisions of S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-62 for any office in which no candidate received a majority of the votes cast. 
(Code 1994, § 7-38)  
Sec. 16-38. - Taking office; assumption of duties. 
(a)  The mayor and the members of the city council elected at the regular general election in November shall take office and assume the duties of their respective offices at the first meeting of city council in January following their election in November. The terms of the previously elected mayor and members of the city council shall continue until the new officials have taken their oath of office. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to a special election which may be required to fill the unexpired term of the mayor or any member of the city council because of resignation, death, disqualification or any other cause. 
(Code 1994, § 7-39)  
Sec. 16-39. - Oath of mayor and councilmember. 
The mayor and councilmember, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, shall take the following oath: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I am duly qualified, according to the constitution of this state, to exercise the duties of the office to which I have been elected and that I will, to the best of my ability, discharge the duties thereof and preserve, protect and defend the constitution of the state and of the United States. 
"As mayor (or councilmember) of the City of Mauldin, I will equally, fairly and impartially, to the best of my ability and skill, exercise the trust reposed in me and will use my best endeavor to preserve the peace and carry into effect, according to law, the purpose for which I have been elected. So help me God." 
(Code 1994, § 7-40) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-15-150.  
Chapter 18 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 6; rabies control, § 6-121 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 8; flood damage prevention, ch. 21; parks and recreation, ch. 30; solid waste management, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36; utilities, ch. 40; vegetation, ch. 42. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Acts of animals deemed a public nuisance, § 6-13; litter a nuisance, § 34-118. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to abate nuisances, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-30. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-31. - Condition of premises generally. 
All persons shall maintain their yards, cellars, drains, stable lots and all other lands owned or occupied by them in the city, whether occupied or vacant, in a clean and healthy condition. It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any premises within the city limits to permit such premises to become filthy, dirty or so filled with rubbish as to emit dangerous or disagreeable odors to the annoyance or discomfort of persons who reside or transact business in that locality or who may pass along any street, lane, alley or sidewalk in the vicinity. Any place so kept or permitted is hereby declared a nuisance, subject to abatement by the building and zoning director. 
(Code 1994, § 13-1) 
State Law reference— Ordinances relating to upkeep of property within a municipality, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-80.  
Sec. 18-32. - Report of unsanitary conditions to council. 
It shall be the duty of the building and zoning director to report unsanitary conditions of buildings and premises to the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 13-2)  
Sec. 18-33. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act which offends, endangers, injures or impairs the health, safety or life of any individual. Any such act is hereby declared a public nuisance. 
(Code 1994, § 13-3)  
Sec. 18-34. - Unsanitary, unsightly and unsafe conditions. 
(a)  All premises within the city, whether vacant, improved or occupied, shall at all times be kept in a sanitary condition. All damp low places and all garbage, leaves, trash, cans, vessels, broken bottles, pieces of metal, china, glass or other materials that may hold water are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Weeds, grass and other rank vegetation which is allowed to grow, stand uncut upon, or garbage, trash, eroded soil and other debris allowed to accumulate and remain on any lot or allowed to spill into the public right-of-way, so as to render the premises unsightly or unsanitary, are hereby deemed and declared to be a public nuisance and a detriment to health and safety. The occupant or lessee of any such premises and the owner, his agent, representative or employee having control of any vacant premises within the city who shall permit or tolerate the existence of any conditions condemned in this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any owner and any lessee, occupant, agent or representative of the owner of any lot or parcel of land to cut or cause to be cut all weeds, grass and other rank vegetation and to remove all garbage, trash, eroded soil and other debris as often as may be necessary to prevent the development of any of the conditions which are prohibited in this section. 
(Code 1994, § 13-4)  
Sec. 18-35. - Conditions affording food or harborage for rats. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, leave, dump or permit to accumulate any garbage, rubbish or trash in any building, vehicle and their surrounding areas in the city so that the same shall or may afford food or harborage for rats. Any violation of this section shall constitute a public nuisance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and constitute a public nuisance for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises, improved or vacant, or on any open lots or alleys in the city, any lumber, boxes, barrels, bricks, stones or similar materials and permit them to remain thereon unless the same shall be placed on open racks that are elevated not less than 18 inches above the ground and evenly piled or stacked, so that these materials will not afford harborage for rats or violate any other provisions of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 13-5)  
Sec. 18-36. - Abatement. 
(a)  The building and zoning director, upon receiving notice of the existence of any condition declared by this article, shall notify the person responsible for such condition to clean up his premises and abate such public nuisance within ten days. It shall be sufficient notification to deliver the notice or a copy thereof to the person to whom it is addressed or to deposit a copy of such notice in the United States mail properly stamped and directed to such person at his last known address and post a copy thereof on the premises upon which the public nuisance exists. If service of notice cannot be obtained in either of such methods, notice will be posted in a conspicuous place, for 24 hours, on the premises where the violation has occurred. 
(b)  Upon failure of the person to abate the cited public nuisance, as provided for in this section, within ten days after notice, a person violating these provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished in accordance with section 1-6. 
(c)  The employees or agents of the city may enter upon the premises of the offending person and cause the public nuisance to be removed therefrom. The cost of removing such nuisance shall become a lien upon the land, and such person shall be liable to the city for the costs of removal or abatement in addition to being subject to prosecution for violating this article. 
(Code 1994, § 13-6)  
Sec. 18-37. - Right of entry to abate. 
The building and zoning director, together with his subordinates, assistants, workers, employees and agents, shall have the power to enter upon any premises within the city upon which there is suspected to be a public nuisance for the purpose of abating the same. Any person who in any manner hinders or obstructs any authorized officer or representative of the city in the inspecting of any premises within the city limits, in the abatement or removal of any public nuisance, or in the discharge of any duties prescribed in this article or any other ordinance for the prevention or correction of any unsanitary, unsightly, or unsafe condition in the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1994, § 13-7)  
Sec. 18-38. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-39. - [Smoking and smokeless tobacco on municipal property and municipal buildings.] 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words or phrases shall have the meaning prescribed below: 
Designated smoking area means any area outdoors which is outside of any enclosed public place and removed from building entrances and exits. Any designated smoking area must be so situated as to allow nonsmoking individuals to conduct normal activity in a smoke-free environment. 
Municipal property means all buildings, structures, and property owned by the city except for properties leased to private businesses. 
Parks and recreational facilities shall mean all public parks, playgrounds, or ball fields, publicly owned or leased by the city upon which the public is invited or upon which the public is permitted and where individuals gather for recreational activities, including all areas adjacent to such facilities including, but not limited to, any parking areas, driveways or drive aisles. 
Smokeless tobacco means tobacco that is not smoked, but is used in another form such as chewing tobacco or snuff. 
Smoking means to inhale, exhale, burn or carry any lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, electronic cigarette, vapes, or similar devices that burn tobacco, (or similar products.) 
(b)  Smoking and smokeless tobacco use prohibited. Smoking and smokeless tobacco use are prohibited in and about any municipal property or on any park or recreational facility except outdoors in designated areas. 
"No Tobacco" signs, a "No Tobacco" symbol, or "Designated Tobacco Area" signs shall be clearly and conspicuously posted. 
No person shall cause, allow, or permit any person to smoke cigarettes, cigars, pipes, electronic cigarettes or other devices containing tobacco or other combustible smoking materials on municipal property or parks and recreational facilities owned by the city except in designated areas defined in subsection (a). 
No person shall cause, allow or permit any person to use smokeless tobacco on municipal property or parks and recreation facilities owned or leased by the City of Mauldin for city use except in designated areas defined in subsection (a). 
(c)  Violation and penalty. Any person who smokes or uses smokeless tobacco on municipal property or on parks and recreation facilities, or who causes, allows, or permits any person to smoke or use smokeless tobacco on municipal property or in parks and recreation facilities, except outdoors in designated areas, is in violation of this section and subject to its remedies and penalties. 
Any person in violation of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, must be fined between $10.00 and $25.00. (S.C. Code § 44-95-10 et seq. (1976, as amended)). 
(d)  Other applicable laws. This section shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking or the use of smokeless tobacco where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 814, 12-19-2016) 
Editor's note— It should be noted, Ord. No. 814, adopted Dec. 19, 2016, has an effective date of July 1, 2017.  
Secs. 18-40—18-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ABANDONED AND JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Disposition of abandoned and derelict motor vehicles on public and private property, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-5810 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Motor vehicle means any self-propelled land, water, or air vehicle which can be used for towing or transporting people or materials including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, buses, motor homes, motorized campers, boats, airplanes, motorcycles, motor scooters, tractors, snowmobiles, dune buggies, or other off the road vehicles. 
Motor vehicle, abandoned or derelict, means a motor vehicle: 
(1)  Left unattended or inoperable on public property other than a public street for more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained illegally on private or public property for a period of more than seven days without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property; 
(2)  Of which the certificate of registration has expired and the registered and legal owner no longer resides at the address listed on the certificate of registration on record with the department and who cannot be found after a reasonable search; 
(3)  Of which the manufacturer's serial plates, motor vehicle identification numbers, license number plates, or any other means of identification have been removed so as to nullify efforts to locate or identify the registered and legal owner; 
(4)  Left unattended or inoperable upon a street or highway in violation of a law or ordinance controlling traffic or prohibiting parking and constituting a hazard to life or property; or 
(5)  Of which the registered and legal owner of record disclaims ownership or releases his rights thereto. 
Motor vehicle, junk, means any motor vehicle incapable of self-propulsion or being moved in the manner for which it was originally intended or in the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, or discarded, or cannot safely or legally be operated, or declared to be a nuisance by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 13-51) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-62. - Abandonment unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any motor vehicle, including junk motor vehicles, on any private street, right-of-way or public grounds or upon any privately owned property; and it shall be unlawful for any person, including an owner or occupant, controlling privately owned property to abandon or to permit the abandonment thereupon of any motor vehicle. 
(Code 1994, § 13-52)  
Sec. 18-63. - Removal. 
The person responsible, or the registered owner of any such vehicle if such can be determined after reasonable search, or the owner of the premises on which such vehicle is located, or all, shall be given notice as prescribed in subsection (2) to remove and dispose of an abandoned vehicle at his own expense, or he shall be in violation of this article. 
(1)  Public property. If such person or owner cannot be determined or has not complied within the time prescribed by the notice, such vehicle, if located on public property, at the discretion of the city, may be removed to a storage area for safekeeping, at the direction of the city. Written notice of such removal shall be promptly given to the registered owner of the vehicle and to any holders of any lien on record in the office of the state department of motor vehicles, if such can be determined after a reasonable search. The city may remove such vehicles without prior notice when such vehicles constitute a safety hazard or other public nuisance. 
(2)  Private property. If located on private property, no such vehicle shall be so removed from such premises by the city without the written authorization of the owner of the vehicle, if known, or the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises, unless the vehicle has been declared by order of the codes enforcement officer, after due notice and hearing, to be a safety hazard or other public nuisance. Upon the issuance of such order, the costs of removal and disposal may be assessed against the person responsible for the nuisance. Such costs may be placed as a lien against his property, and such lien shall be collectible in the same manner as municipal taxes. 
(Code 1994, § 13-53)  
Sec. 18-64. - Disposition of vehicles. 
(a)  The owner of any removed vehicle, before obtaining possession thereof, shall pay to the city all reasonable costs incidental to its removal, storage or the locating of the owner. 
(b)  Should such owner fail or refuse to pay the costs within 20 days after receipt of the notice, or should his identity or whereabouts be unknown or unascertainable after a reasonable search and after notice, the stored vehicle may be sold after 20 days' notice has been given to the department of motor vehicles before the date of the sale and after the vehicle has been held for not less than 30 days. Junk motor vehicles and motor vehicle accessories shall govern disposition of any junk motor vehicles and motor vehicle accessories, section 18-65. 
(c)  The vehicle may be sold by public sale, after one public notice published in a newspaper of general circulation, but no vehicle may be sold or disposed of until its value has been determined in writing by at least two disinterested dealers or garagemen. 
(d)  A vehicle of an appraised value of less than $50.00 may be disposed of by any means in the discretion of the storing agent of the city. 
(e)  The proceeds of any sale shall be forwarded to the finance administrator, who shall pay from the proceeds the costs of removal, storage, investigation as to ownership and sale and other liens, in that order. If after the sale the ownership at the time of removal is established satisfactorily to the finance administrator, the owner shall be paid so much of the proceeds as remains after payment of the foregoing costs and liens. Otherwise, any remaining proceeds shall be deposited 90 days in the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 13-54)  
Sec. 18-65. - Junk motor vehicles and motor vehicle accessories. 
(a)  The person responsible, or the owner of the premises on which such vehicle and/or motor vehicle accessories are located, or the registered owner of any such vehicle and/or motor vehicle accessories if such can be determined after reasonable search, or all, shall be given notice as prescribed in this article to remove and dispose of such vehicle and/or motor accessories at his own expense, or he shall be in violation of this article. If such person or owner cannot be determined or has not complied within the time prescribed by the notice, any such vehicle and/or motor vehicle accessories at the discretion of the city may be removed from public property to a storage area for safekeeping at the direction of the city. No such vehicle and/or motor vehicle accessories shall be so removed from privately owned premises, without the written authorization of the registered owner of the vehicle and/or motor vehicle accessories, if known, or the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises, unless the vehicle and/or motor vehicle accessories have been declared by order other codes enforcement officer, after due notice and hearing, to be a safety hazard or other public nuisance. Upon the issuance of such order, the costs of its removal and disposal may be assessed against the person responsible for the nuisance, and such costs may be placed as a lien against his property and collectible in the same manner as municipal taxes. 
(b)  A junk motor vehicle and/or vehicle accessories may be posted in place, and its owner may reclaim it by exhibiting reasonable proof of ownership and paying all reasonable costs incident to its removal, storage and administrative expenses. An unclaimed junk motor vehicle and/or motor vehicle accessories may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of in summary manner after 20 days following possession of such vehicle and/or accessories under the provisions of this article. Notice shall be promptly given after final disposition to the state department of motor vehicles on such forms as it provides that it was deemed a junk motor vehicle and disposed of as such. This notice shall fully and accurately describe such disposition of junk motor vehicles and/or motor vehicle accessories shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, after notification has been given, to remove any junk motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories from any private property upon which such storage is not permitted or onto any public highway or other public property for purposes of storage. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to any motor vehicle or motor vehicle accessories completely screened by legally installed and maintained solid fencing, walls, buildings, landscape features, or a combination thereof. No vehicle or accessory shall exceed the height of the solid screen enclosure as to be readily visible from any public place or from any surrounding private property. 
(Code 1994, § 13-55)  
Sec. 18-66. - Disposition with owner's consent. 
With a vehicle owner's written consent, the city at its own discretion may remove and immediately dispose of any vehicle as a junk motor vehicle regardless of value or condition of the vehicle and without waiting such periods. Costs may be assessed to the vehicle owner. 
(Code 1994, § 13-56)  
Secs. 18-67—18-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - NOISE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 892, adopted Feb. 18, 2019, repealed div. 3 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former div. 3, §§ 18-91—18-100, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 550, § 1(13-71—13-80), adopted Oct. 15, 2001; and Ord. No. 576, §§ 1—5, adopted May 19, 2003. 
 
Sec. 18-91. - Findings. 
This article shall apply to the control of sound originating within the limits of the City of Mauldin. Prohibitions contained and enacted in this division are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, prosperity, peace, and quiet of the city and its inhabitants. The City of Mauldin finds that excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health, welfare, and safety of citizens and their quality of life. A substantial body of science and general knowledge exists which shows that excessive noise is harmful to humans and diminishes their quality of life. Therefore, noise must be regulated in order to abate excessive noise. People have a right to an environment free from excessive noise. It is the policy of the City of Mauldin to prevent excessive sound that may jeopardize the health, welfare, or safety of the citizens or degrade their quality of life. 
(Ord. No. 892, 2-18-2019)  
Sec. 18-92. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ambient noise means the general prevailing sound or combination of sounds at the location where a listener receives the sound of the noise about which a complaint has been or is being made. It is the sound or combination of sounds which a person of ordinary sensibilities would reasonably expect to encounter at the location in the ordinary and customary use of the premises. 
Continuous sound means any sound which exists, essentially without interruption, for a period of five minutes or more. 
C-weighting is the electronic filtering in sound level meters that models a flat response (output equals input) over the range of maximum human hearing frequency sensitivity. 
dBA is the A-weighted unit of sound pressure level. 
Decibel (dB) is the unit of measurement for sound pressure level at a specified location. 
Emergency vehicle means a motor vehicle used in response to any emergency or to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger. 
Emergency work means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons from an imminent exposure to danger. 
Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled by mechanical power including, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, truck-trailers, semitrailers, campers, motorcycles, minibikes, go-carts, and racing vehicles. 
Noise means any sound which is unwanted or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on human beings. 
Noise disturbance means any sound which annoys or disturbs the comfort, quiet, or repose of reasonable persons with normal sensitivities, or which injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, hearing, peace, and safety of such persons. 
Person means any human being, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, company, contractor, supplier, installer, user, owner or operator, including any municipal corporation or its officers or employees. 
Property boundary means any imaginary line exterior to any enclosed structure, at the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person. 
Property line means that part of a parcel of land legally approved and recorded and described by metes and bounds or an apartment, motel room or similar dwelling the interior wall or the common wall separating the living units or exterior wall of the building. 
Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, or alley, or similar place which is owned or controlled by a public governmental entity. 
Stationary noise source means any device, fixed or movable, which is located or used on property other than a public right-of-way. 
Use district means those districts established by the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 892, 2-18-2019) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-93. - Prohibited noise generally. 
(a)  Any noise emanating from within the jurisdictional limits of the city of such character, intensity, or duration which substantially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of persons with ordinary sensibilities occupying, owning, or controlling nearby properties within the jurisdictional limits of the city, or persons making use of public properties for their intended purposes, is hereby declared to be unlawful, constitutes a nuisance, and is prohibited. (See also section 18-97, enforcement factors, and section 18-99, measurement of noise level; establishment of prima facie violation.) 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued: 
(1)  Any excessive or loud noise which disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity, within the jurisdictional limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 892, 2-18-2019)  
Sec. 18-94. - Standard of reasonableness and use of technology. 
It is the intent of the city council in regulating noise to take into account the latest scientific advances in noise measurement and control while at the same time preserving the common sense and common law determination of what constitutes a disturbance or public nuisance. Therefore, technological sound level measurements, while desirable, shall not be required to demonstrate a violation of this section or any other ordinance or statute which establishes the creation of disturbance or public nuisance. Decibel measurements less than those specified in this section may still establish a violation of this section when due regard is made for time, place, and circumstance of the noise. 
(Ord. No. 892, 2-18-2019)  
Sec. 18-95. - Specific noises prohibited. 
(a)  Operation of certain instruments, devices, and equipment. Noise disturbances shall include, but not be limited to, the use and operation of the following instruments, devices, or pieces of equipment or the human voice when operated or used in the manner prohibited by section 18-93: 
(1)  Musical instruments. 
(2)  Radios, receivers, stereos, televisions, disc players, tape players, and comparable mechanical and electronic devices which produce sound. 
(3)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers or other devices which enhance or influence the level of sound in any way. 
(4)  Mechanical devices operating by compressed air, such as pneumatic drills and jackhammers. 
(5)  Horns, sirens and signal devices using loud, brash or harassing noises, whether on vehicles or otherwise, except when used as a warning or danger signal. 
(6)  Motor vehicle exhausts without mufflers or with inefficient or ineffective mufflers. 
(7)  The human voice when used to yell, shout, scream or the like. 
(8)  Construction machinery, heavy-duty equipment used in street repair and maintenance, and domestic and commercial power tools when operated from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., unless a permit is obtained. 
(9)  The creation of unreasonably loud, raucous, and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any vehicle at a place of business or residence. 
(10)  The repair, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle in any residential district, so as to cause loud or offensive noises to be emitted therefrom during the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(b)  Continuous or repeated sounds. Regardless of the level of sound, the following shall be deemed a nuisance and shall be prohibited under section 18-93: 
(1)  To keep any animal, including a bird, causing a frequent or long continued noise, such as barking, howling or screeching, which disturbs the comfort and repose of any reasonable person with ordinary sensibilities in the immediate vicinity. 
(2)  To install or operate a burglar alarm system which uses an audible warning or bell without a functioning device that will shut off the warning or bell within 20 minutes after the activation of the system when the alarm cannot be readily or conveniently silenced manually by persons who are disturbed by its activation. Each activation of such an alarm that continues beyond 20 minutes shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  The procedure for responding to a noise complaint shall be as follows: 
(1)  Complaints must be reported to Mauldin law enforcement officer and shall include the name, address, and telephone number of the complainant, as well as the address, to the extent known, of the person responsible for the noise. 
(2)  Upon receiving a complaint as described in subsection (c)(1) of this section, the chief of police or any law enforcement officer, after verification of the complaint, and when reasonable and practical to do so, may give an oral or written warning to cease and abate the noise immediately, or as soon as reasonable and practical, prior to being charged with a violation. 
(3)  If a second complaint is received and verified by the chief of police or any law enforcement officer, and previous notification has been given to cease and abate the noise, a citation may be issued to the person responsible for the offending noise. 
(4)  Additional complaints, when verified by a law enforcement officer, shall each constitute a separate violation for which a citation may be issued to the person responsible for the noise. 
(Ord. No. 892, 2-18-2019)  
Sec. 18-96. - Exemptions. 
The following uses and activities shall be exempt: 
(1)  Noises from safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure relief valves. 
(2)  Noises resulting from an authorized vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of an emergency. 
(3)  Noise resulting from emergency work. 
(4)  Any other noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration permitted by law and for which a license or permit therefor has been granted by the city. 
(5)  Any aircraft operated in conformity with, or pursuant to, federal law, federal air regulations, and air traffic control instruction used pursuant to and within the duly adopted federal air regulations. 
(6)  Except as specifically prohibited pursuant to section 18-95, any motor vehicle operating lawfully upon the public streets, roads, and highways in the city. 
(7)  Any railroad vehicles operating lawfully in the city. 
(8)  The sound produced by bells or chimes or other carillon instruments when used to signify the passage of an hour, half-hour, or quarter-hour components or to commemorate a wedding, funeral, or similar event, including religious services, provided that the sounds do not exceed five continuous minutes of duration in any one-hour period. 
(9)  Sound emanating from a ballpark, playing field, stadium, or comparable outdoor facility designed and intended for recreational sports activity when used for organized exhibition or participatory sports, recreational activities or scheduled outdoor events. 
(10)  Sound at community concerts, street fairs or parades which are conducted, sponsored or sanctioned by the city. 
(Ord. No. 892, 2-18-2019)  
Sec. 18-97. - Enforcement factors. 
In the enforcement of this section, an enforcement officer may be required to exercise judgement in determining if a particular noise is sufficiently loud or otherwise so offensive that it would substantially interfere with persons occupying nearby public or private property. When making such determinations, the enforcement officer may consider the following and other relevant factors: 
(1)  The time of day or night the noise occurs; 
(2)  The land use, nature, and zoning of the area from which the noise emanates and the area where it is received or perceived; 
(3)  The proximity of the noise to sleeping facilities, whether residential or commercial, during the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.; 
(4)  The duration of the noise; 
(5)  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; 
(6)  The volume and intensity of the noise. 
(7)  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual. 
(8)  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural. 
(9)  The type and intensity of ambient noise, if any. 
(See also section 18-93, prohibited noises generally, and section 18-99, measurement of noise level; establishment of prima facie violation.) 
(Ord. No. 892, 2-18-2019)  
Sec. 18-98. - Application for special permit. 
Applications for a permit for relief from the noise level designated in this division on the basis of reasonable cause may be made to the chief of police or his designee. Any permit granted under this division shall contain all conditions upon which such permit has been granted and shall specify a reasonable time that the permit shall be effective. The chief of police or his designee may grant a permit if it is found that: 
(1)  Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify his activity or operation to comply with this division; 
(2)  The activity, operation, or noise source will be of a temporary duration, and cannot be done in a manner which would comply with other subsections of this section; and 
(3)  No reasonable alternative is available to the applicant. 
The chief of police or his designee may prescribe any conditions or requirements he deems necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community or a nearby neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 892, 2-18-2019)  
Sec. 18-99. - Measurement of noise level; establishment of prima facie violation. 
A prima facie violation of section 18-93 shall be established whenever a measurement of offending noise shall be taken in accord with this section and shown to produce a level of noise in excess of the guidelines of the chart contained in this section. Noise levels identified in the chart of guidelines shall be measured in decibels and A-weighted, with the unit of measurement being designated as dB(A). For the purpose of determining dB(A)s, the noise shall be measured on the A-weighting scale having characteristics established by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a reasonable representation of the sound being measured with due regard to the location on the premises where the noise is heard by any person making a complaint. Precise positioning of the meter is not required. Guideline measurements establishing a prima facie violation for common noises are as follows: 
Noise Limit Table 
(1)  Except as authorized elsewhere in this article, no person shall cause, allow, or permit the operation of any sound source, including amplified sound, on a property or any public space or right-of-way located in the city in a manner which creates a sound level that exceeds the sound level limits set forth below unless otherwise noted. Such a sound constitutes a noise disturbance. 
Table 1—Sound Level Limits Applicable to types of Property 
Type of Property 	Time 	Sound 
Level 
Limit 
Receiving Property 
(where sound is received by complainant) 
Residential, public space, institutional, or noise sensitive facility 	7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 	70 dBA 
Offending Property (where sound originates) 
Residential, public space, institutional, or noise sensitive facility 	10:01 p.m. to 6:59 a.m. 	50 dBA 
Receiving Property 
Commercial or business 
(where sound is received by complainant) 	7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 	75 dBA 
Offending Property (where sound originates from) 
Commercial or business 	10:01 p.m. to 6:59 a.m. 	70 dBA 
Industrial or manufacturing 
(where sound originates) 	At all times 	85 dBA 
 
(See also section 18-93, prohibited noise generally, and section 18-97, enforcement factors.) 
(Ord. No. 892, 2-18-2019)  
Sec. 18-100. - Enforcement procedures; penalty; additional remedies. 
The chief of police will have primary responsibility for the enforcement of the noise regulations contained in this division. Nothing in this division shall prevent the chief of police from obtaining voluntary compliance by way of warning, notice, or education. All law enforcement officers in the ordinary course of their duties shall have the authority to advise persons of the provisions of this section and request compliance without having received a complaint from a member of the public. However, no charge shall be made against any person unless: (1) a complaint is made to an officer or other agent of the city, or; (2) a law enforcement officer hears and observes the noise, and the person has first been provided an opportunity to abate the offending noise immediately without penalty. However, if the violation continues or reoccurs, or if the same person has been provided an opportunity within the preceding 30 days to abate a noise at the same location, and the person continues to make the noise or continues to allow it to be made, then such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined and/or be imprisoned as provided in section 1-6 . The city attorney may also seek any other appropriate remedy in the discretion of the city attorney available at law or in equity, in a court of competent jurisdiction, to ensure compliance. 
(Ord. No. 892, 2-18-2019)  
Chapter 20 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 8; fire district, § 8-3; civil emergencies, ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Fire protection generally, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-25-10 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Obstructing fire equipment, firefighters; parking near fire hydrant. 
No person shall park any vehicle or otherwise cause any obstruction to fire equipment at a fire or at an entrance to the fire station, or park within 15 feet of any fire hydrant. It shall be unlawful to interfere with or obstruct the activities of any member of the fire department who is acting in the line of duty at or proceeding to a fire. 
(Code 1994, § 9-2) 
Cross reference— Stopping, standing and parking, § 38-81 et seq. 
State Law reference— Parking near fire hydrant, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-2530.  
Sec. 20-2. - Following fire apparatus too closely or parking near fire. 
No unauthorized person with any vehicle shall follow within 500 feet of any apparatus belonging to the fire department while such apparatus is en route to a fire or park within 300 feet of a fire. 
(Code 1994, § 9-3) 
Cross reference— Stopping, standing and parking, § 38-81 et seq. 
State Law reference— Following or parking near fire apparatus, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-1960.  
Sec. 20-3. - Unauthorized riding on fire apparatus or handling of equipment. 
No person not a member of the fire department, unless authorized by a proper official, shall be allowed to ride on the fire apparatus or handle equipment. 
(Code 1994, § 9-4)  
Sec. 20-4. - Installation of fire hydrants and other fire protection devices. 
(a)  All fire hydrants and other fire protection devices installed by developers or other parties or interests in dealing with the improvement of land or other properties within the city shall be installed in accordance with the then prevailing rules, regulations and specifications of the commission of public works of the City of Greenville, South Carolina, and shall meet all current Fire Underwriters' requirements for class three fire insurance protective rates. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the commission of public works of the City of Greenville, South Carolina, to furnish or supply water to any hydrants installed, constructed or erected by the developers of new subdivisions or areas within the limits of the city which fail to meet the requirements of this section. 
(c)  Whenever any property is being developed and/or water lines being installed to service any area in the city limits, there shall be placed, at intervals of no more than 1,000 feet apart for residential areas and 500 feet apart for commercial areas, fire hydrants as approved by the chief of the fire department. Distances between fire hydrants shall be measured along street lines and not across property lines. 
(d)  Whenever any property within the city is rezoned to become a commercial zone, the owner must install any necessary fire hydrants called for under this section as a condition of rezoning and such hydrants must be installed prior to the issuing of any building permits for that property. 
(Code 1994, § 9-5)  
Sec. 20-5. - Fire investigations and reports. 
The inspector of buildings shall investigate all fires and file a report to the state fire marshal as provided by S.C. Code 1976, §§ 5-25-160—5-25-210. The mayor, chief of the fire department or any municipal official may be ex officio inspector of buildings. 
(Code 1994, § 9-6)  
Sec. 20-6. - Firefighter's insurance and inspection fund. 
The city hereby accepts the benefits of S.C. Code 1976, § 38-57-10 et seq., relative to the disposition of funds arising from insurance companies doing business in the state and the compulsory inspections to qualify therefor. 
(Code 1994, § 9-7)  
Sec. 20-7. - Penalty for fires due to criminal carelessness. 
If the investigating officer shall consider that any fire is due to criminal carelessness, the person responsible for such fire shall be indicted before a magistrate for a misdemeanor and, upon conviction for the same, may be punished in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Code 1994, § 9-8) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-25-190.  
Sec. 20-8. - Open burning. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to start, or cause to be started, an open fire to burn any woodlands, brush, grass, structures, leaves, debris or other matter, except as provided in this section. 
(b)  The city fire department may burn for official training purposes. 
(c)  The city may issue a burning permit, at its discretion, for the burning of trees, brush and undergrowth on land in excess of five acres where such land has been cleared for development, under the following conditions: 
(1)  The applicant shall give the city notice in writing of all information required by the city. This notice shall include, but not be limited to, the location of the proposed burn, the material to be burned, the times and dates of the proposed burn, and the location of public roads, streets, property lines, and dwellings in the proximity of the burn. 
(2)  The applicant shall clear the area around the burn site and have immediately available sufficient equipment and personnel to adequately secure the fire and prevent its spread. If, in the opinion of the fire department, it is necessary for the city to send fire department equipment to the burn site, the applicant shall be responsible to pay for the reasonable cost thereof, as determined by the city. 
(3)  No matter may be burned which is not native to the site. 
(4)  The applicant shall conduct the burn at such location and under such conditions that smoke or fumes will not go onto any roadway or the property of others and not pose a health or environmental hazard. Weather, atmospheric conditions and recent rainfall shall also be factors to be considered. 
(5)  No burning shall be carried out during any period which the governor or other authorized official has declared that an emergency exists in connection with forest fires or open burning. 
(6)  The applicant agrees to be fully responsible for any damages or injuries to others as a result of the burning activity. The city requires the applicant to provide proof of liability insurance in such amounts as determined by the city. 
(7)  The city may impose such other conditions and restrictions as are deemed appropriate based on the type and size of the proposed burn. 
(8)  The chief of the fire department and city administrator are authorized to establish additional rules and regulations for burning permits. 
(9)  The applicant will pay a permit fee as determined by resolution of the city council. No permit shall be issued without the approval of the city council. 
(d)  This section shall not prohibit cooking fires built in fireplaces, grills or barbecue pits which shall be kept under competent and continuous supervision. 
(e)  The city may issue permits for open fires as part of special events under such terms and conditions as provided by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 9-9)  
Sec. 20-9. - Fire sprinklers. 
(a)  Required. All new construction shall be equipped with an approved automatic quick response fire sprinkler system installed to the N.F.P.A. 13 or other applicable national standards to the following classification of occupied structures: Group R occupancies and multiple dwelling structures including hotels, motels, motor inns, apartment houses, apartment hotels, convents, dormitories, townhouses, condominiums and other similar buildings except single-family structures and duplex apartments. 
(b)  Retrofitting existing buildings. Existing buildings, as defined in Group R, shall be made to conform to the requirements of this section if such building is altered, improved or repaired after damage by fire or otherwise, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the then physical value of the building immediately preceding any alterations or improvements thereto or any damage thereof. 
(c)  Physical value. Physical value in this section shall mean the estimated cost to replace the building in-kind. The city shall determine the physical value based upon documentation submitted by the owner or other interested parties. 
(d)  Inspections and certifications. Each building's owner shall have each standpipe and sprinkler system inspected and certified annually by a qualified sprinkler contractor or qualified individual. A copy of that certification shall be forwarded to the fire department. 
(e)  Compliance and approval. No automatic fire sprinkler system required by this section shall be installed without prior approval by the fire chief. 
(f)  Alternate/modified sprinkler system. The N.F.P.A. 13D Standard does not recommend installation of sprinkler systems in multiple dwellings. A sprinkler system conforming to an applicable national standard will be considered by the fire department. 
(Code 1994, § 9-10)  
Secs. 20-10—20-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to adopt technical codes by reference, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-280. 
 
Sec. 20-41. - Code adopted. 
The currently adopted fire prevention codes enforced in the City of Mauldin are those, which the State of South Carolina has mandated by legislation and as posted by the South Carolina Labor, Licensing and Regulation Building Codes Council (www.llr.state.sc.us/POL/BCC/.). In addition, the City of Mauldin, by local ordinance also adopts Chapter I Administration in its entirety as referenced in the enacted International Codes. 
(Code 1994, § 9-36; Ord. No. 538, § 1, 6-18-2001; Ord. No. 822A, § 1, 4-17-2017)  
Sec. 20-42. - Enforcement. 
The code adopted by this article shall be enforced by the chief of the fire department, subject to such rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the chief insurance commissioner. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with such code. The chief of the department shall have the authority to reference the following appendices on matters of interpretation and application of the codes when warranted to ensure the public health, safety and welfare: Appendices D - Fire Department Access Roads, Appendix F - Hazard Ranking, and Appendix I- Fire Protection Systems - Noncompliant Conditions, when such circumstances and life safety concerns are warranted. 
(Code 1994, § 9-37; Ord. No. 822A, § 3, 4-17-2017)  
Sec. 20-43. - Storage of explosives and blasting agents, storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks and bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas. 
The limits referred to in the code adopted by this article, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, the limits referred to in such code, in which storage of class 1 liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, and the limits referred to in such code, in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby established as within areas zoned OD, C-1, C-2, or I-1. 
(Code 1994, § 9-38)  
Sec. 20-44. - Modifications. 
The chief of the fire department shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the currently adopted International Fire Code as mandated by the state, upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code; provided, however, that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modifications when granted or allowed, and the decision of the chief of the fire department thereon, shall be entered upon the records of the department, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Code 1994, § 9-39; Ord. No. 822A, § 2, 4-17-2017)  
Sec. 20-45. - Appeals. 
Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the currently adopted International Fire Code as mandated by the state, do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of such code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department to the city council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Code 1994, § 9-40; Ord. No. 822A, § 2, 4-17-2017)  
Sec. 20-46. - Violations. 
Any person who is convicted of violating any provision of this article or of the code hereby adopted shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, unless a different penalty is provided for a specific offense, shall be punishable as provided in section 1-6. All persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The application of such penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions by court order. 
(Code 1994, § 9-41)  
Sec. 20-47. - Flameproofing decorative materials used in places of public assembly. 
In addition to the requirements of the currently adopted International Fire Code as mandated by the state, relative to decorative materials in places of assembly, all combustible decorative materials, including curtains, acoustical materials, streamers, cloth, cotton batting, straw, vines, leaves, trees and moss, but not including floor coverings, shall be rendered flameproof; provided that this shall not be required of materials not exceeding 1/16 of an inch in thickness applied directly to and adhering to a noncombustible base. Such flameproofing, unless certified by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., or other laboratories of recognized standing as being of a permanent nature, shall be tested by the council each six months and the treatment renewed if necessary. 
(Code 1994, § 9-42; Ord. No. 822A, § 2, 4-17-2017)  
Sec. 20-48. - Permit for use of certain decorative materials; flameproofing of materials used to decorate electric lightbulbs. 
Cotton batting, straw, dry vines, leaves, trees, celluloid or other highly flammable materials shall not be used for decoration purposes in show windows or stores without a permit; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be held to prohibit the display of saleable goods permitted and offered for sale in the store. Electric lightbulbs in stores or public halls shall not be decorated with paper or other combustible materials, unless such materials shall first have been rendered flameproof. 
(Code 1994, § 9-43)  
Sec. 20-49. - Fire alarm boxes in hospitals and public schools. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of applicable requirements of the currently adopted International Fire Code as mandated by the state, each hospital operating over ten beds and all public schools in which there is a general fire alarm station and an electrically operated fire alarm system shall be equipped with a fire alarm box of the type and character used in the city, to be located on the premises at such place as the chief of the fire department may direct. When such box is installed by such hospital or public school, the municipal authorities shall connect such box with the general fire alarm system and shall thereafter maintain such box in good repair, and such municipal authorities or their agents may enter every such hospital or school at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspecting and repairing any such box. The failure to so install and equip any such hospital or public school shall be a misdemeanor and punishable in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Code 1994, § 9-44; Ord. No. 822A, § 2, 4-17-2017) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-25-40.  
Secs. 20-50—20-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to equip and control a fire department, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-25-20. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 20-81. - Officers. 
(a)  The fire department shall consist of a chief and other officers as may be deemed necessary by the city council for the effective operation of the department. 
(b)  The chief shall be appointed by the city administrator with the approval of the city council for an indefinite period, and his tenure of office shall depend upon his good conduct and efficiency. He shall be technically qualified by training and experience and shall have ability to command men and hold their respect and confidence. He shall be suspended only for just cause by the city administrator. 
(c)  The chief shall be held accountable for the fire department only and shall make written and verbal reports to the city council as the city council may require. 
(Code 1994, § 9-66) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-71 et seq. 
State Law reference— Appointment of chief of fire department, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-25-110.  
Sec. 20-82. - Members. 
The volunteer membership of the fire department shall consist of citizens 18 years old or older residing in the fire district of the city or the city's fire service area and who qualify for membership by meeting the selection criterion provided in the official city job description. All memberships in the volunteer fire department will be considered as part-time employees and subject to all departmental and city regulations. 
(Code 1994, § 9-67)  
Sec. 20-83. - Equipment. 
(a)  The fire department shall be equipped with such apparatus and other equipment as may be required from time to time to maintain its efficiency and properly protect life and property from fire. 
(b)  Recommendations of apparatus and equipment needed shall be made by the chief or the fire committee of the city council and shall be purchased in such manner as may be designated by the city council. 
(c)  No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private purpose, nor shall any person wilfully and without proper authority take away or conceal any article used in any way by the department. 
(d)  No person shall use or tamper with the fire trucks or fire equipment owned by the city, unless authorized to do so by the mayor, the councilmember in charge of the fire department or the chief. 
(Code 1994, § 9-68)  
Sec. 20-84. - Duties generally. 
(a)  Chief. The chief shall be held responsible for the general conditions and efficient operation of the fire department, the training of members and the performance of all other duties imposed upon him. 
(b)  Drivers. Drivers shall be thoroughly familiar with the territory to be served, including the condition of the routes during the different seasons and the location of all water supplies. They shall observe speed limits which are consistent with safety, considering traffic, weather and road conditions. Special care shall be taken when approaching all intersections, the apparatus being kept under control at all times. 
(c)  Members. All members shall assist in the work of the fire department as ordered and trained and, in the absence of specific orders, shall do as they see fit. All members shall attend regular meetings and drills, if possible, to increase the efficiency of the department. Each member is responsible for his fire helmet, coat, boots and pants, and when his membership in the department is terminated, he shall return all department property in his possession to the chief. 
(Code 1994, § 9-69)  
Sec. 20-85. - Enforcement of chapter. 
All regularly appointed members of the fire department are hereby given the necessary special powers to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 9-70)  
Sec. 20-86. - Insignia for cars. 
Each member of the fire department driving a car shall be issued a suitable insignia to be attached to the car. 
(Code 1994, § 9-71)  
Sec. 20-87. - Assistance by police. 
It is hereby made the special duty of the chief of police and other peace officers who may be on duty and available for fire duty to respond to all fire alarms and assist the fire department in the protection of life and property, in regulating traffic, in maintaining order and in enforcing observance of all sections of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 9-72)  
Sec. 20-88. - Rules; regulations. 
The city administrator and fire chief are empowered to make such rules and regulations necessary for the operation of the fire department as they deem necessary; provided that no such rules or regulations shall be inconsistent with the rules made by city council. 
(Code 1994, § 9-73)  
Secs. 20-89—20-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - EXTRATERRITORIAL FIRE PROTECTION 
 
Sec. 20-111. - When service permitted. 
No fire protection service shall be rendered outside the corporate limits by the fire department, except under the following conditions: 
(1)  To serve the fire service area pursuant to contract with the county. 
(2)  To protect property within the city or the fire service areas threatened by the fire from outside. 
(3)  Where human life is in danger. 
(4)  Pursuant to the terms of a mutual aid agreement. 
(Code 1994, § 9-86)  
Secs. 20-112—20-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FIREWORKS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Fireworks and explosives, S.C. Code 1976, § 23-35-10 et seq. 
 
Sec. 20-141. - Possession, sale, storage, transport or use. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell, offer for sale, store, transport or use any fireworks within the city. The term "fireworks," for the purposes of this section, shall be as defined in S.C. Code 1976, § 23-35-30. 
(Code 1994, § 9-111) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 23-35-30.  
Sec. 20-142. - Permits for special displays. 
The city council may, upon application, grant permits to persons or organizations for special fireworks displays. 
(Code 1994, § 9-112) 
State Law reference— Municipal permits for fireworks displays, S.C. Code 1976, § 23-35-60.  
Chapter 21 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 685, § 1, adopted Dec. 15, 2008, set out provisions intended for use in ch. 5. For purposes of alphabetization, and to preserve the style of this Code, these provisions have been included as a new ch. 21, as set forth herein, at the discretion of the editor.  Subsequently, Ord. No. 771, § 2, repealed former ch. 21, and enacted new provisions as set out herein. Former ch. 21, §§ 21-1—21-13, 21-26—21-31, 21-41—21-45, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 685, § 1, adopted Dec. 15, 2008. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 8; environment, ch. 18, streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36; utilities, ch. 40. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 21-1. - Statutory authorization. 
The Legislature of the State of South Carolina has in SC Code of Laws, Title 5 and Title 6, and amendments thereto, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Mauldin, South Carolina does ordain as follows [below]. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 2(Art. I, § A), 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 21-2. - Findings of fact. 
The special flood hazard areas of the City of Mauldin are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
Furthermore, these flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 2(Art. I, § B), 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 21-3. - Statement of purpose and objectives. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect human life and health, minimize property damage, and encourage appropriate construction practices to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions by requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction. Uses of the floodplain which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion are restricted or prohibited. These provisions attempt to control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters, and control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion. Additionally, the ordinance prevents or regulates the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
The objectives of this chapter are to protect human life and health, to help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, and to insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. The provisions of the ordinance are intended to minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in the floodplain, and prolonged business interruptions. Also, an important floodplain management objective of this chapter is to minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects and rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding. 
Floodplains are an important asset to the community. They perform vital natural functions such as temporary storage of floodwaters, moderation of peak flood flows, maintenance of water quality, groundwater recharge, prevention of erosion, habitat for diverse natural wildlife populations, recreational opportunities, and aesthetic quality. These functions are best served if floodplains are kept in their natural state. Wherever possible, the natural characteristics of floodplains and their associated wetlands and water bodies should be preserved and enhanced. Decisions to alter floodplains, especially floodways and stream channels, should be the result of careful planning processes that evaluate resource conditions and human needs. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 2(Art. I, § C), 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 21-4. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all parcels of land that lie either wholly or partially within, or immediately adjacent to, areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of Mauldin, South Carolina, as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study, dated August 18, 2014, with accompanying maps and other supporting data that are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
Upon annexation any special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study for the unincorporated areas of Greenville County, with accompanying map and other data are adopted by reference and declared part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 2(Art. I, § D), 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 21-5. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 2(Art. I, § E), 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 21-6. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered or land developed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 2(Art. I, § F), 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 21-7. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements, liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state law. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions, shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 2(Art. I, § G), 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 21-8. - Partial invalidity and severability. 
If any part of this chapter is declared invalid, the remainder of the chapter shall not be affected and shall remain in force. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 2(Art. I, § H), 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 21-9. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Mauldin, South Carolina, or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 2(Art. I, § I), 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 21-10. - Penalties for violation. 
Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person, firm, corporation or agent who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more that $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Mauldin, South Carolina, from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 2(Art. I, § J), 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 21-11. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter it's most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure (appurtenant structure) means structures that are located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Accessory structures should constitute a minimal investment, may not be used for human habitation, and be designed to have minimal flood damage potential. Examples of accessory structures are detached garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, and hay sheds. 
Addition (to an existing building) means an extension or increase in the floor area or height of a building or structure. Additions to existing buildings shall comply with the requirements for new construction regardless as to whether the addition is a substantial improvement or not. Where a firewall or load-bearing wall is provided between the addition and the existing building, the addition(s) shall be considered a separate building and must comply with the standards for new construction. 
Agricultural structure means a structure used solely for agricultural purposes in which the use is exclusively in connection with the production, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of agricultural commodities, including the raising of livestock. Agricultural structures are not exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the local floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means any enclosed area of a building that is below grade on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. Also refer to definition of structure. 
Critical facility and development means those functions or structures, buildings, or development used for essential services for the public good, health and welfare of the essential daily operations and delivery of services to the citizens of the City of Mauldin. Also includes development that stores or produces highly volatile, toxic or water-reactive materials, or house occupants that may be insufficiently mobile to avoid loss of life or injury. Examples include, but not limited to, emergency medical service facilities, schools, disaster shelters, government offices, law enforcement facilities, fire departments, care center; wastewater treatment facilities, water plants, potable water distribution facilities, power generation facilities, and gas/oil/propane storage facilities. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls parallel to the flow of water. 
Executive Order 11988 (Floodplain Management). Issued by President Carter in 1977, this order requires that no federally assisted activities be conducted in or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard areas, unless there is no practicable alternative. 
Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before September 29, 1978 (initial firm date). 
Existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before March 15, 1987. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete slabs). 
Flood means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency which contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Flood-resistant material means any building material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact (minimum 72 hours) with floodwaters without sustaining damage that requires more than low-cost cosmetic repair. Any material that is water-soluble or is not resistant to alkali or acid in water, including normal adhesives for above-grade use, is not flood-resistant. Pressure-treated lumber or naturally decay-resistant lumbers are acceptable flooring materials. Sheet-type flooring coverings that restrict evaporation from below and materials that are impervious, but dimensionally unstable are not acceptable. Materials that absorb or retain water excessively after submergence are not flood-resistant. Please refer to Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, dated 8/08, and available from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Class 4 and 5 materials, referenced therein, are acceptable flood-resistant materials. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Functionally dependent use means a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of the structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: (a) listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior (DOI)) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places; (d) individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified (1) by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of Interior, or (2) directly by the Secretary of Interior in states without approved programs. Some structures or districts listed on the state or local inventories may not be "historic" as cited above, but have been included on the inventories because it was believed that the structures or districts have the potential for meeting the "historic" structure criteria of the DOI. In order for these structures to meet NFIP historic structure criteria, it must be demonstrated and evidenced that the South Carolina Department of Archives and History has individually determined that the structure or district meets DOI historic structure criteria. 
Increased cost of compliance (ICC) applies to all new and renewed flood insurance policies effective on and after June 1, 1997. The NFIP shall enable the purchase of insurance to cover the cost of compliance with land use and control measures established under Section 1361. It provides coverage for the payment of a claim to help pay for the cost to comply with state or community floodplain management laws or ordinances after a flood event in which a building has been declared substantially or repetitively damaged. 
Limited storage means an area used for storage and intended to be limited to incidental items that can withstand exposure to the elements and have low flood damage potential. Such an area must be of flood-resistant or breakaway material, void of utilities except for essential lighting and cannot be temperature controlled. If the area is located below the base flood elevation in an A or AE zone it must meet the requirements of subsection 21-41(4) of this chapter. 
Lowest adjacent grade (LAG) is an elevation of the lowest ground surface that touches any deck support, exterior walls of a building or proposed building walls. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means, for the purpose of this chapter, the Nations Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which the base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) are shown. (The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used for establishing various elevations within the floodplain.) 
NFIP means National Flood Insurance Program. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 means as corrected in 1929, elevation reference points set by National Geodetic Survey based on mean sea level. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 means vertical control, as corrected in 1988, used as the reference datum on flood insurance rate maps. 
New construction means structure for which the start of construction commenced on or after March 15, 1987. The term also includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete slabs) is completed on or after March 15, 1987. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation. 
Repetitive loss means a building covered by a contract for flood insurance that has incurred flood-related damages on two occasions during a ten-year period ending on the date of the event for which a second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded 25 percent of the market value of the building at the time of each such flood event. 
Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. The Act provides that no new flood insurance shall be provided for any property found by the Federal Emergency Management Agency to have been declared by a state or local authority to be in violation of state or local ordinances. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for footings, piers or foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, including and a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. 
Subdivision means the division or a tract, lot or parcel of land into two or more lots, plats, sites, or other divisions of land. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. Such repairs may be undertaken successively and their costs counted cumulatively. Please refer to the definition of "substantial improvement". 
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project of improvement to a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions (does not include accessibility compliance standards); or 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration would not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Permits shall be cumulative for a period of ten years. If the improvement project is conducted in phases, the total of all costs associated with each phase, beginning with the issuance of the first permit, shall be utilized to determine whether "substantial improvement" will occur. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction, or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from a term or terms of this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 2(Art. II, § A), 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 21-12. - Variances. 
These regulations are the minimum necessary requirements intended to protect lives and property from losses that may result from unregulated development in floodplains and floodways. Any proposed changes to the official floodplain or floodway boundaries shall be made by way of the LOMA or LLOMR submitted to and approved by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). No variances from the terms of this chapter shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 2(Art. V), 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 21-13. - Legal status provisions. 
(a)  Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing flood damage prevention ordinance. This chapter in part comes forward by reenactment of some of the provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance enacted December 15, 2008, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to reenact and continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be enforced. The enactment of this chapter shall not affect any action, suit or proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance of the City of Mauldin (local government) enacted on December 15, 2008, as amended, which are not reenacted herein, are repealed. 
(b)  Effect upon outstanding building permits. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size or designated use of any building, structure or part thereof for which a building permit has been granted by the City of Mauldin; provided, however, that when start of construction has not occurred under such outstanding permit within a period of 60 days subsequent to passage of this chapter, construction or use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 2(Art. VI, §§ A, B), 7-21-2014)  
Secs. 21-14—21-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 21-26. - Designation of local floodplain administrator. 
The business and development services director or his/her designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 2(Art. III, § A), 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 21-27. - Adoption of letter of map revisions (LOMR). 
All LOMRs that are issued in the areas identified in section 21-4 of this chapter are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 2(Art. III, § B), 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 21-28. - Development permit and certification requirements. 
(a)  Development permit. Application for a development permit shall be made to the local floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to any development activities. The development permit may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing: the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures; and the location of fill materials, storage areas, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  A plot plan that shows the one-percent (or 100-year) floodplain contour or a statement that the entire lot is within the floodplain must be provided by the development permit applicant when the lot is within or appears to be within the floodplain as mapped by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the floodplain identified pursuant to either the duties and responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator of subsection 21-30(11) or the standards for subdivision proposals of subsection 21-42(15) and the standards for streams without estimated base flood elevations and floodways of section 21-43. The plot plan must be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by it. The plot plan must show the floodway, if any, as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the floodway identified pursuant to either the duties or responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator of subsection 21-30(11) or the standards for subdivision proposals of subsection 21-42(15) and the standards for streams without estimated base flood elevations and floodways of section 21-43. 
(2)  Where base flood elevation data is provided as set forth in section 21-4 or the duties and responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator of subsection 21-30(11) the application for a development permit within the flood hazard area shall show: 
a.  The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor of all new and substantially improved structures; and 
b.  If the structure will be floodproofed in accordance with the non-residential construction requirements of subsection 21-42(2) the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure will be floodproofed. 
(3)  Where base flood elevation data is not provided as set forth in section 21-4 or the duties and responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator of subsection 21-30(11), the application for the development permit must show construction of the lowest floor at least a minimum of four feet above the highest adjacent grade. A higher lowest floor elevation will be required if the base flood elevation data from adjacent areas indicate that the four feet minimum may be inadequate to protect the structure and service facilities from flooding. The provisions in the standards for streams without estimated base flood elevations and floodways of section 21-43 must also be met, if applicable. 
(4)  Alteration of watercourse. Where any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development, the application for a development permit shall include a description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation, an engineering study to demonstrate that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated watercourse is maintained and a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation, and notification of the proposal to the appropriate authorities of all affected agencies. A copy of the notification shall be maintained in the permit records and submitted to FEMA and the NFIP. 
(5)  Prior to the commencement of any work on the alternation of a watercourse, the applicant must procure and submit to the local flood administrator any applicable federal or state approvals or permits, including a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR). 
(b)  Certifications. 
(1)  Floodproofing certification—Non-residential structures. When a non-residential structure is constructed or substantially improved in the area of special flood hazard, a floodproofing certificate for nonresidential construction is required for structures that have the lowest floor, mechanical systems and its utilities not elevated four feet above the base flood elevation. All construction shall meet the floodproofing requirements of subsection 21-42(2) and subsection 21-45(2)b. to ensure that the materials used to floodproof the structure prevents the passage of water and the effects of buoyancy under the hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads imposed during flood inundation. 
Upon completion of the floodproofing, a certification prepared, signed and sealed by a S.C. registered architect or a S.C. professional engineer shall be submitted to the local flood administrator for review and acceptance. Any work done prior to submission of the certificate shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local floodplain administrator shall review the data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make said corrections required, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(2)  Certification during construction. When a structure is constructed or substantially improved in the area of special flood hazard, a flood elevation certificate is required, after the lowest floor is completed and before any further inspections are accepted and vertical construction commences. The "as-built" measurement shall be made in relation to mean sea level, and be a minimum of four feet above the base flood elevation. The certificate shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a S.C. registered land surveyor or a S.C. professional engineer. Any work done prior to submission of the certificate shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local floodplain administrator shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make said corrections required, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(3)  As-built certification. Upon completion of the development a registered professional engineer, land surveyor or architect, in accordance with SC law, shall certify according to the requirements of subsections 21-28(b)(1), 21-28(b)(2), and 21-28(b)(3) that the development is built in accordance with the submitted plans and previous pre-development certifications. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 2(Art. III, § C), 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 21-29. - Duties and responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator. 
[Duties and responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator] shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Permit review. Review all development permits to assure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)  Requirement of federal and/or state permits. Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. 
(3)  Watercourse alterations. 
a.  Prior to the issuance of the floodplain development permit to alter a watercourse, notify adjacent communities and the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources, Land, Water, and Conservation Division, State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
b.  In addition to the notifications required watercourse alterations per subsection (3)a., written reports of maintenance records must be maintained to show that maintenance has been provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained. This maintenance must consist of a comprehensive program of periodic inspections, and routine channel clearing and dredging, or other related functions. The assurance shall consist of a description of maintenance activities, frequency of performance, and the local official responsible for maintenance performance. Records shall be kept on file for FEMA inspection. 
c.  If the proposed project will modify the configuration of the watercourse, floodway, or base flood elevation for which a detailed flood insurance study has been developed, the applicant shall apply for and must receive approval for a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) with the Federal Emergency Management Agency prior to the start of construction. 
d.  Within 60 days of completion of an alteration of a watercourse, referenced in the certification requirements of subsection 21-28(b)(4), the applicant shall submit as-built certification, by a registered professional engineer, to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(4)  Floodway encroachments. Prevent encroachments within floodways unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of subsection 21-42(5) are met. 
(5)  Adjoining floodplains. Cooperate with neighboring communities with respect to the management of adjoining floodplains and/or flood-related erosion areas in order to prevent aggravation of existing hazards. 
(6)  Notifying adjacent communities. Notify adjacent communities prior to permitting substantial commercial developments and large subdivisions to be undertaken in areas of special flood hazard and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
(7)  Certification requirements. 
a.  Obtain and review actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor of all new or substantially improved structures, in accordance with administrative procedures outlined in subsection 21-28(b)(2). 
b.  Obtain the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with the floodproofing certification outlined in subsection 21-28(b)(1). 
c.  When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with the non-residential construction requirements outlined in subsection 21-42(2). 
d.  A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design, specifications and plans for construction are in compliance with the provisions contained in the coastal high hazard area requirements outlined in Article IV.F.4[sic], Article IV.F.6[sic], and Article IV.F.8[sic] of this chapter. 
(8)  Map interpretation. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(9)  Prevailing authority. Where a map boundary showing an area of special flood hazard and field elevations disagree, the base flood elevations for flood protection elevations (as found on an elevation profile, floodway data table, etc.) shall prevail. The correct information should be submitted to FEMA as per the map maintenance activity requirements outlined in subsection 21-42(7)b. 
(10)  Use of best available data. When base flood elevation data and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with section 21-4, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize best available base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, including data developed pursuant to the standards for subdivision proposals outlined in subsection 21-42(15), in order to administer the provisions of this chapter. Data from preliminary, draft, and final flood insurance studies constitutes best available data from a federal, state, or other source. Data must be developed using hydraulic models meeting the minimum requirement of NFIP approved model. If an appeal is pending on the study in accordance with 44 CFR Ch. 1, Part 67.5 and 67.6, the data does not have to be used. 
A S.C. professional engineer shall provide such data when the project or development is greater than one acre in area. Studies, analysis and computations shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow review and approval by the local floodplain administrator, and in a digital format compatible with the requirements and standards of Greenville County GIS. The accuracy of the data submitted for such determination shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant. 
After review of the detailed study by the local administrator the applicant shall submit to FEMA an application for a letter of map revision (LOMR) based upon existing site conditions. Application for encroachments and/or modifications to the area of special flood hazard will be evaluated and processed as described in subsection 21-29(3)c. and subsection 21-42(5). The applicant shall be responsible for all technical submissions and fees to FEMA in order to obtain the map change. The floodplain development permit will not be issued until FEMA has issued the LOMR or CLOMR, as applicable. 
(11)  Special flood hazard area/topographic boundaries conflict. When the exact location of boundaries of the areas special flood hazards conflict with the current, natural topography information at the site; the site information takes precedence when the lowest adjacent grade is at or above the BFE, the property owner may apply and be approved for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) by FEMA. The local floodplain administrator in the permit file will maintain a copy of the letter of map amendment issued from FEMA. 
(12)  On-site inspections. Make on-site inspections of projects in accordance with the administrative procedures outlined in subsection 21-30(a). 
(13)  Administrative notices. Serve notices of violations, issue stop-work orders, revoke permits and take corrective actions in accordance with the administrative procedures in section 21-30. 
(14)  Records maintenance. Maintain all records pertaining to the administration of this chapter and make these records available for public inspection. 
(15)  Annexations and detachments. Notify the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Land, Water and Conservation Division, State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program within six months, of any annexations or detachments that include special flood hazard areas. 
(16)  Federally funded development. The President issued Executive Order 11988, Floodplain Management May 1977. E.O. 11988 directs federal agencies to assert a leadership role in reducing flood losses and losses to environmental values served by floodplains. Proposed developments must go through an eight-step review process. Evidence of compliance with the executive order must be submitted as part of the permit review process. 
(17)  Substantial damage determination. Perform an assessment of damage from any origin to the structure using FEMA's residential substantial damage estimator (RSDE) software to determine if the damage equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. If the damage to the structure is caused by flooding and is determined to be substantial damage or is a repetitive loss, and the structure is covered by NFIP, the structure may be eligible for the increased cost of compliance (ICC) provision under NFIP. 
(18)  Substantial improvement determination. Perform an assessment of permit applications for improvements or repairs made to a building or structure that equals or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction. Cost of work counted for determining if and when substantial improvement to a structure occurs shall be cumulative for a period of ten years. If the improvement project is conducted in phases, the total of all costs associated with each phase, beginning with the issuance of the first permit, shall be utilized to determine whether "substantial improvement" and "substantial damage" will occur. 
The market values shall be determined by one of the following methods: 
a.  The current assessed building value as determined by the county's assessor's office or the value of an appraisal performed by a licensed appraiser at the expense of the owner within the past six months. 
b.  One or more certified appraisals from a registered professional licensed appraiser in accordance with the laws of South Carolina. The appraisal shall indicate actual replacement value of the building or structure in its pre-improvement condition, less the cost of site improvements and depreciation for functionality and obsolescence. 
c.  Real estate purchase contract within six months prior to the date of the application for a permit. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 2(Art. III, § D), 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 21-30. - Administrative procedures. 
(a)  Inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to a permit progresses, the local floodplain administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the floodplain administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial jurisdiction at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. Whenever a building or part thereof or development is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation of this chapter, the floodplain administrator may order the work to be immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to the person doing the work. The stop-work order shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reasons for the stoppage, and the conditions under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Revocation of permits. The local floodplain administrator may revoke and require the return of the development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing, stating the reason for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the approved application, plans, or specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may also be revoked. 
(d)  Periodic inspections. The local floodplain administrator and each member of his/her inspections department shall have a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action. 
(e)  Violations to be corrected. When the local floodplain administrator finds violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his/her duty to notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law on the property he owns. 
(f)  Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the floodplain administrator shall give him written notice, by certified or registered mail to his address provided on the application for the permit or by personal service that the building or property is in violation of the flood damage prevention ordinance. 
(g)  Order to take corrective action. Pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the administrator shall find that the building or development is in violation of the flood damage prevention ordinance; he shall make an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation within such period of not less than 90 days. Where the administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may be feasible. 
(h)  Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action may appeal from the order to the building and zoning board of appeals by giving notice of such appeal in writing to the floodplain administrator within ten days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order of the floodplain administrator shall be final. The local governing body shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke the order. 
(i)  Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action from which no appeal has been taken, or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an appeal, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in the discretion of the court. 
(j)  Denial of flood insurance under the NFIP. If a structure is declared in violation of this chapter and after all other penalties are exhausted to achieve compliance with this chapter then the local floodplain administrator shall notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to initiate a Section 1316 of the National Flood insurance Act of 1968 action against the structure upon the finding that the violator refuses to bring the violation into compliance with the ordinance. Once a violation has been remedied the local floodplain administrator shall notify FEMA of the remedy and ask that the Section 1316 be rescinded. 
(k)  [Reference material.] The following documents are incorporated by reference and may be used by the local floodplain administrator to provide further guidance and interpretation of this chapter as found on FEMA's website at www.fema.gov: 
(1)  All FEMA technical bulletins. 
(2)  All FEMA floodplain management bulletins. 
(3)  FEMA 348 Protecting Building Utilities from Flood Damage. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 2(Art. III, § E), 7-21-2014)  
Secs. 21-31—21-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 21-41. - General standards. 
Development may not occur in the special flood hazard area (SFHA) where alternative locations exist due to the inherent hazards and risks involved. Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall demonstrate that new structures cannot be located out of the area of special flood hazard (SFHA) and that encroachments onto the SFHA are minimized. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  Flood-resistant materials and equipment. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with flood-resistant materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage in accordance with Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, dated 8/08, and available from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(3)  Minimize flood damage. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages. 
(4)  Critical facilities and development shall be elevated to the 500-year flood elevation or be elevated to the highest known historical flood elevation (where records are available), whichever is greater. If no data exists establishing the 500-year flood elevation or the highest known historical flood elevation, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis that generates 500-year flood elevation data, 
(5)  Utilities. Electrical, ventilation, plumbing, heating and air conditioning equipment (including ductwork), and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding, and at a minimum of four feet above the base flood elevation (BFE). This requirement does not preclude the installation of outdoor faucets for shower heads, sinks, hoses, etc. as long as cut off devices and back flow devices are installed to prevent contamination to the service components and thereby minimize any flood damages to the building. 
(6)  Water supply systems. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(7)  Sanitary sewage systems. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(8)  Gas or liquid storage tanks. All gas or liquid storage tanks, either located above ground or buried, shall be anchored to prevent floatation and lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads. 
(9)  Alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement to a structure must be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this chapter. This includes post-FIRM development and structures. 
(10)  Non-conforming buildings or uses. Non-conforming buildings or uses may not be enlarged, replaced, or rebuilt unless such enlargement or reconstruction is accomplished in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(11)  American with Disabilities Act (ADA). A building must meet the specific standards for floodplain construction outlined in section 21-42, as well as any applicable ADA requirements. The ADA is not justification for issuing a variance or otherwise waiving these requirements. Also, the cost of improvements required to meet the ADA provisions shall be included in the costs of the improvements for calculating substantial improvement. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 2(Art. IV, § A), 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 21-42. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard (SFHA) where base flood elevation data has been provided, as set forth in section 21-4 or outlined in the duties and responsibilities of the local floodplain administrator section 21-29, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the lowest floor and associated mechanical systems, including ductwork elevated no lower than four feet above the base flood elevation. No basements shall be permitted. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, flood openings sufficient to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces, shall be provided in accordance with the elevated buildings requirements in subsection (4). 
(2)  Non-residential construction. 
a.  New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential structure (including manufactured modular buildings) shall have the lowest floor elevated no lower than four feet above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, flood openings sufficient to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces, shall be provided in accordance with the elevated buildings requirements in subsection (4). No basements are permitted. 
b.  Structures located in A-zones may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation provided that all areas of the structure below the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. 
c.  A registered, professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in the floodproofing certification requirements in subsection 21-28(b)(1). 
(3)  Critical facilities. 
a.  Existing critical facilities that are substantially damaged or improved critical facilities shall be elevated or floodproofed in accordance with subsection 21-28(b)(1) and subsections 21-29(17) and (18) in the one-percent (or 100-year) area of special flood hazard (SFHA) or the .2 percent (500-year flood). 
b.  New critical facilities shall not be permitted in the one-percent or the .2 percent area of special flood hazard (SFHA). 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites outside a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than four feet above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
b.  Manufactured homes that are to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that are not subject to the provisions for residential construction in subsection (1) of this section must be elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower four feet than above the base flood elevation, and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement in accordance with Section 40-29-10 of the South Carolina Manufactured Housing Board Regulations, as amended. Additionally, when the elevation requirement would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36 inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in height an engineering certification is required. 
d.  An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood-prone areas. This plan shall be filed with and approved by the local floodplain administrator and the local emergency preparedness coordinator. 
(5)  Elevated buildings. New construction and substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other than a basement, and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to preclude finished space and be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed all of the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. 
2.  The bottom of each opening must be no more than one foot above the higher of the interior or exterior grade immediately under the opening, 
3.  Only the portions of openings that are below the base flood elevation (BFE) can be counted towards the required net open area. 
4.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
5.  Fill placed around foundation walls must be graded so that the grade inside the enclosed area is equal to or higher than the adjacent grade outside the building on at least one side of the building. 
b.  Hazardous velocities. Hydrodynamic pressure must be considered in the design of any foundation system where velocity waters or the potential for debris flow exists. If flood velocities are excessive (greater than five feet per second), foundation systems other than solid foundation walls should be considered so that obstructions to damaging flood flows are minimized; such systems must be designed by a S.C. registered professional engineer. 
c.  Enclosures below lowest floor. 
1.  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
2.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms, must be void of utilities except for essential lighting as required for safety, and cannot be temperature controlled. 
3.  One wet location switch and/or outlet connected to a ground fault interrupt breaker may be installed below the required lowest floor elevation specified in the specific standards outlined in subsections (b)(1), (2) and (3). 
4.  All construction materials below the required lowest floor elevation specified in the specific standards outlined in subsections (b)(1), (2), (3) and (4) should be of flood-resistant materials. 
(6)  New construction and replacement of roadways and bridges. 
a.  New construction. All roadways shall be constructed so that the centerline elevation of the finished road surface is two feet higher than the base flood elevation (BFE) of any adjacent Area of special flood hazard (SFHA). Bridges shall be constructed so that the lowest member of the supporting frame (invert level) is no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation (BFE). 
b.  Replacement of bridges. All replacement of bridges shall show that the replacement will not cause any increase in the level of base flood elevation (BFE) or have an adverse impact on the existing condition. All efforts shall be made during replacement of bridges and culvert to elevate this infrastructure above the base flood elevation whenever possible. 
(7)  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 21-4, are areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters that carry debris and potential projectiles and has erosion potential. The following provisions shall apply within such areas: 
a.  No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, additions, or new development shall be permitted within 100 feet of the stream bank unless: 
1.  It has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood. Such certification and technical data shall be prepared by a S.C. registered engineer and presented to the local floodplain administrator. 
2.  A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) has been approved by FEMA. A letter of map revision must be obtained upon completion of the proposed development. 
b.  If subsection (7)a. is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article III. 
c.  When base flood elevation data is not available from a federal, state, or other source, the lowest floor shall be elevated no lower than four feet above the highest adjacent grade. A higher lowest floor elevation will be required if base flood elevation data from adjacent areas indicate that the four feet minimum may be inadequate to protect the structure and serviced facilities from flooding. 
d.  No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring and the elevation standards of subsection 21-42(4) and the encroachment standards of subsection 21-42(7)a. are met. 
e.  Permissible uses within floodways may include: general farming, pasture, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, forestry, wildlife sanctuary, game farm, and other similar agricultural, wildlife, and related uses. Also, lawns, gardens, play areas, picnic grounds, and hiking and horseback riding trails are acceptable uses, provided that they do not employ structures or fill. Substantial development of a permissible use may require a no-impact certification. The uses listed in this subsection are permissible only if and to the extent that they do not cause any increase in base flood elevations or changes to the floodway configuration. 
(8)  Recreational vehicles. 
a.  A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is: 
1.  On wheels or jacking system; 
2.  Attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices; and 
3.  Has no permanently attached additions. 
b.  Recreational vehicles placed on sites shall either be: 
1.  On site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or meet the development permit and certification requirements of section 21-29, general standards outlined in section 21-41, and manufactured homes standards in subsections (3) and (4). 
(9)  Map maintenance activities. The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) requires flood data to be reviewed and approved by FEMA. This ensures that flood maps, studies and other data identified in section 21-4 accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain management criteria are based on current data. The following map maintenance activities are identified: 
a.  Requirement to submit new technical data. 
1.  For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical or scientific data reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA as soon as practicable, but no later than six months of the date such information becomes available. These development proposals include; but not limited to: 
(i)  Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood elevations or alter floodway boundaries; 
(ii)  Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard area; 
(iii)  Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of culverts; and 
(iv)  Subdivision or large-scale development proposals requiring the establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with subsection 21-43(1). 
2.  It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data, required in accordance with subsection (7), prepared in a format required for a conditional letter of map revision or letter of map revision, and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions shall also be the responsibility of the applicant. 
3.  The local floodplain administrator shall require a conditional letter of map revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for: 
(i)  Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood elevation; and 
(ii)  Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation by more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations but no floodway. 
4.  Floodplain development permits issued by the local floodplain administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a letter of map revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to subsection (7). 
b.  Right to submit new technical data. The floodplain administrator may request changes to any of the information shown on an effective map that does not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or base flood elevations, such as labeling or planimetric details. Such a submission shall include appropriate supporting documentation made in writing by the local jurisdiction and may be submitted at any time. 
(10)  Accessory structures. 
a.  A detached accessory structure or garage, greater than 200 square feet must comply with the requirements as outlined in FEMA's Technical Bulletin 7-93 Wet Floodproofing Requirements or be elevated in accordance with subsections (1) and (4) or dry floodproofed in accordance with subsection (2). 
b.  When an accessory structure is 200 square feet or and are to be placed in the floodplain, the following criteria shall be met: 
1.  Accessory structures shall not be used for any uses other than the parking of vehicles and storage; 
2.  Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential; 
3.  Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters; 
4.  Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure; 
5.  Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be installed in accordance with subsection 21-41(a)(5); 
6.  Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be provided below base flood elevation in conformance with subsection (4)a.; and 
7.  Accessory structures shall be built with flood resistance materials in accordance with Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, dated 8/08, and available from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Class 4 and 5 materials, referenced therein, are acceptable flood-resistant materials. 
(11)  Swimming pool utility equipment rooms. If the building cannot be built at or above the BFE, because of functionality of the equipment then a structure to house the utilities for the pool may be built below the BFE with the following provisions: 
a.  Meet the requirements for accessory structures in subsection 21-42(8). 
b.  The utilities must be anchored to prevent flotation and shall be designed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of the base flood. 
(12)  Elevators. 
a.  Install a float switch system or another system that provides the same level of safety necessary for all elevators where there is a potential for the elevator cab to descend below the BFE during a flood per FEMA's Technical Bulletin 4-93 Elevator Installation for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas. 
b.  All equipment that may have to be installed below the BFE such as counter weight roller guides, compensation cable and pulleys, and oil buffers for traction elevators and the jack assembly for a hydraulic elevator must be constructed using flood-resistant materials where possible per FEMA's Technical Bulletin 4-93 Elevator Installation for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas. 
(13)  Temporary development. No temporary development shall be allowed in a floodplain without full compliance with the requirements herein. 
(14)  Fill. Fill is discouraged because storage capacity is removed from floodplains. Elevating buildings by other means must be considered. An applicant shall demonstrate that fill is the only alternative to raising the building to at least four feet above the base flood elevation and comply with the residential and non-residential construction requirements of subsections (1) or (2). The application must also demonstrate that the amount of fill used will not affect the flood storage capacity or adversely affect adjacent properties. The following provisions shall apply to all fill placed in the special flood hazard area: 
a.  Fill may not be placed in the floodway unless it is in accordance with the requirements in subsection (7)a. 
b.  Fill must consist of soil and rock materials only. Dredged material may be used as fill only upon certification by a registered S.C. professional geotechnical engineer. Landfills, rubble fills, dumps, and sanitary fills are not permitted in the floodplain. 
c.  Fill used to support structures must comply with ASTM Standard D-698, and its suitability to support structures certified by a registered, professional engineer. 
d.  Fill slopes shall be no greater than two horizontal to one vertical. Flatter slopes may be required where velocities may result in erosion. 
e.  The use of fill shall not increase flooding or cause drainage problems on neighboring properties. 
f.  Will meet the requirements of FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01, Ensuring That Structures Built On Fill in or Near Special Flood Hazard Areas Are Reasonable Safe from Flooding. 
g.  No encroachment, including fill, shall be permitted within the area of special flood hazard (SFHA) unless certification with supporting technical data, prepared by a S.C. registered engineer, is provided to demonstrate that the encroachment will not result in adverse impact to the floodplain. Adverse impact includes, but is not limited to, an increase in the base flood elevation (BFE), floodway elevation and floodway width. The demonstration shall include hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that meets the requirements of the NFIP. Compensatory storage at hydraulically equivalent sites within the proposed area may be used as part of the required demonstration with prior approval of the local floodplain administrator. 
If the encroachment results in adverse impact to the floodplain, the applicant shall submit to FEMA a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or other appropriate map change application. Within 30 calendar days of completion of construction activities, the applicant shall apply to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR). The floodplain development permit will not be issued until FEMA has issued the CLOMR. The applicant is responsible for all technical submissions and fees required to obtain the CLOMR/LOMR. 
(15)  Standards for subdivision proposals and other development. 
a.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in these regulations. 
b.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. An access road and/or the invert level of a bridge must be located a minimum of two feet above the base flood elevation to provide emergency access during flood conditions. 
c.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. 
d.  The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical data to FEMA in subsection (7) when a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis is completed that generates base flood elevations. 
e.  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development. The bas flood elevation data shall be obtained in accordance with section 21-4, or if the proposed subdivision area is unstudied, then a flood analysis study shall be prepared in accordance with subsection 21-29(10). 
f.  All building lots containing areas of special flood hazard (SFHA) or immediately adjacent to these areas shall have the proposed lowest floor elevation for each structure in accordance with subsection (2). 
(Ord. No. 771, § 2(Art. IV, § B), 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 21-43. - Standards for streams without established base flood elevations and floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 21-4, are small streams where no base flood data has been provided and where no floodways have been identified. The following provisions apply within such areas: 
(1)  In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for all subdivision proposals and other proposed developments containing at least 30 lots or three acres, whichever is less. 
(2)  No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and new development shall be permitted within 100 feet of the stream bank unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  If subsection (1) is satisfied and base flood elevation data is available from other sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas shall comply with all applicable flood hazard ordinance provisions of article III and shall be elevated or floodproofed in accordance with elevations established in accordance with subsection 21-30(k). 
(4)  Data from preliminary, draft, and final flood insurance studies constitutes best available data. Refer to FEMA Floodplain Management Technical Bulletin 1-98 use of flood insurance study (FIS) data as available data. If an appeal is pending on the study in accordance with 44 CFR Ch. 1, Part 67.5 and 67.6, the data does not have to be used. 
(5)  When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available from a federal, state, or other source the lowest floor shall be elevated no lower than four feet above the highest adjacent grade. A higher lowest floor will be required if base flood elevation (BFE) data from adjacent areas indicate that four feet minimum may be inadequate to protect the structure and service facilities from flooding. One of the following methods may also be used to determine a base flood elevation when prepared by a S.C. registered engineer. For further information regarding the methods for determining BFEs listed below, refer to FEMA's manual Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas: 
a.  Contour interpolation. 
1.  Superimpose approximate zone A boundaries onto a topographic map and estimate a BFE. 
2.  Add one-half of the contour interval of the topographic map that is used to the BFE. 
b.  Data extrapolation. A BFE can be determined if a site within 500 feet upstream of a reach of a stream reach for which a 100-year profile has been computed by detailed methods, and the floodplain and channel bottom slope characteristics are relatively similar to the downstream reaches. No hydraulic structures shall be present. 
c.  Hydrologic and hydraulic calculations. Perform hydrologic and hydraulic calculations to determine BFEs using FEMA approved methods and software. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 2(Art. IV, § C), 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 21-44. - Standards for streams with established base flood elevations but without floodways. 
Along rivers and streams where base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway is identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in the FIS. 
(1)  No encroachments including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development shall be permitted unless certification with supporting technical data by a S.C. registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 2(Art. IV, § D), 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 21-45. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 21-4, are areas designated as shallow flooding. The following provisions shall apply within such areas: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor elevated to at least as high as the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall: 
a.  Have the lowest floor elevated to at least as high as the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade; or, 
b.  Be completely floodproofed together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is required as stated in section 21-29. 
(3)  All structures on slopes must have drainage paths around them to guide water away from the structures. 
(Ord. No. 771, § 2(Art. IV, § E), 7-21-2014)  
Chapter 22 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; civil emergencies, ch. 14; municipal court, ch. 24; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 26; authority of police for picketing, § 28-73; traffic and vehicles, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Municipal police officers, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-110. 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Composition of police department. 
The police force of the city shall consist of one chief of police and such numbers of police officers as, from time to time, the city council may deem necessary for the safety and good order of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 17-1)  
Sec. 22-2. - Swearing in; powers and duties generally. 
The police officers of the city shall be sworn in and thereupon, within the corporate limits and on all property owned or controlled by the city, wheresoever situated, shall be invested with all the powers and subject to all the duties conferred by law upon constables. 
(Code 1994, § 17-2)  
Sec. 22-3. - Special police officers. 
The mayor, upon any emergency or apprehension of mob tumult or riot, may appoint as many special police officers as necessary, to be paid such amounts as may be agreed on at the time of appointment. 
(Code 1994, § 17-3)  
Sec. 22-4. - Sending officers to other political subdivisions upon request. 
(a)  The city council or the mayor, upon the request of the governing body or mayor of any other political subdivision of the state, may send any law enforcement officers to assist the law enforcement officers of such requesting political subdivision in the performance of their duties in cases of emergency, when the governing body of such political subdivision may request the same. A complete record of the request, together with the names of the officers sent, shall be recorded in the minutes of the next regular or special meeting of the city council, whether officers are sent or received. Failure to record the request at the next regular or special meeting of the council does not affect the applicability of the tort liability coverage. Expenses of the requested services shall be borne by the requesting municipality. 
(b)  Such assistance shall be rendered only in emergencies, and such emergency shall be declared by the governing body of the requesting political subdivision. 
(c)  When law enforcement officers are sent to another political subdivision pursuant to this section, the jurisdiction, authority, rights, privileges and immunities, including coverage under the worker's compensation laws, S.C. Code 1976, tit. 42, and tort liability coverage obtained pursuant to S.C. Code 1976, tit. 15, which they have shall be extended to and include the area in which like benefits and authorities are or could be afforded to the law enforcement officers of the requesting political subdivision. When so sent, they shall have the same authority to make arrests and to execute criminal process as is vested by law in the law enforcement officers of the requesting political subdivision, but this section shall not extend the effect of the laws of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 17-4) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-120.  
Sec. 22-5. - Giving false name or address to officers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, when given a written promise to appear or given a written notice by any police officer to appear before the municipal court to answer for an offense against any law of the state, section of this Code or any other ordinance of the city, or during the course of any official investigation, to give an assumed or fictitious name or a false place of residence or address, or any other than his true name and the true place of his residence or address, upon the request of such officer. 
(Code 1994, § 17-5)  
Chapter 24 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; law enforcement, ch. 22; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 26; traffic and vehicles, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-5 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Established; state law adopted. 
The city hereby establishes a municipal court, which shall be a part of the unified judicial system of this state, for the trial and determination of all cases within the jurisdiction of this city. S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-5 et seq. is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated as a part of this chapter as fully as though set out in this section. 
(Code 1994, § 12-1)  
Sec. 24-2. - Powers of municipal judge. 
The municipal judge of the city shall have all the power and authority of magistrates in criminal cases within the corporate limits and police jurisdiction of the city and especially shall have the power and authority to try speedily all offenders against this Code or other ordinances or laws of the city in a summary manner and without a jury, unless demanded by the accused. 
(Code 1994, § 12-2)  
Sec. 24-3. - Power to try cases, compel attendance of witnesses. 
The municipal judge shall speedily try all persons charged with violations of this Code or other ordinances of the city or the laws of the state within his jurisdiction. The municipal judge shall have the same power as a magistrate to compel the attendance of witnesses and require them to give evidence upon the trial of any person for the violation of this Code or other ordinances of the city or the laws of the state, subject to S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-30. The judge shall have no jurisdiction in civil matters. 
(Code 1994, § 12-3) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-45.  
Sec. 24-4. - Clerk of court. 
A clerk of the municipal court shall be appointed by the city council to serve at the pleasure of the city council. The clerk of the municipal court shall keep such records and make such reports as may be determined by the state court administrator. 
(Code 1994, § 12-4) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-71 et seq. 
State Law reference— Appointment and duties of clerk of court, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-35.  
Sec. 24-5. - Duty to attend court when summoned, subpoenaed or otherwise directed to appear. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to attend a session of the municipal court to which he has been directed by ticket, summons or subpoena signed by a police officer, the municipal judge or other presiding officer of the municipal court, whether such person so ticketed, summoned or subpoenaed is directed to appear as a witness, defendant or otherwise. It shall also be unlawful for any person under bond to appear before such court, at a time therein stated, to fail or refuse to so appear. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to attend or appear in the municipal court when ordered or directed so to do by the municipal judge or other presiding officer of such court when such order or directive has been given to such person in open court, whether such order or directive is in writing or verbal. The municipal judge or other presiding officer of the municipal court may excuse any person so ticketed, summoned, subpoenaed, ordered, directed or bound over from attending such court by general order of the court or otherwise as he, in his discretion, deems appropriate. 
(Code 1994, § 12-5)  
Sec. 24-6. - Appeals to court of general sessions. 
From all decisions of the municipal court, any party in interest, feeling himself aggrieved, may appeal to the court of general sessions for the county; provided, however, that he must give notice of such appeal in writing within ten days from the time of sentence or judgment. The appeal shall not operate to stay the execution of the sentence, unless the appellant gives bond, to be approved by the municipal judge, conditioned to abide the judgment of the court of general sessions or pay the fine assessed by the court. Payment of the fine imposed will in no case waive the right of appeal for ten days following payment. Such appeal in the court of general sessions shall be heard upon the report of the presiding officer of the trial below and upon the testimony reported by him. 
(Code 1994, § 12-6) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-95.  
Sec. 24-7. - Municipal judge; appointment; qualifications; term. 
The city council shall appoint a lawyer of good and reputable standing who is a member of the South Carolina Bar as a municipal judge for the municipal court. The attorney shall have at least two years' experience at the bar. The attorney shall hold office for two years or until his successor is appointed and qualified. The municipal judge shall not be considered an officer of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 12-7) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-71 et seq.  
Secs. 24-8—24-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 24-41. - Authority to compel attendance of witnesses. 
The municipal judge has the same power which a magistrate now has to compel the attendance of witnesses and require them to give evidence upon the trial before them of any person for violation of the laws or the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 12-31)  
Sec. 24-42. - Recording testimony in jury trials. 
Any party shall have the right to have the testimony given at a jury trial taken stenographically or mechanically by a reporter. The requesting party shall pay the charges of such reporter for taking and transcribing if such testimony is recorded by a court reporter. 
(Code 1994, § 12-32) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-195.  
Sec. 24-43. - Proceedings to be commenced by information. 
All proceedings before the municipal judge in criminal cases shall be commenced on information under oath, plainly and substantially setting forth the offense charged, upon which, and only which, shall a warrant of arrest issue. The information may be amended at any time before trial. 
(Code 1994, § 12-33)  
Secs. 24-44—24-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PENALTY ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 24-81. - Imposition of penalties. 
Whenever the municipal judge shall find the party tried before him guilty of violating any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the city, he may impose, in his discretion, a fine or imprisonment not to exceed the limits prescribed for such violation by such provision of this Code or other ordinance or, where a specific penalty for such violation is not provided, not to exceed those limits provided by section 1-6; provided, however, that such provisions of this Code or other ordinances, rules, bylaws or regulations are not contrary to the laws of the state. 
(Code 1994, § 12-56)  
Sec. 24-82. - Execution to sheriff to collect fines. 
The municipal judge may issue execution to the sheriff of the county or the police chief for the collection of all fines imposed by him. 
(Code 1994, § 12-57)  
Sec. 24-83. - Fines to go to city. 
All revenues arising from all fines imposed pursuant to this article shall be appropriated to the use of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 12-58) 
State Law reference— Disposition of fines and penalties, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-85.  
Secs. 24-84—24-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - JURIES 
 
Sec. 24-111. - Right to jury trial. 
Any person to be tried in municipal court may, prior to trial, demand a jury trial, and such jury when demanded shall be composed of six persons drawn from the qualified electors of the city in the manner prescribed in this article. The right to a jury trial shall be deemed to have been waived unless demand is made prior to trial. 
(Code 1994, § 12-81) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-125.  
Sec. 24-112. - Service on juries limited to two times per year. 
No person shall be required to serve on a jury in the municipal court more often than two times in each year. 
(Code 1994, § 12-82)  
Sec. 24-113. - Failure to obey jury summons. 
If any juror, duly summoned, shall neglect or refuse to appear in obedience to any venire issued by the municipal court and shall not, within 48 hours, render to the municipal judge a sufficient reason for his delinquency, he may be punished for contempt of court. 
(Code 1994, § 12-83) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-185.  
Sec. 24-114. - Jury commissioners. 
Jury commissioners shall be appointed in accordance with S.C. Code 1976, §§ 14-25-135 and 14-25-145. 
(Code 1994, § 12-84)  
Sec. 24-115. - Drawing of jury list; selection of jury from list. 
The drawing and composing of juries for single trials or terms of the municipal court shall be conducted, mutatis mutandi, according to the statutes relating to the drawing and composing of juries in magistrates' court, except as otherwise specifically provided by state law. 
(Code 1994, § 12-85) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-155.  
Sec. 24-116. - Drawing and summoning jurors by computer. 
In lieu of the manner required by this article, jurors for municipal courts, at the discretion of the city council, may be drawn and summoned by computer in the manner the supreme court, by order, directs. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-170.  
Sec. 24-117. - Essential service to business excuse. 
Upon furnishing an affidavit to the clerk of court requesting to be excused from jury duty, a person either may be excused or transferred to another term of court by the municipal judge if the person performs services for a business, commercial, or agricultural enterprise, and the person's services are so essential to the operations of the business, commercial, or agricultural enterprise that the enterprise must close or cease to function if the person is required to perform jury duty. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 14-25-180.  
Chapter 26 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Law enforcement, ch. 22; municipal court, ch. 24; traffic and vehicles, ch. 38. 
State Law reference— Crimes and offenses, S.C. Code 1976, tit. 16. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Fortunetelling, palmistry, and other forms of predicting future events. 
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business, trade or profession of fortunetelling, palmistry, phrenology, clairvoyance or the prediction of future events by cards or other means or to offer to tell fortunes or predict future events by palmistry, astrology, clairvoyance, cards or other means as an inducement to promote some other business, trade or profession. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Code 1994, § 14-1) 
State Law reference— Fortunetelling, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-17-690.  
Sec. 26-2. - Advertisements. 
(a)  Placing on public property. It shall be unlawful to place any advertisement, business, political or otherwise, or any notice or sign of any nature on public property within the city, by the use of a placard, picture, paper, circular or painting or by any means or device whatsoever. 
(b)  Placing on property in which city has interest. It shall be unlawful to place any advertisement, business, political or otherwise, or any notice or sign of any nature on property in which the city has an interest or which the city has the right to regulate, such as a telephone pole, telegraph pole, electric pole or tower and the like. 
(c)  Placing on private property. It shall be unlawful to place any advertisement, business, political or otherwise, or any notice or sign of any nature on private property within the city, without written consent of the owner or lessee of the property. 
(Code 1994, § 14-3)  
Sec. 26-3. - Discharge of firearms within city. 
No person shall discharge any firearm within the city except by permission of the chief of police, granted for special occasions, except in proper position for firing salutes or by command of a proper military or police officer in the performance of official duty, or in a licensed shooting range or gallery. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 9-25-2000) 
Cross reference— Firing pistols or guns in cemeteries, § 12-4.  
Sec. 26-4. - Casting dangerous object on to the property of others. 
No person shall discharge, fire, cast, or sling any arrow or other dangerous object, which might cause bodily harm to another person, onto or across the property of another person, without permission of the other property owner. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 2, 9-25-2000)  
Secs. 26-5—26-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Offenses against property, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-11-10 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-31. - Altering, removing, cutting landmarks. 
If any person shall knowingly, willfully, maliciously or fraudulently cut, fell, alter or remove any certain boundary tree or other allowed landmark, such person so offending shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Code 1994, § 14-31) 
State Law reference— Altering and removing landmarks, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-11-680.  
Secs. 26-32—26-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GRAFFITI 
 
Sec. 26-41. - Graffiti prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to either: 
(1)  Apply graffiti; or 
(2)  Attempt to apply graffiti; or 
(3)  Conspire to apply graffiti; or 
(4)  Solicit or command another person to apply graffiti; or 
(5)  Aid or abet another person in planning or applying graffiti to any public or private property, real or personal. 
(Ord. No. 674, 4-21-2008)  
Sec. 26-42. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the content clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, glued or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by any means whatsoever to the extend tot the graffiti was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of the property, or despite advance authorization, is otherwise deemed a public nuisance by council. 
Person means any individual, partnership, corporative association private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee or any other legal entity. 
(Ord. No. 674, 4-21-2008)  
Sec. 26-43. - Penalties. 
(a)  Fines and imprisonment. Any person violating this article shall be punished by a fine up to $500.00, or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days, or both by fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court. 
(b)  Restitution. In addition to any punishment specified in this section, the court shall order any violator to make restitution to the victim for damages or loss directly or indirectly by the violator's offense in the amount or manner determined by the court. 
(c)  Community service. In lieu of, or as part of, the penalties specified in this section, a minor or adult may be required to perform community service. Reasonable effort shall be made to assign the minor or adult to a type of community service that is reasonable expected to have the most rehabilitative effect on the minor or adult, including community service that involves graffiti removal. 
(Ord. No. 674, 4-21-2008)  
Sec 26-44. - Graffiti as nuisance. 
(a)  The existence of graffiti on public or private property in violation of this article is expressly declared to be a public nuisance and, therefore, is subject to the removal and abatement provisions specified in this article. 
(b)  It is the duty of both the owner of the property to which the graffiti has been applied and any person who may be in position or who has the right to possess such property to at all times keep the property clear of graffiti. 
(Ord. No. 674, 4-21-2008)  
Sec. 26-45. - Removal of graffiti by perpetrator. 
Any person applying graffiti on public or private property shall have the duty to remove the graffiti within 24 hours after notice by the city or private owner of the property involved. Such removal shall be done in a manner prescribed by the chief of police, the director of the department of public works, or any additional city department head, as authorized by city council. Any person applying graffiti shall be responsible for the removal or for the payment of the removal. Failure of any person to remove graffiti or pay for the removal shall constitute an additional violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 674, 4-21-2008)  
Sec. 26-46. - Same—By property owner or city. 
If graffiti is not removed by the perpetrator according to section 26-45, graffiti shall be removed pursuant to the following provisions: 
(1)  Property owner responsibility. It is unlawful for any person who is the owner or who has primary responsibility for control of property or for repair or maintenance of property in the city to permit property that is defaced with graffiti to remain defaced for a period of ten days after service by first class mail of notice of the defacement. The notice shall contain the following information: 
a.  The street address and legal description of the property sufficient for identification of the property; 
b.  A statement that the property is a potential graffiti nuisance property with a concise description of the conditions leading to the finding; 
c.  A statement that the graffiti must be removed within ten days after receipt of the notice and that if the graffiti is not abated within that time the city will declare the property to be a public nuisance; 
d.  An information sheet identifying any graffiti removal assistance programs available through the city and private graffiti removal contractors. 
(2)  Exceptions to property owner responsibility. The removal requirements of subsection (a) above shall not apply if the property owner or responsibly party can demonstrate that: 
a.  The property owner or responsible party lacks the financial ability to remove the defacing graffiti or is actively engaged in actions to remove the graffiti, or 
b.  The property owner or responsible party has an active program for the removal of the graffiti and has scheduled the removal of the graffiti as part of that program, in which case it shall be unlawful to permit such property to remain defaced with graffiti for a period of 15 days after service by first class mail of notice of the defacement. 
(3)  Right of city to remove. 
a.  Use of public funds. Whenever the city becomes aware or is notified and determined that graffiti is located on publicly or privately owned property viewable from a public or quasi-public place, the city shall be authorized to use public funds for the removal of the graffiti, or for the painting or repairing of the graffiti, but shall not authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extended an area than that where the graffiti is located, unless the city administrator or other designee of the city administrator, determined in writing that a more extensive area is required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid an aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless the property owner or responsible party agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the more extended area. 
b.  Right of entry on private property. Prior to entering upon private property or property owned by a public entity other than the city for the purpose of graffiti removal, the city shall attempt to secure the consent of the property owner or responsible party and a release of the city for liability for property damage or personal injury. 
(Ord. No. 674, 4-21-2008)  
Secs. 26-47—26-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Offenses against the public peace, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-7-10 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-61. - Disruption of court or council. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to interrupt the proceedings of the municipal court or city council, or any meeting of the city council, or be guilty of disorderly conduct therein, or to commit any contempt of either. Every person found guilty and sentenced for a contempt shall be entitled to the right of appeal as is provided for by state law in appeals from the courts of municipalities and councils. 
(Code 1994, § 14-51)  
Secs. 26-62—26-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 
 
Sec. 26-91. - Abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators, or other airtight containers. 
Any person who abandons or discards any icebox, refrigerator, ice chest or other type of airtight container of a capacity sufficient to contain any child and who neglects prior to such abandonment to remove the door, lid or other device for the closing thereof, and any owner, lessee or other person in charge of property who knowingly permits any abandoned icebox, refrigerator, ice chest or other type of airtight container to remain thereon accessible to children without removing the door, lid or other closing device therefrom, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Code 1994, § 14-91) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-3-1010.  
Sec. 26-92. - Closure of abandoned wells. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or tenant to permit or allow any abandoned well to remain open and unprotected, curbed or fenced in on any place or premises owned or occupied in the city. Any person convicted of allowing any such abandoned well to remain open and unprotected, curbed or fenced in shall be punished in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Code 1994, § 14-92) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-3-1020.  
Sec. 26-93. - Discharging air rifles, slingshots, bows and arrows, or other dangerous devices. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge or fire any air rifle, slingshot, bow and arrow or other dangerous device on any public property within the city including, but not limited to, parks, sidewalks or streets, or near any public building, school, church, hospital or in any other public area where the firing or discharge of such device would tend to disturb the peace or endanger the life or property of any person. 
(Code 1994, § 14-93)  
Sec. 26-94. - Fences and gates; removing, destroying, leaving down. 
Any person, other than the owner, who shall remove, destroy or leave down any portion of any fence in the city intended to enclose animals of any kind or crops or cultivated lands, or who shall leave open any gate or leave down any bars or other structure intended for a like purpose, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Code 1994, § 14-94)  
Sec. 26-95. - Pointing firearms at other persons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to present or point at any other person any loaded or unloaded firearm, and upon conviction therefor, any such person shall be punished by fine or imprisonment. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to abridge the right of self-defense or to apply to theatricals or like performances. 
(Code 1994, § 14-96) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-23-410.  
Sec. 26-96. - Electric fences. 
Electric fences are prohibited in the city. Any device consisting of an electrically charged conductor or device intended to enclose, exclude, or resist persons or animals by electrical shock shall not be installed or used, regardless of the source of energy; however, this section shall not apply to "invisible fences" for animals. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 14-97, 12-20-1999)  
Sec. 26-97. - Resisting a stop by police; interfering with a law enforcement officer. 
It is unlawful for any person to resist or interfere with any law enforcement officer by any means including, but not limited to, flight, force, or threat of force, while the officer is performing official duties. Except as provided by law, it is not a defense to prosecution under this section that the offender believed the action of the officer was unlawful or unreasonable. Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 10-15-2001)  
Secs. 26-98—26-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Offenses against morality and decency, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-15-10 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-131. - Gambling. 
(a)  Frequenting house or place for purpose of. It shall be unlawful for any person to indulge or play in any house or place in the city for the purpose of gambling in any form or permitting persons to resort in such location for such purpose. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Playing at games in which betting is involved; betting on other persons. It shall be unlawful for any person to play at any game with cards or dice, or by any other means or instruments in the city, when there is betting in such game, or for any person to bet on the side of hands of such as do play, whether the players are betting or not. 
(Code 1994, §§ 14-116, 14-117)  
Secs. 26-132—26-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FALSE ALARMS 
 
Sec. 26-161. - Findings. 
The mayor and city council find that the police and fire departments are spending a considerable amount of time each year responding to false alarms. Such time represents not only a loss of valuable staff hours and needless expense to the city, but also may delay the response of police or fire personnel to a true emergency. Therefore, the mayor and city council find it necessary and appropriate to adopt an ordinance that encourages alarm users to properly use and maintain the operational effectiveness of alarm systems and to reduce or eliminate false alarms that may unduly divert emergency personnel from responding to true emergencies. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 14-130, 10-15-2001; Ord. of 9-17-2007)  
Sec. 26-162. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm administrator means a person or persons designated by the city administrator to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts. 
Alarm company means the business, by an individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing or monitoring an alarm system in an alarm site. 
Alarm dispatch request means a notification to the police or fire departments that an alarm, either manual or automatic has been activated at a particular alarm site. 
Alarm registration means the notification by an alarm user to the alarm administrator that an alarm system has been installed and is in use. 
Alarm site means a single fixed premise or location served by an alarm system or systems. Each tenancy if served by a separate alarm system in a multitenant building or complex shall be considered a separate alarm site. 
Alarm system means a device or series of devices, including, but not limited to, systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular or private radio signals, which emit or transmit a remote or local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition and intended to summon police or fire service of the City of Mauldin. Alarm system does not include an alarm installed on a vehicle or person. 
Alarm user means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity that uses or is in control of any alarm system at its alarm site. 
Cancellation is the process by which an alarm company providing monitoring service or an alarm user verifies that a false dispatch has occurred and that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site that requires a police or fire response. 
Catastrophic event means those acts or events, whether natural or manmade, outside the control of an alarm user that causes false alarms at four or more separate alarm sites within a continuous 30-minute period of time. A catastrophic event may include, but not limited to, acts of nature such as storms and high winds or electrical power surges. 
Conversion means the transaction or process by which one alarm company begins the monitoring of a previously unmonitored alarm system or an alarm system previously monitored by another alarm company. 
Duress alarm means a silent alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening situation or a serious crime in progress requiring a law enforcement response. 
False alarm means the willful, intentional or unintentional activation of any alarm system causing an alarm dispatch request of police or fire personnel at a time when there is no evidence of criminal activity having been committed or attempted, or no fire or other emergency exists at the alarm site. False alarm also includes an alarm system activation due to an equipment malfunction, improper installation or maintenance of equipment or for any other cause within the alarm users control. False alarms shall not include alarm activations caused by catastrophic events outside the control of alarm users. 
Fire alarm means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, designed to signal the occurrence of a fire, smoke, water flow, or other condition to which the fire department may be reasonably expected to respond. 
Holdup alarm means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress. 
Mobile security device (telematic) means a pushbutton panic alarm device mounted in a vehicle or a portable unit using two-way wireless communications and global positioning satellite (GPS) technology to summon an emergency response from police or fire personnel. 
Monitoring means the process by which an alarm company receives signals from an alarm system and relays an alarm dispatch request to the municipality for the purpose of summoning a police or fire response to an alarm site. 
One plus duress alarm means the manual activation of a signal by entering at a keypad a code that adds one to the last digit of the normal arm/disarm code (normal code 1234 one plus duress code 1235). 
Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization, or similar entity. 
Takeover means the transaction or process by which an alarm user assumes control of an existing alarm system that was previously controlled by another alarm user. 
Verify means an attempt, by the alarm company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site by any means, whether or not actual contact with an alarm user is made, before initiating an alarm dispatch request, in an attempt to avoid a false alarm. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 14-131, 10-15-2001; Ord. of 9-17-2007) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-163. - Alarm registration. 
(a)  No alarm user may have or maintain on any premises, except a vehicle, an alarm system unless the person has registered the alarm system with the alarm administrator. A separate alarm registration is required for each alarm site. The alarm administrator is authorized to charge a nominal one-time registration fee as set forth by city council and on file in the city clerk's office. Additional registration fees may only be charged if the alarm user adds additional alarm sites, or there is a change in the alarm user at a given alarm site. The information on the registration will be made available to the emergency dispatch office to enable them to properly administer this article and to assist police and fire personnel in their response to an alarm site. 
(b)  The alarm registration application and appropriate fee must be submitted to the alarm administrator within ten days after the alarm installation or alarm takeover. For alarm systems in service before the passage of this article, the alarm registration fee must be submitted to the alarm administrator within 30 days after the passage of this article. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a completed application form and the alarm registration fee, the alarm administrator shall register the applicant unless the applicant has failed to pay a fine or fee assessed under this article or the alarm registration for the alarm site is suspended or revoked. 
(d)  Each alarm registration application must include the following information: 
(1)  The name, complete mailing address, and telephone numbers of the person who will be the registered holder and responsible person for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and responsible for fees or fines assessed under this article; 
(2)  The alarm site address (including apt/suite #), alarm site telephone numbers, the name of the alarm user; 
(3)  The classification of the alarm site as either residential (includes condominium, townhouse, manufactured home, etc), commercial, or apartment; 
(4)  The purpose of the alarm system at the alarm site classified as burglar, duress, fire, and/or other, and for each purpose whether the alarm is audible and/or silent; 
(5)  Any dangerous or special conditions present at the alarm site that may endanger emergency response personnel such as animals, chemicals, etc.; 
(6)  Name and telephone numbers of at least two individuals who are able to receive notification of an alarm activation at any time and willing to respond to the alarm site and can grant access to the alarm site and deactivate the alarm system if necessary; 
(7)  Type of business conducted at the alarm site if applicable; 
(8)  The date of installation, conversion, or takeover of the alarm system and name, address, and phone number of the alarm company responsible for the alarm system; 
(9)  The name, address, and phone number of the company monitoring the alarm system if different from the alarm company; 
(10)  The signature and date of the person responsible for the alarm system indicating that they have read and understand this ordinance, that they agree to notify the alarm administrator of any change that alters any information provided on the registration application within ten days of the change, and that they understand that police and fire response may be based on factors such as: availability of police and fire units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels, and other factors. 
(e)  Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm registration shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a registration. 
(f)  An alarm registration cannot be transferred to another person or alarm site and no alarm registration fee shall be waived or refunded. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 14-132, 10-15-2001; Ord. of 9-17-2007)  
Sec. 26-164. - Alarm user responsibilities. 
(a)  An alarm user shall: 
(1)  Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarms; and 
(2)  Make every reasonable effort to respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm site within 30 minutes when notified by the municipality to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide access to the premises, or to provide alternative security for the premises. If the alarm dispatch request is for a fire alarm, the alarm user or representative must be able to respond to the alarm site within 15 minutes or if unable to do so a commercial business must provide a knox box at the alarm site containing keys to the business; and 
(3)  Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report; and 
(4)  Have an alarm system with a fire alarm feature monitored by an alarm company; and 
(5)  Display the registered fire alarm sticker issued by the alarm administrator on the front door or in close proximity of the door at the alarm site. 
(b)  An alarm user shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal audible on the exterior of an alarm site will sound for no longer than 15 minutes after being activated. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 14-133, 10-15-2001; Ord. of 9-17-2007)  
Sec. 26-165. - Alarm company responsibilities. 
(a)  Upon enactment of this article alarm companies shall not program alarm systems so that they are capable of sending one plus duress alarms. Alarm companies may continue to report one plus duress alarms received from alarm systems programmed with this feature prior to the enactment of this article. However, upon enactment of this article when a takeover or conversion occurs or if an alarm user requests an alarm system inspection or modification, an alarm company must remove the one plus duress alarm capability from such alarm system. 
(b)  Upon enactment of this article alarm companies shall not install a device activating a holdup alarm which is a single action nonrecessed button. An alarm company must remove all single action nonrecessed buttons when a takeover or conversion occurs. 
(c)  Upon enactment of this article alarm companies shall use control panels tested for conformance to the Security Industry Association (SIA) Control Panel Standard—Features for False Alarm Reduction. 
(d)  Upon enactment of this article alarm companies shall install all alarm systems in compliance with all building and fire codes adopted by the City of Mauldin and NFPA 72. 
(e)  An alarm company performing monitoring services shall: 
(1)  Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers designated by the alarm administrator; and 
(2)  Attempt to verify every alarm signal, except a duress, holdup or fire alarm activation, before initiating an alarm dispatch request; and 
(3)  Communicate to the emergency dispatcher the type of alarm activation (burglar, fire, duress, holdup, mobile security device, telematic) and (silent, audible, automatic, interior or perimeter); and 
(4)  Communicate specific information about the location of the alarm activation (north, south, front, back, floor, ceiling, etc...); and 
(5)  Communicate any additional information to the emergency dispatcher as may be needed to insure an adequate response by emergency personnel; and 
(6)  Endeavor to contact the alarm user when an alarm dispatch request is made; and 
(7)  Ensure that the alarm user has received adequate training on the proper use of the alarm system; and 
(8)  Provide the alarm administrator with a written list containing the names, mailing addresses, alarm site addresses and telephone numbers of all persons for whom monitoring service is provided at the beginning of each calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 14-134, 10-15-2001; Ord. of 9-17-2007)  
Sec. 26-166. - Alarm administrator responsibilities. 
The alarm administrator shall: 
(1)  Designate the manner, form and telephone numbers for the communication of alarm dispatch requests; 
(2)  Establish a procedure to accept cancellation of alarm dispatch requests; 
(3)  Establish a procedure to record such information on alarm dispatch requests necessary to permit the alarm administrator to maintain records, including, but not limited to, the following information. This information may be relayed by the responding police or fire personnel at the time of clearance to emergency dispatchers, who will then record said information on the call record. 
a.  Identification of the alarm site; 
b.  Date and time the alarm dispatch was received; 
c.  Case number; 
d.  Responding officer; 
e.  If emergency contact was made and if a representative of the alarm user responded; 
f.  Disposition (unfounded/founded/catastrophic event); 
(4)  Establish a procedure for notification to the alarm user after the third false alarm at the alarm site in a (fiscal) year. The written notice mailed to the billing address of the responsible person shall include the following: 
a.  The date and time the alarm dispatches occurred; 
b.  If emergency contact was made; 
c.  The case number; 
d.  A statement urging the alarm user to insure that the alarm system is properly operated, inspected, and serviced in order to avoid false alarms and resulting fees; 
(Ord. No. 549, § 14-135, 10-15-2001; Ord. of 9-17-2007)  
Sec. 26-167. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No alarm user may cause or allow more than three false alarms leading to an alarm dispatch request to occur (during any fiscal year) at any single alarm site. False alarms shall not include alarm activations caused by catastrophic events. 
(b)  No alarm user shall fail to register an alarm system as prescribed in section 26-163. 
(c)  No alarm user shall operate an alarm system at an alarm site that the alarm administrator has suspended alarm response. 
(d)  No Person shall willfully violate any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 14-136, 10-15-2001; Ord. of 9-17-2007)  
Sec. 26-168. - Notification. 
(a)  The responsible person who signed the alarm registration application will be notified in writing after the third false alarm (during any fiscal year), and shall include the information required in section 26-166(4). 
(b)  The responsible person who signed the alarm registration application will be notified in writing, by certified mail, after the sixth false alarm (during any fiscal year) that alarm response has been suspended. This notice of suspension will include the amount of fees due and a description of the appeals procedure available to the alarm user. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 14-137, 10-15-2001; Ord. of 9-17-2007)  
Sec. 26-169. - Fees. 
An administration fee shall be imposed upon the responsible person who signed the alarm registration application or the alarm user for each false alarm in excess of the limits set forth in section 26-167. This fee shall be paid in full within 30 days after the alarm administrator makes billing notification. Fees shall be as determined by the city council periodically and on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 14-138, 10-15-2001; Ord. of 9-17-2007)  
Sec. 26-170. - Penalties. 
Any person willfully violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 14-139, 10-15-2001; Ord. of 9-17-2007)  
Sec. 26-171. - Suspension of response. 
(a)  The alarm administrator may suspend alarm response if it is determined that: 
(1)  The alarm user has six or more false alarms (during any fiscal year); or 
(2)  There is a false statement of a material fact in the application for a registration; or 
(3)  The alarm user failed to register the alarm site; or 
(4)  The alarm user has failed to make a timely payment of a fee assessed under this article. 
(b)  The alarm administrator shall not suspend alarm response to an alarm site when the alarm monitoring company indicates that the alarm dispatch request is for a duress alarm or fire alarm. 
(c)  If the alarm registration is reinstated pursuant to section 26-173, the alarm administrator may suspend alarm response if it is determined that two false alarms have occurred within 60 days after the reinstatement date. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 14-140, 10-15-2001; Ord. of 9-17-2007)  
Sec. 26-172. - Appeals. 
(a)  An alarm user may appeal the assessment of a fee, suspension, or request reinstatement to the alarm administrator. The filing of an appeal with the alarm administrator or city administrator stays the assessment of the administrative fee or suspension until the appeal process is exhausted. 
The alarm user shall file a written appeal to the alarm administrator by setting forth the reasons for the appeal within ten days after notification by the alarm administrator of the fees due. If an appeal is not made within the ten day period, the action of the alarm administrator is final. 
If the alarm administrator denies the waiver of fees, issuance or renewal of an alarm registration, or suspends response, the alarm administrator shall send written notice of the action and a statement of the right to appeal. 
(b)  A second level of appeal is available to the city administrator for cases in which the alarm user is not satisfied with the decision reached by the alarm administrator. 
The alarm user may appeal the decision of the alarm administrator by setting forth the reasons for the appeal within 20 days after receiving the decision of the alarm administrator. If an appeal is not made within the 20-day period, the action of the alarm administrator is final. 
The city administrator must render a decision within ten working days after having reviewed the appeal and shall inform the alarm user in writing of the decision. The city administrator may affirm or reverse the decision of the alarm administrator in whole or part after considering any relevant information in regards to the appeal. The decision of the city administrator is final as to administrative remedy available to the alarm user. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 14-141, 10-15-2001; Ord. of 9-17-2007)  
Sec. 26-173. - Reinstatement. 
An Alarm user whose alarm response has been suspended may have alarm response reinstated by the alarm administrator if the person has met the following conditions: 
(1)  Has submitted an updated application and a reinstatement fee as determined by city council and on file in the city clerk's office; and 
(2)  Has paid, or otherwise resolved, all criminal citations and/or administrative fees; and 
(3)  Has provided the alarm administrator with certification from a properly licensed alarm company that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired if necessary; and 
(4)  Has provided the alarm administrator with a completed customer false alarm prevention checklist furnished by the alarm administrator and answers all statements in the affirmative. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 14-142, 10-15-2001; Ord. of 9-17-2007)  
Sec. 26-174. - Response to mobile security devices. 
If an alarm dispatch request is initiated from a mobil security device where there is no separate indication that a crime is in progress, emergency personnel will not be dispatched to the location of the alarm activation. 
(Ord. No. 549, 14-143, 10-15-2001; Ord. of 9-17-2007)  
Sec. 26-175. - Confidentiality. 
All employees or representatives of the municipality shall hold information contained in registration application and applications for appeals in confidence. No information obtained from the registration application may be released to any third party, except by a court order or subpoena from court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 14-144, 10-15-2001; Ord. of 9-17-2007)  
Sec. 26-176. - Government immunity. 
Registration of an alarm system is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, for response. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By registering an alarm system, the alarm user acknowledges that police response may be based on factors such as: Availability of police and/or fire units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, staffing levels and other factors. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 14-145, 10-15-2001; Ord. of 9-17-2007)  
Chapter 28 - PARADES, PICKETING AND DEMONSTRATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate parades and assemblages on highways, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-710(3). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 28-1—28-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARADES, PROCESSIONS AND MEETINGS 
 
Sec. 28-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Meeting means any assembly together or concert of action between or among three or more persons for the purpose of protesting any matter or of making known any position or promotion of such persons, or on behalf of any organization or class of persons, or for the purpose of attracting attention to such assembly. 
Parade and procession mean any assemblage of three or more persons participating in, or three or more vehicles being operated in, any march, ceremony, show, exhibition or procession of any kind in or upon the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks or other public grounds or places, not including a bona fide funeral procession. 
(Code 1994, § 15-26) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 28-32. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. No procession or parade shall occupy, march or proceed along any street, sidewalk or any other public place, nor shall any person conduct any public or private meeting on any street, sidewalk or other public place in the city, except in accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police and such other regulations as are set forth in this article which may apply. 
(b)  Application; authority of police chief to designate route. A written application shall be made to the chief of police by any person desiring to have a parade, procession or meeting, setting forth the object, time, place and route of the parade or procession, or the object, time and place of the meeting. The chief of police shall have authority to designate the route of the parade or procession and the portion of the streets or other public places to be used in such a way as to avoid as much as possible the obstruction or impediment of public travel or public business. The chief of police may refuse to issue a permit for a parade, procession or meeting, unless application therefor is filed with him at least ten days before the time thereof. In the absence of the chief of police, the ranking officer of the police department present shall act in his name and stead. 
(Code 1994, §§ 15-27, 15-28)  
Sec. 28-33. - Restricted hours. 
No parade shall be permitted between the hours of 11:30 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. or between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., local time, and no parade or procession shall commence or continue after sunset or commence before sunrise. 
(Code 1994, § 15-29)  
Sec. 28-34. - Interfering with, addressing abusive language to participants. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to physically interfere with processions, marches or meetings, or with the persons lawfully engaged therein in the use of any street, sidewalk or other public place, or to address profane, indecent, abusive or threatening language or other fighting words to or at such participants, which would tend to provoke such participants or others to a breach of the peace. 
(Code 1994, § 15-30)  
Sec. 28-35. - Conduct. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or participate in any parade, procession or meeting of such character, extent and duration, or of such nature, as to create a public disturbance, to operate as a nuisance or to tend to create or threaten rioting, disorderly conduct or public or private mischief. 
(b)  Abusive or threatening language by participants. It shall be unlawful for any person conducting or participating in any parade, procession or meeting to address abusive or threatening language or other fighting words to or at any person, which would tend to provoke such person or others to a breach of the peace. 
(Code 1994, §§ 15-31, 15-32)  
Secs. 28-36—28-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PICKETING 
 
Sec. 28-71. - Permitted; conditions. 
Peaceful picketing, including demonstrating, in the furtherance of a lawful purpose shall be permitted in the city, provided that the same is done under the following conditions: 
(1)  Picketing shall be conducted only on the sidewalks or other city-owned area normally used or reserved for pedestrian movement, including easements and rights-of-way, and shall not be conducted on the portion of a street used primarily for vehicular traffic. 
(2)  Not more than ten picketers promoting the same objective shall be permitted to use the sidewalks within one block in the city at any one time. 
(3)  Such picketers may carry written or printed placards or signs not exceeding two feet in width and two feet in height promoting the objective for which the picketing is done; provided that the words used are not defamatory in nature and would not tend to produce violence. The staff on which such placard is carried shall not exceed 40 inches in length, must be made of wood, shall not exceed three-fourths of an inch in diameter at any point and must be blunt at each end. 
(4)  Picketers must march in single file and not abreast and may not march closer together than 15 feet, except in passing one another. 
(5)  If picketers promoting different objectives desire to use the same sidewalk for picketing and such use would result in the presence of more than ten picketers thereon, the chief of police shall allot time to each group of picketers for the use of such sidewalk on an equitable basis, but each group shall be permitted to picket subject to the provisions of this section at least once every two hours. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful for any picketers to address abusive or threatening language to or at any person, which would tend to provoke such person or others to a breach of the peace. 
(Code 1994, § 15-56)  
Sec. 28-72. - Interference with pickets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to physically interfere with pickets in the use of the sidewalk or to address profane, indecent, abusive or threatening language to or at such picketers, which would tend to provoke such picketers or others to a breach of the peace. 
(Code 1994, § 15-57)  
Sec. 28-73. - Authority of police. 
The police officers of the city may, in the event of the assemblage of persons in such numbers as to tend to intimidate picketers pursuing their lawful objective, through numbers alone or through the use of inflammatory words, direct the dispersal of persons so assembled and may arrest any person who fails to absent himself from the place of such assemblage when so directed by the police. 
(Code 1994, § 15-58) 
Cross reference— Law enforcement, ch. 22.  
Sec. 28-74. - Maintenance of free passage. 
Whenever the free passage of any street or sidewalk in the city shall be obstructed by a crowd, the persons composing such crowd shall disperse or move on when so directed by a police officer as provided in section 28-73. 
(Code 1994, § 15-59)  
Secs. 28-75—28-100. - Reserved.  
Article IV. - Begging 
 
Sec. 28-101. - Definitions. 
(a)  Definitions. The following definitions apply for purposes of this section: 
Beg means to solicit, request or ask for money or other good and benefits as a charity, whether done by words, bodily gestures, signs or any other means. 
Charitable organizations means those organizations and their members who are defined by S.C. Code § 33-56-170(1) ( charitable organization means any organization, institution, association, society or corporation which is exempt from taxation pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) or 501(d) of Title 26 of the United States.). 
Charitable purposes means those purposes defined by S.C. Code § 33-56-20(2) ( charitable purposes means a purpose described in Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code or a benevolent, social welfare, scientific, educational, environmental, philanthropic, humane, patriotic, public health, civic or other eleemosynary objective, including an objective of an organization of law enforcement personnel, firefighters or other person who protect the public safety if a stated purpose of the solicitations includes a benefit to a person outside the actual service of membership of the organization.). 
Obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic means to walk, stand, sit, lie or place an object in such a manner as to block passage by another person or a vehicle, or to require another persons or a driver of a vehicle to take evasive action to avoid physical contact. Acts authorized as an exercise of one's constitutional right to picket or to legally protest, and acts authorized by a permit issued pursuant to parades as defined in article II, shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
Public place means an area generally visible to public view and includes alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, plazas, sidewalks and streets open to the general public, including those that serve food or drink or prodwellings and the grounds enclosing them. 
(b)  Prohibited acts means it shall be unlawful for any person within the city in any public place to: 
(1)  Beg; or 
(2)  Obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic while engaging in begging activities. 
(c)  Exemption for charitable organizations soliciting charitable funds for charitable purposes. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, it shall not be unlawful for a charitable organization to solicit charitable funds for charitable purposes, provided they do so in a reasonable and orderly manner, and without obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic in any public place. 
(Ord. No. 677, 6-16-2008)  
Chapter 30 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Dogs permitted in public parks, § 6-57; environment, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36; vegetation, ch. 42. 
State Law reference— Municipal parks, recreational facilities, S.C. Code 1976, § 51-15-10 et seq. 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Dogs permitted in public parks. 
Dogs shall be permitted during park hours of operation under specific conditions spelled out in "Dogs in Park Rules." 
Violation and penalty. Any person who brings dogs to parks and recreation facilities and does not follow the stated park rules is in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies and penalties. 
Any person in violation of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, must be fined between $10.00 and $25.00. (S.C. Code 1976, §§ 44-95-10 et seq. (1996)). 
(Code 1994, § 16-1; Ord. No. 830, 7-30-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 830, adopted July 30, 2017, changed the title of § 30-1 from "Dogs prohibited in public parks" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 30-2. - Interference with permittees. 
No person in a park shall disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit. 
(Code 1994, § 16-2)  
Sec. 30-3. - Possession, consumption of alcoholic beverages in parks. 
No person in a park shall have brought alcoholic beverages into such park, nor shall any person drink alcoholic beverages at any time in the park. 
(Code 1994, § 16-3) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 4.  
Sec. 30-4. - Operation of motor vehicles. 
No person in a park shall operate any motor-driven vehicle in the park area, except in the parking lots and drives and then only for the purpose of parking or ingress or egress. 
(Code 1994, § 16-4) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 38.  
Sec. 30-5. - Littering. 
No person in a park shall leave trash, refuse, bottles, cans, paper or other litter about the buildings or grounds. All such litter shall be placed in designated containers. 
(Code 1994, § 16-5) 
Cross reference— Solid waste management, ch. 34.  
Sec. 30-6. - Violations of rules and regulations; failure to obey signs. 
No person in a park shall violate any rules and regulations pertaining to the park or fail to abide by any posted sign. 
(Code 1994, § 16-6)  
Sec. 30-7. - Hours; closing of public areas. 
(a)  Hours. The opening and closing hours for each individual public mall, park or other public property, or facility or area therein, where adopted, may be posted therein for public information, and no person shall remain therein beyond the times prescribed without permission or permit from the city. 
(b)  Closing of areas to public. Any section or part of any public mall, park or other public property may be declared closed to the public by the city administrator or the city at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise), and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the city administrator or the city or his representative shall find reasonably necessary. 
(Ord. No. 914, 7-15-2019)  
Chapter 32 - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 8; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36. 
State Law reference— Sediment control programs, S.C. Code 1976, § 48-13-10 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 32-1. - Findings. 
(a)  The city council finds that accelerated erosion from unprotected construction sites, road maintenance and other land disturbing activities is a major source of sediment. Sediment suspended in streams, lakes and other waters of this county constitutes a major pollution problem and contributes to flooding conditions. As the sediment settles out, it fills stream channels, lakes and reservoirs. 
(b)  Erosion and sedimentation can be effectively controlled, but cannot be completely eliminated, either during active construction or after stabilization, from both a technical and an economic standpoint. 
(c)  Natural erosion during stormwater runoff has always occurred and will continue at low rates from well-stabilized areas. It will cause stream turbidity regardless of the control measures applied. During construction, accelerated erosion will occur during stormwater runoff with a proportionate increase in visible turbidity in stream flow. 
(d)  This chapter is promulgated pursuant to the authority contained in the South Carolina Erosion and Sediment Reduction Act of 1983, S.C. Code 1976, § 48-18-10 et seq. This program is oriented toward prevention of pollution and drainageway obstruction from sediment by requiring preparation and implementation of an erosion and sedimentation control plan adapted to site conditions and meeting specified performance criteria. 
(Code 1994, § 18-1)  
Sec. 32-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter is designed to ensure a better environment for the city by protecting the lands and waters, to the extent possible, from the effects of soil erosion and sedimentation by controlling them. 
(Code 1994, § 18-2)  
Sec. 32-3. - Scope of chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter impose requirements on any persons, unless specifically excluded, engaged in land disturbing activities within the city. This chapter is designed to ensure planning and implementation of effective temporary and permanent control measures to prevent accelerated erosion and sedimentation. 
(Code 1994, § 18-3)  
Sec. 32-4. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accelerated erosion means any increase over the rate of natural erosion as a result of land disturbing activities. 
Active construction means activities which contribute directly to the completion of facilities contemplated or shown on the construction plans. 
Adequate erosion control measure, structure or device means one which controls the soil material within the land area under responsible control of the person conducting the land disturbing activity. 
Applicant means the owner of record or his designated representative. 
Borrow means fill material which is required for on-site construction and is obtained from other locations. 
Buffer zone means the strip of land adjacent to a lake or natural watercourse, the width of which is measured from the edge of the water to the nearest edge of the disturbed area, with the 25 percent of the strip nearer the land disturbing activity containing natural or artificial means of confining visible siltation. 
Commercial activity means any activity which, under the terms of the city's zoning ordinance, is classified as an allowable use within the O-D, C-1, C-2, C-1N, I-1 and S-1 zoning classifications. 
Conservation district means the soil and water conservation district of the county. 
County engineer means the county engineer or duly appointed official of the county. 
Embankment means a deposit of soil, rock or other material either constructed by man or resulting from excavation. 
Enforcement authority means the city council or its designated representative. 
Erosion means the process by which the ground surface is worn away by the action of water. 
Excavation means any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. 
Fill means a deposit of soil, rock or other material placed by man. 
Grading means any displacement of soil by stripping, excavating, filling, stockpiling or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its excavated or filled condition. 
Ground cover means any natural vegetative growth or other material which renders the soil surface stable against accelerated erosion. 
Industrial activity means any activity which, under the terms of the city zoning ordinance, would be an allowable use in the S-1, excluding commercial uses, and I-1 classifications. 
Issuing authority means the municipal or county permit department having jurisdiction over the site for which a site grading permit is being requested. 
Lake and natural watercourse mean any stream, river, brook, swamp, sound, bay, creek, run, branch, canal, waterway, estuary, natural drainageway and any reservoir, lake or pond, natural or impounded, in which sediment may be moved or carried in suspension, and which could be damaged by accumulation of sediment. 
Land disturbing activity means any use of the land by any person in residential, industrial, educational, institutional or commercial development, highway and road construction and maintenance that results in a substantial change in the natural cover or topography and that may cause or contribute to sedimentation. 
Multifamily dwelling means a building used exclusively as a place of residence containing two or more dwelling units. 
Natural erosion means the wearing away of the earth's surface by water, wind or other natural agents under natural environmental conditions undisturbed by man. 
Person engaged in or conducting land disturbing activity means the individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, interstate body or other legal entity who initiates and is financially responsible for the project which necessitates the land disturbing activity. 
Plan means the erosion and sediment control plan required by this chapter to be a part of the application for a grading permit. 
Planning commission means the city planning commission. 
Residential subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of contiguous land into two or more lots, sites or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development, and includes the dedication of new street rights-of-way or a change in an existing street, resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. The following shall not be included: 
(1)  The division of land into parcels greater than five acres where no street right-of-way dedication is involved. 
(2)  The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the widening or opening of streets. 
Sediment means soil or other surface materials transported by wind or surface water as a product of erosion. 
Siltation means sediment resulting from accelerated erosion which is settleable or removable by properly designed, constructed and maintained control measures; and which has been transported from its point of origin within the site of a land disturbing activity; and which has been deposited, or is in suspension in water. 
Single-family dwelling means a detached building used exclusively as a place or residence for one family. 
Standard design storm (SDS) means a ten-year storm, a rainfall of 2.4 inches in 60 minutes. 
Stormwater runoff means the direct runoff of water resulting from precipitation in any form. 
Tract means all contiguous land and bodies of water in one ownership, or contiguous land and bodies of water in diverse ownership being developed as a unit, although not necessarily all at one time. 
Uncovered means the removal of ground cover from, on, or above the soil surface. 
Undertaken means the initiating of any activity, or phase of activity, which results or will result in a change in the ground cover or topography of a tract of land. 
Utility means a company, regulated by the public service commission, municipality or special purpose district, providing a utility service, including construction, maintenance and repair of lines, pipelines or support activities. 
Waste means surplus materials resulting from on-site construction and disposed of at other locations. 
Working days means days exclusive of Saturday and Sunday during which weather conditions permit land disturbing activity to be undertaken. 
(Code 1994, § 18-4) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 32-5. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The issuing authority shall periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan approved by the soil and water conservation district and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. 
(b)  If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and subject to the provisions of this section. 
(c)  The issuing authority shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(Code 1994, § 18-5)  
Sec. 32-6. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who engages in any grading operation subject to the provision of this chapter without first obtaining a grading permit or who willfully violates the provisions of a grading plan submitted to obtain a grading permit shall be subject to the following actions: 
(1)  Upon determination that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the person engaged in the land disturbing activity will be given 48 hours to apply for a site grading permit and submit the required plans. If a plan is not submitted, an immediate stop work order may be issued by the issuing authority. 
(2)  If a plan has been submitted and approved, but violations of the plan are occurring, an immediate stop work order may be issued by the issuing authority. 
(3)  If violations remain uncorrected and/or stop work orders are not obeyed, the violator shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable in accordance with section 1-6. Notice of violation shall be sufficient if directed to the owner, the agent of the owner, or the contractor and left at his known place of residence or place of business. 
(b)  The soil and water conservation district or the city council may obtain injunctive relief to enjoin violations of any grading plan submitted for the purpose of obtaining a grading permit; and any person damaged as a result of such violations may, upon a proper showing of such damages, obtain payment therefor by a civil action. 
(Code 1994, § 18-6)  
Secs. 32-7—32-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLAN AND PERMIT 
 
Sec. 32-41. - Required. 
A site grading permit shall be required prior to any land disturbing activity unless otherwise excluded in section 32-42. No permit shall be issued until the applicant has submitted a plan to control erosion and sedimentation and such plan has been approved by the soil and water conservation district. 
(Code 1994, § 18-31)  
Sec. 32-42. - Exclusions. 
The requirement to submit a type 1, 2, or 3 sediment and erosion control plan as provided for in this chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Commercial mining operations. 
(2)  Agricultural land management and agricultural practices. 
(3)  The construction of on-farm buildings and structures used in a farming operation. 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, or their accessory buildings which are not a part of a residential subdivision. 
(5)  Construction of a dwelling unit within a subdivision which is being developed in accordance with an approved sedimentation plan. 
(6)  All minor land disturbing activities such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion. 
(7)  Any project involving the movement of not more than 500 cubic yards of land, which is promptly stabilized to prevent erosion and sedimentation, provided this land change does not occur within 200 feet of the banks of any major stream or river. 
(8)  Emergency repairs or maintenance of existing structures and facilities which require ground to be broken. 
(9)  Construction activities of the state department of highways and public transportation conforming to the requirements of section 108.03 of the latest edition of the state standard specifications for highway construction. 
(Code 1994, § 18-32)  
Sec. 32-43. - Application. 
All applications for permits under this article shall be submitted to the city through the business and development services department for processing and permit issuance. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by three copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sediment control plan. Plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 32-53. Soil erosion and sediment control plans shall also conform to the provisions of sections 32-52 and 32-53. 
(Code 1994, § 18-33; Memo. of 3-5-2012)  
Sec. 32-44. - Fees. 
The erosion and sedimentation plan shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee according to the established fee schedule which is on file in the office of the municipal clerk. 
(Code 1994, § 18-34)  
Sec. 32-45. - Review by soil and water conservation district. 
Immediately upon receipt of an application for permit under this article, the issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the soil and water conservation district for its review and recommendations. The results of their review shall be forwarded to the appropriate issuing authority which shall issue the final approval or denial on all applications. 
(Code 1994, § 18-35)  
Sec. 32-46. - Approval. 
If the application conforms to the requirements of this chapter, the soil and water conservation district shall recommend approval to the issuing authority within ten working days and forward the approved application to the issuing authority. 
(Code 1994, § 18-36)  
Sec. 32-47. - Denial. 
If the application does not conform to this chapter, the soil and water conservation district shall recommend disapproval to the issuing authority. The recommendation for disapproval shall be accompanied by written reasons for disapproval and suggested corrective actions and shall be forwarded to the issuing authority within ten working days. 
(Code 1994, § 18-37)  
Sec. 32-48. - Resubmittal of application. 
If an application is disapproved by the soil and water conservation district, the applicant may correct the deficiencies in conformance with this chapter and resubmit the application for reconsideration. If the revised application is approved, then the issuing authority shall issue the site grading permit. 
(Code 1994, § 18-38)  
Sec. 32-49. - Issuance of permit. 
Site grading work may not proceed until such time as approval of the applicable type 1, 2, or 3 is granted. However, in the case of a type 2 sedimentation and erosion control plan as described in section 32-53, site grading work may begin prior to the final approval of the sedimentation and erosion plan and issuance of a site grading permit. In order to proceed prior to the issuance of the permit, the applicant must meet the following conditions: 
(1)  An application must be filed with the issuing authority accompanied by a sketch plan and narrative. 
(2)  The applicant shall proceed under the terms of the sedimentation and erosion control sketch plan and narrative as submitted until otherwise notified. 
(3)  The applicant shall begin the installation of sedimentation and erosion control measures within 48 hours of the commencement of land disturbing activity. 
(4)  The applicant must take the steps necessary to receive final approval of the sketch and narrative plan within 30 days of the application or be subject to the penalties outlined in section 32-6. 
(Code 1994, § 18-39)  
Sec. 32-50. - Board of zoning appeals. 
All requests for variances and exceptions under this chapter shall be heard by a zoning board of adjustment and appeals. 
(Code 1994, § 18-40) 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-201 et seq.  
Sec. 32-51. - Variances and exceptions. 
The board of zoning appeals may authorize upon written appeal in specific cases such variances or exceptions from the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship or peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties. Before action is taken on a request for a variance, the board shall hold one or more public meetings, at which any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. A variance from the terms of this chapter may be granted by the board upon a finding that: 
(1)  There are special conditions and circumstances which are peculiar to the land, structure or building involved which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same area. 
(2)  A literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by similar properties under the terms of this chapter. 
(3)  Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to similar other lands structures, or buildings. 
(4)  The variance requested will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(5)  The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building or structure. 
(Code 1994, § 18-41)  
Sec. 32-52. - Types of sedimentation and erosion control plans. 
For the purposes of this chapter, erosion and sedimentation plans shall be divided into three types: type 1, type 2 and type 3. The designs, presentations and submittal shall be the responsibility of the person engaged in or conducting the land disturbing activity. 
(1)  Type 1 sedimentation and erosion control plan. A type 1 sedimentation and erosion control plan must be prepared and certified by a registered, professional engineer or registered landscape architect. The registration seal must be affixed to the plan. The specific requirements of a type 1 plan are detailed in section 32-53(a)—(c). 
(2)  Type 2 sedimentation and erosion control plan. A type 2 sedimentation and erosion control plan is comprised only of a narrative description accompanied by a sketch plan. This plan does not require preparation or certification by a registered engineer or registered landscape architect. The specific requirements of a type 2 plan are enumerated in section 32-53(d)—(f). 
(3)  Type 3 sedimentation and erosion control plan. A type 3 sedimentation and erosion control plan, at a minimum, may be comprised of a narrative description accompanied by a sketch plan. This type of plan may only be used by public utilities in the installation of utility services. This plan does not require preparation or certification by a registered engineer or registered landscape architect. The specific requirements of a type 3 plan are enumerated in section 32-53(g), (i). 
(Code 1994, § 18-42)  
Sec. 32-53. - Data required. 
(a)  Type 1 sedimentation and erosion control plans shall be submitted for the following projects: 
(1)  All shopping centers or group commercial developments two acres or larger, all multifamily developments two acres or larger. 
(2)  All planned developments. 
(3)  All industrial developments two acres or larger. 
A type 1 plan shall also be included with the stormwater management plan (i.e., drainage plan) where required for the development of a residential subdivision. Type 1 plans shall also be submitted in any case where site development requires the construction of sedimentation and erosion control devices, i.e., sediment basin, retaining walls, etc. 
(b)  When, under the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, a detailed engineering plan for sedimentation and erosion control is required, three copies of the plan shall accompany the application. The plan may be included as a part of the stormwater management plan. However, the plan shall include, as a minimum, the following data to the extent required by the city: 
(1)  A vicinity map sufficient to locate the site and to show the relationship of the site to its general surroundings at a scale of not less than one inch equals one mile. 
(2)  A site drawn to a workable scale. 
a.  The boundary lines of the site on which the work is to be performed, including the approximate acreage of the site. 
b.  Existing contours with intervals of not more than ten feet. 
c.  Proposed improvements on the site including present development and future utilization, if known. 
d.  All drainage provisions, erosion and sediment control measures, vegetative practices, or other protective devices to be constructed in connection with, or as a part of, the proposed work. 
e.  Provisions for temporary erosion control during construction and permanent control during the life of the facility. Such provisions shall include an estimated time schedule and sequence of operations indicating the anticipated starting and completion dates of the particular development sequence. 
f.  The name and address of the property owner and developer. 
g.  Title, scale, north arrow, date and name of individual or organization preparing plans. 
(c)  When a type 1 engineering plan for sedimentation and erosion control is required, the plan and specifications shall be supported by such supplemental reports, data and additional information as the conservation district and the city may reasonably require including but not limited to any of the following: 
(1)  Finished contours at the same interval as required or used for existing topography, proposed building and pavement grades, and the elevations, dimensions, locations, extent and slope of all proposed grading. 
(2)  Storm drainage computations and studies including the estimated runoff from the area served by drains, adequacy of outlets, ditch and pipe sizing computations, and map showing the drainage area. 
(3)  Field investigation reports indicating the nature, condition, and characteristics of existing drainage and flooding conditions. 
(4)  Results from actual soils investigations, reports, or test borings, if available. 
The data of subsections (c)(1)—(4) of this section is to be provided on an "as needed" basis and will not be required in total for each application for a grading permit. 
(d)  A type 2 plan shall be submitted for land disturbing activities within the city not falling under a type 1 or type 3 classification. Certain land disturbing activities are specifically excluded from the requirements of this chapter. These exclusions are contained in section 32-42. When, under the provisions of a type 2 plan above, a narrative description (an optional checklist available from the issuing authority may be used in lieu of a narrative) and sketch plan of the overall project are required, this narrative shall include: 
(1)  An anticipated starting and completion date of the various stages of land disturbing activities and the expected date the final stabilization will be completed. 
(2)  A description of the sediment control program and sediment control practices. 
(3)  A general description of topographic and soils conditions of the tract as available from the county planning commission or the local soil and water conservation district. 
(4)  A general description of adjacent property and a description of existing structures, buildings, and other fixed improvements located on surrounding properties. 
(5)  A description of the maintenance program for sediment control facilities including inspection programs, vegetative establishment of exposed soils, method and frequency of removal and disposal of solid waste material removed from control facilities and disposition of temporary structural measures. 
(e)  A sketch plan (no professional seal required) to accompany the narrative shall contain: 
(1)  A site location drawing of the proposed project, indicating the location of the proposed project in relation to roadways, jurisdictional boundaries, streams and rivers. 
(2)  The boundary lines of the site on which the work is to be performed. 
(3)  A topographic map of the site, available from the county planning commission. 
(4)  The location of temporary and permanent vegetative and structural erosion and sediment control measures. 
The requirements contained in subsections (e)(1)—(4) of this section may be indicated on one map as illustrated in the example of a typical sketch plan in subsection (f) of this section. 
(f)  A sample sketch plan map shall be provided. 
(g)  A type 3 plan shall be submitted for all utility installations within the city not excluded by the provisions of section 32-42 and/or this subsection. The use of a type 3 plan shall be limited to the installation of utility services. The construction by a utility provider of permanent facilities involving sites one acre or larger shall be included under the provisions of a type 1 or type 2 plan as described in section 32-52. 
(h)  Under the provisions of a type 3 plan (section 32-52(3)), the following shall be included: 
(1)  A site location drawing of the proposed project, indicating the location of the proposed project in relation to roadways, jurisdictional boundaries, streams and rivers. 
(2)  The location of temporary and permanent vegetative and structural erosion and sediment control measures. 
(3)  An anticipated starting and completion date of the various stages of land disturbing activities and the expected date the final stabilization will be completed. 
(4)  A description of the sediment control program and sediment control practices. 
(5)  A general description of topographic and soils conditions of the tract as available from the county planning commission or the local soil and water conservation district. 
(i)  Certain activities undertaken by utility providers are not substantial land disturbing activities and are therefore not intended to be regulated by this chapter. Those activities, in addition to those exclusions listed in section 32-42, which are not subject to this chapter include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Installation of utilities on a site of one acre or less. 
(2)  Installation of utilities in a ditch section one foot or less in width. 
(3)  Installation of utility poles. 
(4)  Maintenance of easements and rights-of-way. 
(5)  Service connections, i.e., tapping main lines and/or setting meters, including installation of a manhole, bell hole, underground vault, valve box or fire hydrant. 
(6)  Projects for which an encroachment permit has been issued by the state department of highways and public transportation, or county or a municipality. 
(7)  Emergency repairs. 
(8)  Any other activity determined not to be a substantial land disturbing activity by the soil and water conservation service. 
(Code 1994, § 18-43)  
Sec. 32-54. - Standard sedimentation and erosion control measures. 
(a)  Implementation. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sediment pollution can take place during land disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not excluded by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sediment control measures. These provisions shall be incorporated into the sketch plan. Soil erosion and sediment control measures shall conform to the standards and specifications of this chapter. The application of measures shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sediment pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity. 
(b)  General design principles. Practical combinations of the following principles and/or best management practices shall be utilized as a minimum in determining the sediment and erosion control devices to be installed for any land disturbing activity: 
(1)  The land disturbing activity shall conform to existing topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential. 
(2)  Land disturbing activities shall be conducted in a manner minimizing erosion. 
(3)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum. 
(4)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum. 
(5)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable. 
(6)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented. 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development. 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable. 
(9)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills. 
(10)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property. 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners. 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible and provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum. 
(c)  Maintenance. 
(1)  Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the person responsible for the land disturbing activity. 
(2)  Sediment basins shall be considered hazardous to life or property and shall be fenced and posted in accordance with the standards and specifications incorporated by reference in this chapter and detailed in the drainage design certification. Large scale office or industrial complex developments of ten acres or more, which incorporate natural or manmade lakes, streams or ponds, shall be exempt from fencing upon review and approval by the city. 
(Code 1994, §§ 18-44—18-46)  
Chapter 34 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Dead animals, § 6-6; animal waste, § 6-11; buildings and building regulations, ch. 8; environment, ch. 18; littering in parks, § 30-5; interfering with manholes covers; dumping trash, other waste into manholes, § 40-4. 
State Law reference— Collection of garbage, S.C. Code 1976, §§ 44-55-1010—44-55-1060. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cart means a plastic, 90-gallon refuse receptacle having a tightfitting lid, carrying an embossed serial number, and the design, construction, and capacity shall be designated by the city. Its use shall be primarily for single-family residential refuse collection. 
Container means a container constructed of metal, of a capacity of not less than two nor more than eight cubic yards, of sound construction, having a sufficient number of doors for loading and unloading, equipped with drains sufficient to keep the container free of accumulated liquids at all times, and equipped with a suitable top designed to return to a closed position after dumping. 
Garbage means organic waste matter, both animal and vegetable, being comprised chiefly of waste food. 
Refuse means waste material other than garbage. 
Rubbish means tree limbs, cuttings, shrubbery, weeds, leaves, etc. 
(Code 1994, § 19-1; Ord. No. 581, § 1(19-1), 6-16-2003) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-2. - Violations. 
Every person failing to comply with this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-6. In addition, the city shall have the authority to refuse collection services for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 19-2; Ord. No. 581, § 1(19-2), 6-16-2003)  
Sec. 34-3. - City to operate service; frequency of collections; amount of garbage collected. 
The city will operate a garbage disposal pickup service for the residents and small business establishments located within the city, and such service shall be once a week. No single pickup shall exceed two 90-gallon city-approved receptacles or carts. Nonsingle-family uses requiring more than two 90-gallon carts will be required to use containers. 
(Code 1994, § 19-3; Ord. No. 500, § 1(19-3), 6-21-1999; Ord. No. 581, § 1(19-3), 6-16-2003)  
Sec. 34-4. - Drainage of liquid. 
All garbage and refuse shall be drained of liquid before being deposited for collection. 
(Code 1994, § 19-4; Ord. No. 581, § 1(19-4), 6-16-2003)  
Sec. 34-5. - Receptacles. 
(a)  Generally. All single-family residences and small business in the city, including townhouses, condominiums, duplexes, and all apartment complexes with less than nine units, shall purchase and use city-approved receptacles or carts for the disposal of normal household garbage, refuse and recyclable materials. The city has available for purchase garbage and recycle receptacles and carts. Receptacles must be brought to the curb or ditch line before 7:30 a.m. on the scheduled collection day and removed from the curb or ditch line before 12:00 midnight of the scheduled collection day. 
(b)  Certain deposits prohibited. 
(1)  No dirt, rocks, yard waste or construction materials as described in section 34-7 shall be put in city approved receptacles. 
(2)  No oil, batteries, or hazardous waste of any type shall be put in city-approved receptacles or along the curbside. 
(c)  Responsibility of resident. The resident or small business shall be responsible for the replacement of any stolen, damaged, or abused receptacle. The city will not be responsible for any stolen, damaged, or abused receptacles or carts. 
(d)  Accessibility. All garbage and refuse receptacles must be brought to the public street curb or ditch line adjacent to a driveway on the designated day. Receptacles not so located when the city truck services the street shall not be emptied. 
(e)  Back door service. Residences where no one is physically able to roll the city-provided receptacles to the street for collection will be extended back door service. Applications for back door service will be subject to approval of the city verifying such request. 
(Code 1994, §§ 19-5—19-10; Ord. No. 487, 10-26-1998; Ord. No. 500, § 1(19-5, 19-7), 6-21-1999; Ord. No. 581, § 1(19-5—19-10), 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 760, 12-16-2013)  
Sec. 34-6. - Use of commercial containers restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump refuse or trash in a refuse commercial container located in the city if such person is not a resident of the city or if the trash or refuse is not from within the city limits. It shall likewise be unlawful to dump refuse, trash or any other matter in such containers when the containers are full or to throw refuse from such containers. 
(Code 1994, § 19-11; Ord. No. 581, § 1(19-11), 6-16-2003)  
Sec. 34-7. - Removal of construction debris. 
(a)  Disposal of construction materials. Every contractor, carpenter, or builder or the property owner, after completing or during the construction or alteration of a building or property must remove all trash incident to such construction or alteration at his own expense. 
(b)  Construction materials defined. The term "construction materials" means, but is not limited to, carpet, padding, sheetrock, lumber, shingles, siding, shutters, or other lumber materials, bricks, blocks, cement and mortar, concrete, rocks, and dirt. 
(Code 1994, § 19-12; Ord. No. 487, 10-26-1998; Ord. No. 581, § 1(19-12), 6-16-2003) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 8.  
Sec. 34-8. - Disposal in public places. 
No person shall place or throw garbage or refuse in any public street, public alley, or other public place in the city. 
(Code 1994, § 19-12; Ord. No. 581, § 1(19-13), 6-16-2003) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36.  
Sec. 34-9. - Collection of tree limbs, cuttings, shrubbery and leaves. 
(a)  Tree limbs, cuttings, shrubbery, etc., will be collected by the city as soon as practical; provided, however, that such limbs, cuttings, shrubbery, etc., are no longer than six feet and no more than six inches in diameter and placed on the front of the owner's or tenant's property nearest the street or public alley on the city street right-of-way adjacent to the property line. The amount collected shall be not more than four cubic yards per pickup. The city reserves the right to charge an additional fee for excessive amounts. An excessive amount is defined as more than four cubic yards of yard waste per pickup. Should the city decide to implement this fee, it shall be based on, but not limited to, twice the actual costs of the current landfill rate for disposal of such yard wastes. 
(b)  Trees pruned by a contractor or taken down by the contractor shall be disposed by the contractor. 
(c)  Grass clippings and leaves will be separated from yard rubbish and other refuse. It shall be free of rocks and other extraneous material. Grass clippings will not be picked up unless they are placed in a disposable plastic bag. The plastic bag shall be tied, closed and placed on the city street right-of-way adjacent to the property. 
(d)  No leaves, grass clippings, tree limbs, or debris shall be placed within six feet of any storm drainage appurtenance or catch basin. 
(e)  The city administrator may relax or omit any provision(s) of this code section with the exception of size and placement location, in order to provide the highest level of collection possible in response to a storm or similar event to section 34-9 of our city Code. 
(Code 1994, § 19-14; Ord. No. 487, 10-26-1998; Ord. No. 581, § 1(19-14), 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 618, 1-23-2006; Ord. No. 680, 6-16-2008; Ord. No. 759, 12-16-2013; Ord. of 3-19-2018, § 1) 
Cross reference— Vegetation, ch. 42.  
Secs. 34-10—34-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COMMERCIAL, BUSINESS AND MULTIFAMILY WASTE DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 10. 
 
Sec. 34-41. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cart means a plastic, 90-gallon refuse receptacle having a tightfitting lid, carrying an embossed serial number, and the design, construction, and capacity shall be designated by the city. Its use shall be primarily for single-family residential refuse collection. 
Container means a container constructed of metal, of a capacity of not less than two nor more than eight cubic yards, of sound construction, having a sufficient number of doors for loading and unloading, equipped with drains sufficient to keep the container free of accumulated liquids at all times, and equipped with a suitable top designed to return to a closed position after dumping. 
Industrial establishment means any person engaged in manufacturing or processing any item or goods. 
Institution means schools, hospitals, and charitable, philanthropic, and religious institutions conducted for the benefit of the public or a recognized section of the public. 
Retail and commercial establishment means any office, retail store, restaurant, hotel, motel, garage, trailer park or private club. 
Multifamily means an apartment complex consisting of nine or more dwelling units. 
(Code 1994, § 19-41; Ord. No. 581, § 1(19-41), 6-16-2003) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-42. - Special rules and regulations. 
The city shall make specific collections of refuse and other wastes from business and institutional units as follows: 
(1)  Retail, commercial, and institutional units using carts. 
a.  General rubbish. General rubbish shall be collected from all retail, commercial, and institutional units using carts on a regular basis in accordance with a schedule set by the public works director. 
b.  General bulk waste. General bulk waste shall be collected in accordance with a schedule set by the public works director. 
c.  Other waste. No other types of waste shall be collected. 
(2)  Retail, commercial, institutional, industrial, and multifamily units using container service. The city will not provide any solid waste service to businesses using containers. Multifamily apartments as defined in section 34-41 shall be required to use containers. 
The city council may, from time to time, make special rules and regulations for the method and manner of garbage storage and collection in order to facilitate the efficient collection thereof. 
(Code 1994, § 19-42; Ord. No. 581, § 1(19-42), 6-16-2003)  
Sec. 34-43. - Unlawful disposal. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw or sweep any garbage or rubbish, paper, trash or waste matter of any kind resulting from the operation of any business, industrial or commercial establishment in any alley, street, sidewalk, storm drain or other public place, or to place or store any such matter on any private property, vacant lot or open place within the city, unless the same shall be enclosed in suitable containers as specified in this article. 
(Code 1994, § 19-43)  
Sec. 34-44. - Commercial containers. 
The owner of any business, commercial, industrial establishment or multifamily complex shall provide such commercial containers as necessary for the storage of garbage and waste matter, and such containers shall at all times be kept in a place easily accessible to city equipment. The owner shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of such containers and shall not permit them to fall into an unsafe or nonrodentproof condition. The owner shall not permit hazardous waste to be placed in such containers or they shall be responsible for its disposal. No service shall be given to those establishments permitting objects, obstructions or vehicles to hinder in any way whatsoever the servicing of such containers. 
(Code 1994, § 19-44)  
Sec. 34-45. - Authority to limit amount collected. 
The city council shall have the right and authority to limit the amount of garbage and waste matter it will collect and remove from any business, industrial or commercial establishment. 
(Code 1994, § 19-45)  
Sec. 34-46. - Frequency of collections. 
(a)  The city shall collect and remove authorized garbage and waste matter from any business, commercial, industrial establishment or multifamily complex at such times and intervals as are deemed appropriate by the city. 
(b)  Industrial establishments, multifamily complexes and mobile home parks shall not be affected by these container and collection limitations, but the city council reserves the right to pass resolutions regulating the volume and frequency of industrial waste collection. 
(Code 1994, § 19-46)  
Sec. 34-47. - Fees and charges. 
(a)  Retail, commercial, institutional, industrial, eleemosynary, and multiple residential housing units having dumpster containers collected by rear-loading vehicles shall be charged a fee per cubic yard collected, billed quarterly, and as set from time to time. Such fees are on file in the office of the municipal clerk. 
(b)  Fees shall be due and payable within 30 days from date of mailing, or as specified on the bill. After this 30-day period, a late fee, which is on file in the office of the municipal clerk, shall be added in addition to any costs of collection. Partial payments shall not be accepted. If a bill is not paid within 30 days, the city may discontinue service to that user and initiate any civil action necessary to collect the amount due, and code inspectors shall be notified to inspect the property for violations of law. Retail, commercial, institutional, industrial, and eleemosynary units may contract with private waste companies according to their needs. 
(c)  The public works director shall determine the required size, capacity requirements, location, and frequency of pickups of containers necessary for proper service, but not less than once per week. 
(Code 1994, § 19-47)  
Secs. 34-48—34-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LITTER[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Dumping litter prohibited, S.C. Code 1976, § 16-11-700. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 34-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bulk means all bulk waste, including used or damaged appliances, furniture, mattresses, tires, etc. 
Container means a watertight receptacle made of metal, heavy-duty plastic or material of similar strength, with a tightfitting cover for the storage and disposal of solid waste. 
Garbage means all perishable refuse, except for those items being recycled by the city sanitation department, including animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food; household rubbish, including paper, cardboard, boxes, rags, plastic, cloth, glass, bottles, cans and any similar waste; and small dead animals. 
Litter means any quantity of solid waste which is not properly disposed of. 
Private property means, but is not limited to, the following exterior locations owned by any private person: yards, grounds, walks, driveways, entrances, passageways, parking areas, working areas, storage areas, vacant lots and recreational facilities. 
Public property means, but is not limited to, the following exterior locations: streets, roads, public rights-of-way, medians, sidewalks, alleys and other public ways; and any and all public parks, grounds, lots, recreation facilities, waterways and drainage systems. 
Recyclables means any garbage that may be recycled by the city sanitation department. 
Rubbish means yard rubbish, including ashes, weeds, brush, leaves, grass, vines, wood, shrubbery, trees, branches, stumps and similar materials; bricks, stones and metal. 
Solid waste means bulk, garbage, refuse, rubbish, debris and other solid waste. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-82. - Penalties. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punished in accordance with section 1-6. The court, in lieu of a monetary fine, may direct the substitution of litter-gathering labor under the supervision of the court, not to exceed one-hour for each $5.00 of fine imposed. In addition to any other punishment authorized by this article, in the sound discretion of the judge, such person may be directed by the judge to pick up and remove from any public place or any private property, with prior permission of the legal owner, upon which it is established by competent evidence that such person has deposited litter, any or all litter deposited thereon by any person prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(Code 1994, § 19-67)  
Sec. 34-83. - Prohibited on public and private property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, throw, drop, discard, deposit or otherwise dispose of litter or other solid waste on any public or private property within the city except in containers or areas lawfully provided therefor. 
(Code 1994, § 19-68)  
Sec. 34-84. - Keeping property clean. 
The owner or occupant of private property is responsible to keep his property free from litter. Failure to do so shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 19-69)  
Sec. 34-85. - Truck loads or tires causing litter. 
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or public property or private property of others. No person shall drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or private property, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
(Code 1994, § 19-70) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 38.  
Sec. 34-86. - Construction sites. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or contractor at a construction site to: 
(1)  Permit garbage, rubbish, paper or other solid waste to be blown or washed away from the construction site onto public property or other private property. 
(2)  Fail to secure all construction material in such a manner as to prevent same from blowing or washing from the construction site to public property or private property of others. 
(Code 1994, § 19-71) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 8.  
Secs. 34-87—34-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - HANDBILLS 
 
Sec. 34-111. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial handbill means any printed or written matter, sample, device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced matter of literature: 
(1)  Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, or thing; 
(2)  Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; 
(3)  Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state or under any ordinance of this city; or 
(4)  Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
Newspaper means any periodical of general circulation, regularly published and sold to the public, with not less than 12 issues per year. 
Noncommercial handbill means any printed or written matter, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or reproduced matter of literature not included in the definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper. 
(Code 1994, § 19-81) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-112. - Certain existing ordinances not affected. 
This division shall not be deemed to repeal, amend or modify any ordinance ever ordained, either prohibiting, regulating or licensing canvassers, hawkers, peddlers, transient merchants, or any person, using the public streets or places for any private business or enterprise, or for commercial sales, not covered in this division. 
(Code 1994, § 19-82)  
Sec. 34-113. - Penalties. 
Any person violating or causing another person to violate the provisions of this division shall be fined in accordance with section 1-6. The court, in lieu of a monetary fine, may direct the substitution of litter-gathering labor under the supervision of the court, not to exceed one hour for each $5.00 of fine imposed. In addition to any other punishment authorized by this division, in the sound discretion of the judge, such person may be directed by the judge to pick up and remove from any public place or any private property, with prior permission of the legal owner, upon which it is established by competent evidence that such person has deposited litter or handbills, any or all litter or handbills deposited thereon by any person prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(Code 1994, § 19-83)  
Sec. 34-114. - Commercial, noncommercial handbills. 
(a)  Throwing, distributing in public places. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city. 
(b)  Placing on vehicles. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill into or upon any unoccupied vehicle in such a manner as to cause the handbill to become scattered by the elements and become litter. This section shall not prevent the display of handbills on a vehicle by the owner thereof. 
(c)  Depositing on uninhabited or vacant premises. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which reasonably appear to be uninhabited or vacant. Indicators that such premises are uninhabited or vacant are the accumulation of newspapers or handbills, a sign indicating the house is for sale or rent, the lack of draperies and furnishings in the dwelling, and other such conditions. 
(d)  Prohibited where posted. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises, if requested by any person thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement" or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of such premises do not desire to be molested or disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. 
(e)  Distributing at inhabited private premises. 
(1)  No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or other person then present in or upon such private premises willing to accept it, or by placing or depositing it within five feet of the main door of such inhabited private premises and securing it to prevent it from being blown or scattered about such premises or sidewalks, streets, or other public places. Mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. 
(2)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place, or upon private property. 
(Code 1994, §§ 19-84—19-88)  
Sec. 34-115. - Distributing noncommercial handbills in public places. 
It shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any person who is willing to accept it. 
(Code 1994, § 19-89) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36.  
Sec. 34-116. - Names and addresses of responsible parties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, scatter, hand out or circulate any commercial or noncommercial handbill in any place, under any circumstances, which does not have printed on the cover, front or back thereof, the name and address of the following: 
(1)  The person who printed, wrote, compiled or manufactured the same. 
(2)  The person who caused the same to be distributed; provided, however, that in the case of a fictitious person or club, in addition to such fictitious name, the true names and addresses of the owners, managers or agents of the person sponsoring such handbill shall also appear thereon. 
(Code 1994, § 19-90)  
Sec. 34-117. - Offensive handbills. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, hand out, distribute or transmit any commercial or noncommercial handbill which: 
(1)  May reasonably tend to incite riot or other public disorder, or which advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state by means of any artifice, scheme, or violence; 
(2)  Is obscene or libelous; or 
(3)  Is harmful to minors, if it is distributed in such a manner as to be reasonably expected to be viewed by minors. 
(Code 1994, § 19-91)  
Sec. 34-118. - Nuisance. 
In addition to the penalties stated in section 34-113, the violation of any provision of this division is hereby declared to be a nuisance, which may be abated pursuant to state law. 
(Code 1994, § 19-92) 
Cross reference— Nuisances, § 18-31 et seq.  
Chapter 36 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-12(5); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-12(9); drinking in public conveyances, § 4-7; animals running at large or grazing on streets and sidewalks, § 6-4; exhibiting animals kept for service on streets, § 6-5; buildings and building regulations, ch. 8; consent agreement for placing lines in streets or similar public places, § 10-211 et seq.; cemeteries, ch. 12; environment, ch. 18; flood damage prevention, ch. 21; parades, picketing and demonstrations, ch. 28; parks and recreation, ch. 30; soil erosion and sedimentation control, ch. 32; disposal of solid waste in public places, § 34-8; distributing noncommercial handbills in public places, § 34-115; utilities, ch. 40; vegetation, ch. 42; distance of trees from curbs and sidewalks, § 42-48. 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of streets, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-30. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 36-1. - Council approval of street names or name changes. 
No person shall name any street or change the name of any street, except upon consent of the city council as authorized by resolution. 
(Code 1994, § 20-1)  
Sec. 36-2. - Numbering of residences, businesses and other establishments. 
All residences, businesses, buildings, structures and other establishments must be numbered according to the street number designation provided by the city. The numbers shall be located in a conspicuous place and must be of such size that the numbers may be easily read from the street. No number shall be less than four inches in height, and each number must be black in color and made of metal or plastic. Any new dwelling, business or establishment must be numbered at the time the dwelling, business or building is completed. 
(Code 1994, § 20-2)  
Sec. 36-3. - Playing games or throwing rocks or missiles on streets. 
No person shall play any games or throw any rocks or missiles on any public street within the city. 
(Code 1994, § 20-3)  
Sec. 36-4. - Littering streets, alleys, or sidewalks prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to litter, place, throw, track, or allow to fall on any street, alley, or sidewalk, any refuse, glass, tacks, mud, or other objects or materials which are unsightly or which obstruct or tend to limit or interfere with the use of such public ways and places for their intended purposes. 
(Ord. No. 590, § 20-4, 12-15-2003)  
Secs. 36-5—36-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PAVING 
 
Sec. 36-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City road means a public road or public way that is listed on the official inventory of city roads and bridges adopted by the city council. 
Full width means the width of a road that is appropriate for the right-of-way available. Full width improvement on a 50-foot right-of-way would consist of a 20-foot roadway, five-foot shoulders, three additional feet to the center of the ditches and seven-foot back slopes. Full width improvement of a 36-foot right-of-way would consist of an 18-foot roadway, three-foot shoulders, two additional feet to the centerline of the ditches and four-foot back slopes. Improving a road to full width includes installation of proper drainage facilities. 
Residence means an occupied dwelling place including houses, modular homes and mobile homes which have permanent electrical power installation. 
Unimproved property means any tract of land that does not contain a residence. Improving a road to property with a residence when that road is not the primary access to the residence shall be considered improvement of a road to unimproved property. 
(Code 1994, § 20-31) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 36-32. - Work on city right-of-way and property. 
(a)  Waste soil. All waste soil shall be stockpiled on city property. If soil stockpiles exceed foreseeable needs or available space, such soil may be disposed of by the city purchasing agent, in accordance with the current procedure for disposal of city property. 
(b)  Gravel. City crews may place gravel on any city road from its beginning to the last residence served by the road. Beyond the last residence, the existing surface may be maintained by scraping but no sand, gravel or cinders will be added at city expense. City crews may place gravel purchased by others on a city road that does not meet the above criteria. This does not include the road acceptance fee. If a cul-de-sac is within 100 feet of the last residence, the 100 feet of road and cul-de-sac may be graveled. Through roads, i.e., roads with termination on a public road at both ends, may be graveled upon approval of the city council. 
(c)  Road improvements. Unless otherwise directed by the city council, a city road may be improved according to the following guideline: A road may be improved to full width to a residence by the most economical route, provided that a minimum density of one residence every 1,500 feet exists. Improving a road without the required density or beyond the last residence requires approval of the city council. 
(d)  Roadside ditches. The city may provide labor, equipment and cover material to pipe roadside ditches on city roads, provided that the affected property owner provides all necessary pipe, and catchbasin materials on the site, but if piping a roadside ditch on a city road or bridge will materially benefit the road or bridge, the city council may approve provision of the necessary materials at the city's expense. 
(e)  Driveway entrances. The city may provide and/or install drainage lines at private driveway entrances to facilitate proper roadway drainage, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No more than 20 linear feet of pipe 36 inches or less in diameter may be provided per lot. 
(2)  No pipe or structures larger than 36 inches in diameter may be installed by the city. Larger structures installed on a city right-of-way by others require an encroachment permit. 
(3)  As many as two driveway entrances, not over 20 feet in width, will be permitted on each lot, and may be paved from a minimum distance of seven feet to a maximum distance of the right-of-way line, measured from the edge of the roadway and perpendicular to the centerline. No more than 20 feet of pipe may be furnished by the city. Although two driveway entrances are allowed, the city will only provide the materials for one driveway entrance. If a citizen desires a second one, the citizen must pay the cost of the materials, installation and maintenance. 
(4)  No pipe may be furnished, installed or maintained on private roads. Installation of pipe for private roads requires an encroachment permit. Roads being constructed for dedication to the city shall be considered private prior to final acceptance. 
(f)  Resurfacing. The street department shall prepare and submit to the city council annually a proposed resurfacing program. The roads in the program shall be presented to the city council in the order of their priority based upon their structural condition and use. All resurfacing that is more than 500 feet in length or 25 percent of the length of a road is subject to this requirement. 
(Code 1994, § 20-32)  
Sec. 36-33. - Work off city right-of-way and property. 
Work may be performed off city rights-of-way or property in the following cases: 
(1)  Protection of city street or bridge. For correcting a situation detrimental to a city street or bridge which affects the safety of the traveling public. Such work may include, but is not limited to, stream channel improvement and sight distance obstruction removal. Upon specific approval of the city administrator, private driveways may be scraped only to the extent necessary to protect a city or county road within the city limits by channeling water into side ditches and cleaning side ditches. Hold harmless agreements are required for all such types of work. 
(2)  Drainage work off city rights-of-ways and properties. To perform maintenance on dedicated easements, provided that such maintenance will provide for the free flow of surface water to a live stream and/or relieve regional flooding conditions along a live stream. The city may provide labor and equipment to perform maintenance on drainage easements and installation of erosion protection, but the easement, in general, must carry water from public roads or lands or be regional in nature. This work will be accomplished only upon request and approval of all property owners adjacent to the easement and after a properly executed hold harmless agreement, and right of entry agreement, signed by all such owners is filed with the city and accepted for recording. Felled trees may be removed only if impeding the normal flow of water and only if it affects a public interest, public health, or public safety. 
No maintenance assistance is offered any development until completion. After completion of a development project, no such assistance shall be rendered to commercial developments, industrial sites, golf courses, apartment complexes, or mobile home parks, without specific approval of council. A record of each project undertaken is to be maintained in the city public works department and made available upon request. The record is to include manpower and equipment usage. 
In the event the work is done by the private property owner, the work must be performed by a licensed, qualified contractor. All work must be inspected during installation and approved by the public works department upon completion and before covering. 
Types of work. The following types of drainage assistance may be performed by the city public works department provided it affects a public interest, public health, or public safety: 
a.  Machine cleaning of normally dry drainage easements to allow free flow of surface water. 
b.  Installation or removal of pipe (labor and equipment only) on normally dry drainage easements. Materials must be furnished by the property owner. All materials furnished including pipe, catch basins, grates and lids must meet city standards. 
c.  Installation of large stone or other erosion protection materials (labor and equipment only) on normally dry drainage easements. 
d.  Unclogging and repair of pipe systems (labor and equipment only) on normally dry drainage easements. 
Conditions. The drainage assistance described above may only be performed under the following conditions: 
a.  All requests for off right-of-way drainage assistance must be approved by the public works director. 
b.  All affected property owners must execute drainage assistance agreements which shall include an easement with permanent encroachment provisions and a hold harmless agreement. These agreements shall be filed with the public works department. 
c.  Drainage assistance may be provided for circumstances involving water which originates from public lands or public rights-of-ways to natural stream beds or drainage systems. 
d.  No materials will be furnished by the city for any of the above types of work. 
e.  No assistance shall be provided to any development prior to its completion. 
f.  No off right-of-way drainage assistance shall be performed more than once in a 12-month period except under extraordinary circumstances and with the concurrence of the city administrator. 
(Code 1994, § 20-33; Ord. No. 542, § 1, 8-20-2001; Ord. No. 821, 3-20-2017)  
Sec. 36-34. - Road acceptance. 
A road may be accepted into the city system if it satisfies one of the following conditions: 
(1)  Construction meeting the requirements of the city subdivision regulations. 
(2)  Construction as provided by ordinance of council in areas not subject to subdivision regulations. 
(3)  Satisfaction of the following criteria: 
a.  Continuous, unrestricted use by the general public since 1965, as evidenced by aerial photographs and affidavits. 
b.  The road must have served two or more properties in 1965. 
c.  The road must serve two or more residences at the time of acceptance. 
d.  A 50-foot right-of-way or consent agreement, acceptable for recording, must be executed and submitted by all abutting property owners. 
Any road not meeting such criteria may be accepted by the council if it determines that special circumstances exist. 
(Code 1994, § 20-34; Ord. No. 821, 3-20-2017)  
Sec. 36-35. - Emergencies. 
The city administrator is authorized to use city labor, equipment and material for the purpose of meeting emergencies that may exist and that, in the opinion of the administrator, warrant the use of such equipment, labor and material to protect the property or lives of people in the city provided it affects a public interest, public health, and/or public safety. The city administrator shall file a report with council at its next meeting after such work is completed showing the nature of the emergency and the amount of materials used. 
(Code 1994, § 20-35; Ord. No. 821, 3-20-2017)  
Sec. 36-36. - Furnishing city equipment, material or labor. 
Except as specified in this article, no city equipment, material or labor will be furnished to corporations, partnerships, buildings, developers, contractors, industrial or commercial establishments or individuals. 
(Code 1994, § 20-36; Ord. No. 821, 3-20-2017)  
Sec. 36-37. - Authority to participate in cost sharing agreements. 
The city is authorized to participate in cost sharing agreements involving benefited private property within its corporate limits for: 
(1)  Constructing, reconstructing, extending, and otherwise building or improving storm sewer and drainage systems which benefit the public; 
(2)  Constructing, reconstructing, paving, widening, installing curbs and gutters, and improving streets which benefit the public; 
(3)  Constructing, reconstructing, paving, widening or improving sidewalks along any public street which benefits the public. 
(Ord. No. 821, 3-20-2017)  
Sec. 36-38. - Basis for making cost sharing agreements. 
Cost sharing agreements may be made on the basis of: 
(1)  The frontage of private property abutting the project at an equal rate per foot of frontage; or 
(2)  The area of land served, or subject to being served, by the project at an equal rate per unit of area; or 
(3)  The value added to the land served by the project or which may be served by it, as calculated by determining the difference between the appraised value of the land without improvements as shown on the tax records of the county, and the appraised value of the land with improvements according to the appraisal standards and rules adopted by the county at its last revaluation, at an equal rate per dollar of value added; or 
(4)  A combination of two or more of these basis. 
Whenever the basis selected for a cost sharing agreement is either area or value added, council may provide for benefit zones according to the distance benefited property is from the project being undertaken, and may establish differing charges to apply uniformly throughout each benefit zone. 
For each project, council shall endeavor to establish a cost sharing method from the criteria set out in this section which will most accurately reflect the benefit conferred upon it by the project. Council's decision as to the method of determining cost sharing terms shall be final and conclusive and not subject to further review or challenge. 
(Ord. No. 821, 3-20-2017)  
Sec. 36-39. - Corner lot exemptions. 
Council shall have authority to establish exemptions from charges for corner lots when a project is undertaken along both sides of such lots. The exemptions shall be based on categories of land use (residential, commercial, industrial, or agricultural) and shall be uniform for each category. Exemptions are not allowed that exceed 75 percent of the frontage of any side of a corner lot, or 150 feet, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 821, 3-20-2017)  
Sec. 36-40. - Cost sharing agreement resolution; contents. 
Whenever council decides to finance a proposed project by cost sharing agreements, it shall first adopt a preliminary resolution that shall contain the following: 
(1)  A statement of intent to undertake the project; 
(2)  A general description of the nature and location of the project; 
(3)  A statement describing the proposed basis for a cost sharing agreement, which shall include a general description of the boundaries of the area benefited if the basis is either area or value added; 
(4)  A statement as to the percentage of the cost of the work that is to be paid for by the private property owner or a specific amount to be paid for by the private property owner; 
(5)  A statement defining any cost to be paid by the private property owner to be held in abeyance and the time therefore; 
(6)  A statement of the proposed terms of payment by the private property owner and the time therefore; 
(7)  A provision establishing a time and place for a public hearing on all matters covered by this article which shall not be earlier than three weeks nor later than ten weeks from the date of the adoption of this article. 
(Ord. No. 821, 3-20-2017)  
Sec. 36-41. - Notice. 
At least ten days before the date set for the public hearing, council shall publish a notice that a cost sharing resolution has been adopted and that a public hearing will be held to receive public comment at a specified time and place. The notice shall generally describe the nature and location of the improvement. In addition, at least ten days prior to the hearing, council shall have a copy of the resolution mailed to the owners of all property subject to cost sharing in the event the project is undertaken. The person designated to mail these resolutions shall file with the council a certificate showing that they were mailed by first-class mail and the date of mailing. The certificate shall be deemed adequate notice of compliance. 
(Ord. No. 821, 3-20-2017)  
Sec. 36-42. - Determination of costs. 
When the project is complete, council shall ascertain the total cost including those for construction, all necessary legal services, engineering services, interest paid during construction, obtaining necessary rights-of-way, and publication of notices and resolutions. The determination of council as to the total cost of any project shall be conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 821, 3-20-2017)  
Sec. 36-43. - List of affected property owners. 
When the total cost of a project has been determined, council shall have a list of all affected property owners prepared which shall contain a brief description of each lot, parcel, or tract of land involved, the basis for the costs, the amount charged to each private property owner, the terms of payment including any schedule of discounts, if such a schedule is to be established, and the name of the owner of each parcel of land. A map of the project showing each parcel and the basis of the charges, the amount charged, and the name of the owner, shall be a sufficient list of affected property owners. 
After the list of affected property owners has been completed, it shall be filed in the city clerk's office and made available for public inspection. A notice of the completion of the list of affected property owners, setting forth in general terms a description of the project, the availability of the list of affected property owners in the clerk's office for inspection, and the time and place for a public hearing concerning the list of affected property owners, shall be disseminated at least ten days before the date set for the hearing on the list of affected property owners. Council shall require that a notice of the hearing concerning the list of affected property owners be mailed to the owners of property listed thereon at least ten days before the hearing. The notice shall include the time and place of the hearing, the availability of the list of affected property owners for inspection in the city clerk's office and the amount of the charges for each property owner shown on the list of affected property owners. The person designated to mail these notices shall file with the council a certificate showing they were mailed by first-class mail and the date mailed. The certificate shall be conclusive evidence that the notices were mailed in accordance with the requirements of council unless fraud is shown by an aggrieved property owner. 
(Ord. No. 821, 3-20-2017)  
Sec. 36-44. - Public hearing. 
At the public hearing, council shall hear all interested persons who appear with respect to any matter covered by the cost sharing agreement resolution. After the public hearing, council may adopt a resolution directing that the project or portions thereof be undertaken. This article shall describe the project in general terms (which may be by reference to projects described in this article) and shall set forth the following: 
(1)  The basis of the costs to be shared by the property owner, together with a general description of the boundaries of the area benefited if the basis of the cost sharing is either area or value added; 
(2)  The percentage of the cost to be shared by the property owner, or the specific amount to be shared by the property owner; 
(3)  The terms of payment, including the conditions under which the property owner's shared cost are to be held in abeyance, if any. 
The percentage of the property owner's shared costs may not be different from the percentage proposed, and the projects authorized may not be greater in scope than the projects described in the initial resolution. In the event council decides that a different percentage of the cost or specific cost should be charged than those proposed in the initial resolution, or that any project should be enlarged, it shall adopt and advertise a new resolution as herein provided. 
At the public hearing, all persons shall have an opportunity to be heard, including objections to the list of affected property owners. Thereafter, council shall annul, modify, or confirm the charges, in whole or in part, either by confirming the initial charges for any or all of the lots or parcels described in the list of affected property owners, or by canceling, increasing, or reducing them as may be proper in compliance with the basis of the charges. If any property is omitted, council may place it on the list and levy the proper charges. Whenever council confirms charges for any project, the city clerk shall enter in the minutes of the council meeting the date, and time of confirmation. After the time of confirmation, the property owners shared costs shall constitute a lien on the property in the same manner as a lien for county and city property taxes in accordance with the priorities set out in section 36-48. After the list of affected property owners is confirmed, a copy shall be delivered to the city finance director for collection in the same manner as property taxes, except as provided herein. 
This hearing may be held in conjunction with the public hearing to confirm the list of affected property owners (see section 36-45). 
(Ord. No. 821, 3-20-2017)  
Sec. 36-45. - Publication of notice of confirmation of list of affected property owners. 
After the expiration of 20 days from the confirmation of the list of affected property owners, the city finance director shall publish a notice that the list of affected property owners has been confirmed, and that charges may be paid without interest at any time before the expiration of 30 days from the date that the notice is published. If not paid within this time, all installments thereof shall bear interest as provided in section 36-48. The notice shall include the schedule of discounts, if one has been established; to be applied to the property owners shared costs paid before the expiration date for payment of property owners shared costs without interest. 
This hearing may be held in conjunction with the public hearing to consider the cost sharing agreement resolution (see section 36-44). 
(Ord. No. 821, 3-20-2017)  
Sec. 36-46. - Reassessment. 
Council shall have the power when, in its judgment, any irregularity, omission, or error in any of the proceedings related thereto, has occurred, to set aside any special charge made by it and thereupon to make a reassessment. In that event, all additional interest paid, or to be paid, as a result of the delay in confirming the property owners shared costs shall be included as a part of the project cost. The proceeding shall, as far as practicable, take place in the same manner as those used in determining the original property owners shared costs. The new property owners shared costs shall have the same force as if they had originally been properly made. 
(Ord. No. 821, 3-20-2017)  
Sec. 36-47. - Payment of assessments in cash or by installments. 
Property owners involved shall have the option, within 30 days after the publication of the notice that the list of affected property owners has been confirmed, of paying the shared costs either in cash or in installments as determined by council in the resolution. 
(Ord. No. 821, 3-20-2017)  
Sec. 36-48. - Enforcement of property owners shared costs; interests; foreclosure; limitations. 
(a)  Any portion of property owners shared costs that are not paid within 30 days after publication of the notice that the list of affected property owners has been confirmed shall bear interest until paid at a rate to be fixed by council at a rate not more than eight percent per annum. 
(b)  If any installment of a property owners shared costs is not paid on or before the due date, all of the installments remaining unpaid shall immediately become due and payable, unless the council waives acceleration. Council may waive acceleration and permit the property owner to pay all installments in arrears together with interest due thereon and the cost to the city of attempting to obtain payment. If this is done, the remaining installments shall be reinstated so that they fall due as if there had been no default. Waiver of acceleration and reinstatement of future installments may be done at any time before foreclosure proceedings have been instituted. 
(c)  Liens may be foreclosed under any procedure prescribed by law for the foreclosure of property tax liens, except that lien sales and lien sale certificates shall not be required, and foreclosure may be begun at any time after 30 days after the due date. The city shall not be entitled to a deficiency judgment in an action to foreclose a lien. The lien shall be inferior to all prior and subsequent liens for state, local, and federal taxes, and superior to all other liens. 
(Ord. No. 821, 3-20-2017)  
Secs. 36-49—36-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Repair of streets, etc., generally, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-27-120. 
 
Sec. 36-71. - Permit required; fee. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to break, dig holes or trenches in or cause excavation of any kind to be made in any of the streets, alleys, parks, squares, sidewalks or rights-of-way of the city, for the purpose of placing any poles, rails, cables or wires of any kind, for laying water, sewer, gas or other pipes or for any other purpose, except with a written permit from the city. A permit fee shall be charged for each permit. The amount of the excavation permit fee shall be set from time to time and a schedule of such fees is on file in the municipal clerk's office. 
(Code 1994, § 20-56)  
Sec. 36-72. - Cash deposit in addition to fee. 
When a permit is granted under this article, the person obtaining such permit may, before beginning work thereunder, deliver to the city a cash deposit in such sum as may be required by the city council. The return to the permittee of such cash deposit shall be conditioned upon the proper repair, renewal or replacement of any street, surface, pavement, sidewalk, curbstone or other public property that may be removed, disturbed or otherwise injured during the course of the work under such permit and upon the leaving by the permittee of the same in as good condition as before such work was done or such excavation made. Such cash deposit, if required, is in addition to the permit fee. 
(Code 1994, § 20-57)  
Sec. 36-73. - Bond. 
When a permit is granted under this article, the person obtaining such permit may be required by the city, before beginning work thereunder, to execute and deliver to the city a good and sufficient bond, in writing, in such sum as may be required by general resolution, conditioned upon the payment of any damages which may result to any persons or property by reason of any pole, pipe, wire, barrier or other obstruction of any kind placed in or upon the streets, alleys, parks, squares, sidewalks or curbstones of the city by the permittee or his agent and further conditioned upon the repayment to the city of any sum of money which the city may at any time be compelled to pay out by reason of any acts on the part of such permittee or his agent or the failure to properly repair the excavation. 
(Code 1994, § 20-58)  
Sec. 36-74. - Repair of pavement. 
When pavement is disturbed or removed by any person making excavations therein pursuant to a permit, the person making such excavation or causing the excavation to be made shall repair or replace the excavation in accordance with the requirements of the city and warrant such repairs for one year. 
(Code 1994, § 20-59)  
Sec. 36-75. - Removing, damaging pipes, poles, wires, other appurtenances. 
Whenever, in the opinion of the city council, it is necessary to have the pipes of gas or water companies or the poles, wires, rails or other appurtenances of any kind of telegraph, telephone, electric lighting, electric power or public transportation companies changed, removed or relaid for the purpose of improvements in streets, alleys, parks, squares, sidewalks or curbstones, whether by regrading, widening or otherwise improving such streets, parks, squares, sidewalks or curbstones, the owners of such pipes, poles, wires, rails or other appurtenances shall, within a reasonable time after demand made on them by the city council, remove, relay or otherwise change the position of such pipes, poles, wires, rails or appurtenances as may be directed by the city, but at the expense of such owners. In no case shall such owners be entitled to damages from the city for interference with or injury to such pipes, poles, wires, rails or other appurtenances by reason of work upon or improvement in or on any street, alley, park, square, sidewalk or curbstone by authority of the city or its officers or agents. 
(Code 1994, § 20-60)  
Sec. 36-76. - Depth of pipes. 
No person shall lay or place any sewer, water or gas pipes in or under any of the streets, alleys, parks, squares, sidewalks or curbstones in the city, unless such pipes shall be laid at such depth below the surface of such streets, alleys, parks, squares, sidewalks or curbstones as may be required by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 20-61)  
Sec. 36-77. - Liability for work and maintenance. 
Any person doing any work under this article shall be liable for any claims arising by virtue of such work and shall be liable for any claims by virtue of the failure to properly repair such street, etc. Such person shall be required to see to the proper maintenance of any repaved or filled-in area for a period of one year following the completion of the work. Any sinking or other defect shall be promptly repaired by such person. 
(Code 1994, § 20-62)  
Sec. 36-78. - Restoration prerequisite to turning on electricity or granting occupancy permit. 
No permanent electrical power shall be released to any property and no occupancy permit shall be granted for any building or dwelling until the owner or contractor has replaced or corrected any damage done to the right-of-way, curb and street adjacent to such property. 
(Code 1994, § 20-63)  
Sec. 36-79. - Maintenance of roadside vegetation. 
(a)  Trimming limbs and shrubbery. Tree limbs, shrubbery or other vegetation overhanging into city streets from public rights-of-way shall be trimmed or pruned one foot from the edge of the street pavement or one foot from the back side of curbing to a height of no less than 15 feet in height. Where tree limbs, shrubbery or other vegetation protrudes into the right-of-way, so as to interfere with vision, obscure a traffic sign or signal, obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic, and/or strikes or scrapes against such traffic, the city or its agent upon notification will take immediate action to remove the obstruction. 
(b)  Intersection site triangles. Intersection site triangles shall be maintained to allow proper site distance from intersections. All trees and shrubbery shall be trimmed or pruned to allow proper site distance from each direction at the intersection. All trees or shrubbery trimmed or pruned commercially shall be the responsibility of the contractor or property owner and it shall be their responsibility for disposal. 
(c)  Streetlight obstruction. Streetlights obstructed by vegetation will be reported to the respective utility. 
(Code 1994, § 20-64)  
Chapter 38 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Open containers of alcohol while in vehicles, § 4-8; abandoned and junked motor vehicles, § 18-61 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 22; municipal court, ch. 24; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 26; operation of motor vehicles in parks, § 30-4; truck loads or tires causing litter, § 34-85. 
State Law reference— Motor vehicles, S.C. Code 1976, tit. 56. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Jurisdiction of municipal court. 
The municipal court may try and determine criminal cases involving violations of the provisions of this chapter or of the S.C. Code of 1976 relating to motor vehicles and traffic occurring within the city limits when the penalty prescribed by state law for such violations does not exceed the penalties provided by section 1-6. The municipal court may have trial jurisdiction over such criminal cases the same as magistrates. 
(Code 1994, § 11-1) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-6150.  
Sec. 38-2. - Adoption of state laws. 
Unless otherwise specifically covered by this chapter, all of the provisions and requirements of the general law of the state regulating traffic on highways registration and licensing, and driver's licenses, as contained in S.C. Code 1976, §§ 56-1-10 et seq., 56-3-10 et seq., and 56-5-10 et seq. insofar as such provisions can have application within the city, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set out in this section. All persons within the city shall strictly comply with all of the regulations imposed hereby, when so applicable. 
(Code 1994, § 11-2)  
Sec. 38-3. - Powers generally of city council. 
The city council, except as otherwise directed by this chapter or state law, shall have the power to: 
(1)  Regulate the operation and parking of vehicles within the city by the erection or placing of proper signs or markers indicating prohibited or limited parking, restricted speed areas, one-way streets, play streets, through or arterial streets, parking meter spaces in parking meter zones, U-turns, school zones, hospital zones, loading and unloading zones, quiet zones and other signs, markers and official traffic control devices indicating the place or manner of operating or parking vehicles within the city. 
(2)  Secure all necessary signs, markers or official traffic control devices to be erected or placed on any street or part of a street when such action is deemed necessary. The existence of such signs, markers or official traffic control devices at any place within the city shall be prima facie evidence that such signs, markers or official traffic control devices are erected or placed by and at the direction of the council and in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(3)  Regulate the movement of pedestrians upon the streets and sidewalks of the city by the erection or placing of proper signs or markers indicating the flow of pedestrian traffic. 
(4)  Designate bus stops and taxicab stands and erect signs prohibiting the parking of vehicles other than buses and taxicabs at their respective stops and stands. 
(5)  Designate truck routes and regulate the parking of vehicles of various sizes and weights. 
(6)  Mark off traffic lanes on streets and parts of streets indicating and directing the flow of traffic when, in the judgment of the council, such action is necessary. 
(Code 1994, § 11-3)  
Sec. 38-4. - State driver's and vehicle licenses required. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street in the city without a valid state driver's license to operate the vehicle, and such vehicle shall have valid state license tags. 
(Code 1994, § 11-4)  
Sec. 38-5. - Certificates of public convenience and necessity for taxicabs or ambulances. 
No person shall operate any taxicab or ambulance in the city without first having obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the city council authorizing such operation. Upon application therefor, the city council shall investigate the matter and issue such certificates as they deem advisable, upon such terms and conditions as it, in its discretion, might require. 
(Code 1994, § 11-5)  
Secs. 38-6—38-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION 
 
Sec. 38-41. - Improper use of driveways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person driving a vehicle to use the driveway of any filling station or service station in the city as a roadway or thoroughfare. 
(Code 1994, § 11-31)  
Sec. 38-42. - Turning movements restricted; use of private property for U-turn. 
It shall be unlawful for any person driving a vehicle to make any U-turn or other prohibited turn at any point where such turn is prohibited. It shall be unlawful to accomplish a U-turn by deviously going into or through private property adjoining the street where such turn is prohibited. 
(Code 1994, § 11-32)  
Sec. 38-43. - Use of vehicle for advertising. 
No person shall operate or park any vehicle on any street for the primary purpose of advertising. 
(Code 1994, § 11-33)  
Sec. 38-44. - Obstruction of intersections. 
No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal to proceed. 
(Code 1994, § 11-34)  
Sec. 38-45. - Negligent operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle upon a public way in the city negligently or heedlessly or without due caution in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property. Any person found guilty of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Code 1994, § 11-35)  
Secs. 38-46—38-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Obstructing fire equipment, firefighters; parking near fire hydrant, § 20-1; following fire apparatus too closely or parking near fire, § 20-2. 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate stopping, standing and parking, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-710(1); stopping, standing and parking regulated, S.C. Code 1976, § 56-5-2510. 
 
Sec. 38-81. - Obstructing roadways. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic; except, that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals of a police officer. 
(b)  No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1994, § 11-56)  
Sec. 38-82. - Loading zones. 
The city council may from time to time designate parking spaces as loading zones. No vehicle shall be parked in such spaces except trucks and commercial vehicles for the purposes of loading or unloading cargo. 
(Code 1994, § 11-57)  
Sec. 38-83. - Regulations not exclusive. 
The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Code 1994, § 11-58)  
Sec. 38-84. - Parking prohibited on certain streets. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful to park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets so designated. The city administrator may designate such areas with the recommendation of the traffic engineer or by direction of the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 11-59)  
Sec. 38-85. - Parking restricted on certain streets. 
When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful to park a vehicle between the hours and on any day specified on such signs upon any of the streets in the city. Such areas may be designated by the city administrator upon the recommendation of the traffic engineer or by direction of the city council. 
(Code 1994, § 11-60)  
Sec. 38-86. - Prohibited in specified places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control sign or signal: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway or so near thereto as to interfere with the unobstructed use of such driveway. 
(3)  Within an intersection. 
(4)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant. 
(5)  On a crosswalk. 
(6)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
(7)  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic control signal located on the side of a roadway. 
(8)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless indicated for a different length by official signs or markings. 
(9)  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing. 
(10)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station or on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of such entrance. 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(13)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or within a highway tunnel. 
(14)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, standing or parking or within any zones designated for buses, taxis or any public service vehicles. 
(15)  In any designated parking zone beyond the time specified by any adjacent parking or traffic control sign or device. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or willfully erase, remove, or obliterate any marks or symbols placed upon any vehicle by a police officer pursuant to his duties, or to move a motor vehicle in such a manner or to another location so as to park beyond any prescribed time periods or to avoid payment of any parking penalties or to evade any parking ordinances of this city. 
(16)  Adjacent to a curb marked with red or yellow paint. 
(17)  In any parking zone designated for handicapped parking unless the vehicle has a valid license tag issued by the state department of highways and public transportation with a special number or identification indicating that such tag has been issued to a handicapped person. 
(18)  On any railroad tracks. 
(19)  On any controlled access highway. 
(20)  In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including crossovers. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(Code 1994, § 11-61)  
Sec. 38-87. - Proximity to curbs. 
(a)  Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with the righthand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within 18 inches of the righthand curb, except where angle parking is permitted and except on one-way streets where parking is permitted on both sides. 
(b)  No violation of this section shall be deemed to have occurred whenever such parked vehicle is located within the outside boundary lines or pavement marks indicating the limits of such parking space when such exist. 
(Code 1994, § 11-62)  
Sec. 38-88. - Manner of parking within parking zones. 
(a)  When a parking space in any parking zone is parallel with the adjacent curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked with the foremost part of the vehicle pointed in the direction of the flow of traffic. On two-way streets, such parking causes the right side of the vehicles to be adjacent to the curb or sidewalk. 
(b)  When a parking space in any parking zone is at an angle from the adjacent curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked with the foremost part of the vehicle adjacent to the curb or sidewalk. 
(Code 1994, § 11-63)  
Sec. 38-89. - Stopping, standing or parking in loading zones. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to stop, stand, or park such vehicle for a longer period of time than is necessary for the expeditious loading and unloading of passengers or materials in any place marked as a loading zone. In no case shall such period exceed 30 minutes. Such loading zones shall be marked with yellow paint along the curb or other appropriate sign or device. 
(Code 1994, § 11-64)  
Sec. 38-90. - Parking to be incidental to use and operation of vehicle. 
No vehicle shall be parked on any street except when such parking is incidental to the use and operation of the vehicle. The storage or parking on the streets of vehicles, by garages, dealers or other persons, when such storage or parking is not incidental to the bona fide use and operation of the vehicle is prohibited. 
(Code 1994, § 11-65)  
Sec. 38-91. - Notice to appear to answer charge of parking violation. 
(a)  Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked in violation of any of the parking restrictions of this article, the officer finding it shall take its registration number and any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and affix conspicuously to such vehicle a notice in writing, on a form provided by the city, for the driver to answer to the charge against him during the hours and at the time and place specified in the notice. The officer shall send one copy of such notice to the municipal court. 
(b)  Any driver of a motor vehicle who willfully neglects to answer to the charges set forth in a notice so affixed by a police officer in accordance with this section shall have the fine doubled if not paid by court date. If after 60 days the fine has not been paid, a warrant will be issued by the court. Proof of ownership of any motor vehicle shall be prima facie evidence that such owner parked such vehicle. 
(Code 1994, § 11-66)  
Sec. 38-92. - Responsibility of owner for vehicle found illegally parked. 
If any vehicle is found upon a street in violation of any provision of this article regulating the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation. 
(Code 1994, § 11-67)  
Sec. 38-93. - Parking of commercial vehicles on residential streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any commercial vehicle to park on a street in a residentially zoned area, except as authorized in this section. 
(b)  A commercial vehicle shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Vehicles designed to transport more than ten people. 
(2)  Vehicles with more than six wheels. 
(3)  Farm tractors and tractors with a fifth wheel designed for transporting trailers or other equipment. 
(4)  Construction equipment and bulldozers. 
(5)  Trailers. 
(6)  Recreational vehicles with sleeping facilities. 
(7)  Motor vehicles which exceed or equal a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 15,001 pounds. The term "gross vehicle weight rating" (GVWR) means the value specified by the manufacturer as the loaded weight of a single vehicle. 
(c)  Vehicles delivering products or services to a nearby dwelling or residence are exempt from this prohibition while in the process of such delivery. Public utility vehicles are also exempt while on duty at the site. 
(Ord. No. 509, § 11-69, 11-15-1999)  
Sec. 38-94. - Fines. 
A schedule of fines shall be applied to parking violations within the city. The schedule is not printed in this section but is on file in the municipal clerk's office. 
(Code 1994, § 11-68)  
Sec. 38-95. - Parking or driving upon city-owned or city-used property. 
(a)  No person may stop, stand, or park any vehicle upon city-owned property or any property used by the city pursuant to lease, agreement, easement, etc., or any portion thereof in violation of any parking restriction posted on signs, markings, traffic control devices, or gates. 
(b)  No person shall park or permit to be parked upon city-owned or city-used property any vehicle unless the parking of such vehicle is incidental to the use of the city property where the vehicle is parked. 
(c)  No person may drive or operate a vehicle upon city-owned or city-used property in a manner which impedes the use of said property. 
(d)  For the purposes of this ordinance, "city-owned property" subject to this section shall mean any lands which the city owns, leases, or uses pursuant to agreement or easement, or in which it has acquired a beneficial interest by virtue of an agreement for sale or conveyance. 
(e)  The city may have any vehicle that violates this section towed at the owner's expense. 
(f)  Any person who violates the provisions of this section may be fined in accordance with the ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 792, 10-19-2015)  
Secs. 38-96—38-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RAILROADS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Mailing copies of municipal ordinances affecting railroads required, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-7-35. 
 
Sec. 38-121. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Grade crossing means a crossing at grade of a public street or highway over tracks of a railroad. 
Railroad means a carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars, operated on stationary rails. 
Railroad signal or sign means any sign, signal or device erected by authority of a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train. 
Railroad train means a steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto and operated upon rails, other than a streetcar. 
(Code 1994, § 11-91) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 38-122. - Complaints to state public service commission. 
The mayor or city council may apply directly to the state public service commission for relief from conduct of any railroad within the city limits in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1994, § 11-92) 
State Law reference— Complaints of railroads by local governments, S.C. Code 1976, § 58-17-190.  
Sec. 38-123. - Duties at crossings generally. 
It shall be the duty of the flagman to keep a lookout for the approach of cars crossing such streets and to warn persons crossing or about to cross at such place of the approach of any train, car or engine. 
(Code 1994, § 11-93)  
Sec. 38-124. - Red flag or light required. 
Each flagman shall be provided with and keep a red flag during the daytime and a red light during the nighttime, and the appropriate signal shall be displayed at all times upon the approach of any train, car or engine. 
(Code 1994, § 11-94)  
Sec. 38-125. - Disregarding warnings; interfering with, resisting or annoying. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cross the railroad track after having been warned by a flagman. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, resist or annoy any flagman while in the discharge of the duties imposed by this article. 
(Code 1994, § 11-95)  
Secs. 38-126—38-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - WRECKERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 10. 
 
Sec. 38-161. - Criteria for assignment to rotation list. 
Any firm having its principal business operation within the city limits shall become eligible to be considered for assignment of wrecker service calls by the police department provided that: 
(1)  The firm has a valid license to do business in the city. 
(2)  The firm's storage lot, which will be used to contain any vehicle towed as a result of a service call from the police department, is located within the city limits. 
(3)  The firm conforms to the rules and requirements of this plan. Any deviation from the requirements of this plan or any failure to provide reasonable, quick, and efficient service may result, upon a finding by the chief of police, in that firm's being removed from the police duty wrecker list. 
(4)  The owner's request will be honored only if the requested tow truck is on the scene within 15 minutes from the time that it is dispatched, or at the discretion of an investigating officer. 
(5)  No tow truck will respond to any scene without being called by the city. 
(6)  Tow truck drivers will be responsible for cleaning all debris from the road and right-of-way. 
(7)  The tow service must have a telephone located in the business and must furnish the city with at least one after-hours telephone number. 
(8)  There shall be an attendant on call, capable of responding to police calls for towing as well as being present or available for the release of vehicles to the public during normal business hours. 
(9)  Each firm shall be expected to provide adequate public liability and property damage insurance to protect the public from any loss or damage arising from the operation of the wrecker. 
(10)  Each firm shall have a storage lot within the city in close proximity to its regular place of business. Such lot shall have adequate storage. 
(Code 1994, § 11-116)  
Sec. 38-162. - Application of article provisions. 
It is not the purpose or intent of this article to regulate any person owning a wrecker and operating the same in connection with an automobile sales or repair agency in the city and who does not wish to apply to be placed on the list of wreckers on call by the city police department and rotate on a basis as provided by this article; provided, however, that the provisions of section 38-161 shall apply to all persons owning or operating a wrecker in the city. 
(Code 1994, § 11-117)  
Sec. 38-163. - Storage of disabled vehicles. 
All business operations under this article and the storage of all wrecked or disabled vehicles shall be in conformity with all other existing ordinances of the city, particularly the ordinances pertaining to planning and zoning. 
(Code 1994, § 11-118)  
Sec. 38-164. - Charges regulated. 
The city council may promulgate and fix the charges which an applicant shall charge for his wrecker or towing services. A copy of such charges shall be furnished to the applicant and signed by the applicant thereby agreeing to abide by the charges so fixed. 
(Code 1994, § 11-119)  
Sec. 38-165. - Rules; regulations. 
The chief of police and the city administrator shall have the authority to promulgate and enforce other reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article for the proper and efficient operation of wrecker or towing services in the city. 
(Code 1994, § 11-120)  
Sec. 38-166. - Establishment and use of rotation list. 
The city administrator and the chief of police shall determine when each wrecker service shall be subject to call by the police department of the city. The city administrator and the chief of police shall have the authority to determine the number of wrecker operators to be placed on the rotation list and subject to call by the police department of the city in any given year, according to duly adopted rules and regulations providing for criteria to be considered in selecting operators subject to call by the police department. 
(Code 1994, § 11-121)  
Sec. 38-167. - Right of vehicle owner not impaired. 
Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the owner of any wrecked or disabled vehicle from selecting a wrecker service of his own choice if he is unwilling to permit the wrecker service then on call to handle his vehicle. 
(Code 1994, § 11-122)  
Sec. 38-168. - Application of rotation system. 
All persons licensed by the city under this article to operate a wrecker or towing service shall abide by the rotation system to be promulgated and shall not answer any call or offer its services to the owner of any wrecked or disabled vehicle unless specifically requested by the owner. 
(Code 1994, § 11-123)  
Sec. 38-169. - Solicitation restricted. 
No person operating a wrecker in the city, whether licensed under this article or not, shall solicit business for his wrecker at the scene of any wreck. 
(Code 1994, § 11-124)  
Sec. 38-170. - Determination of violation. 
The operator of any wrecker that appears on the scene of a wreck without being called by the owner of the wrecked or disabled vehicle or the police department of the city and who attempts to solicit business or refuses to leave the scene of a wreck upon request of the police department shall be held in violation of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 11-125)  
Sec. 38-171. - License. 
(a)  Required. No person shall engage in the wrecker or towing service or business within the city: 
(1)  Unless he maintains and operates such business on private property within the city limits. 
(2)  Without first obtaining a business license for the operation of his business from the finance administrator. 
(b)  Application. Any person desiring to operate a wrecker or towing service in the city shall first be required to complete an application form containing the information provided for in this section. The application shall set forth the following information and any other pertinent information as may be required by the city administrator: 
(1)  The name, home address and proposed business address of the applicant. 
(2)  The location of the applicant's place of business, the hours during which the business will be open for service, the number of and a description of each wrecker or towing truck which will be owned by the applicant setting forth the serial number of each vehicle and if not owned, the name of the owner or lessor. 
(3)  The number of available spaces that the applicant has for the storage of wrecked or disabled motor vehicles, together with a description of the building or enclosure in which the wrecked or disabled vehicles will be stored. The daily or weekly charge for such storage for each vehicle. Storage areas shall be completely enclosed by a fence. 
(4)  The names of the drivers and attendants who will operate the wrecker or towing vehicles. These employees shall be of good moral character, and the applicant shall set forth all state or city traffic violations for the past three years which any of these employees have been charged with and the disposition of the charges. 
(5)  Such other information as the city administrator shall find reasonably necessary to effectuate the purpose and intent of this article. 
(c)  Insurance coverage. 
(1)  Before any license shall be issued under the provisions of this article for the city, the applicant shall furnish and file with the city a copy of an insurance policy as follows: 
a.  A garage keeper's regular liability policy covering fire, theft or any damage which may result to a person's motor vehicle in the care or under the control or in storage with the applicant in the amount of at least state-required coverage subject to a deduction for not more than $100.00. 
b.  A garage liability insurance policy covering the operation of the applicant's business equipment or vehicles in an amount not less than the minimum amount required by state law for a general automobile liability policy of an individual. 
(2)  Each policy required in subsection (c)(1) of this section must contain an endorsement providing that the insurer shall give to the city at least 30 days' notice of any change or cancellation of the policy. The policies required in this section shall be kept on file by the city in the office of the finance administrator. 
(d)  Revocation. The chief of police or the city administrator shall have the right to revoke any license issued under this division for cause after giving to the applicant or licensee three days' written notice of a hearing before the city administrator, which notice shall state the time, date and location of such hearing and the act complained of. 
(Code 1994, §§ 11-126—11-129)  
Chapter 40 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance prescribing rates for city utility services saved from repeal, § 1-12(3); any ordinance adopting community antenna television system regulations saved from repeal, § 1-12(8); administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 8; businesses, ch. 10; environment, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36; utilities near trees, § 42-50. 
State Law reference— Construction and operation of municipal utilities, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-31-610; authority to purchase, construct system, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-21-50; authority to improve existing system, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-21-80; bond issue authorized, S.C. Code 1976, § 6-21-190; water, sewage, waste disposal and the like, S.C. Code 1976, § 44-55-10 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 40-1. - Construction of sanitary sewer facilities. 
(a)  Generally. Any person may, after entering into an agreement with the city, construct sanitary sewer facilities in the city. All lines, treatment facilities and other phases of the plans and work must be approved by the city council prior to commencement of any work. All work shall be subject to inspection and approval by the city council. 
(b)  Procedure. 
(1)  Plans and specifications. Any person who proposes to construct sanitary sewers in the city, or elsewhere if such sewers are to connect onto the city sewer system or are to be connected to the sewer system in the city drainage basin, shall be required to have plans and specifications for such sewers prepared by a registered engineer. Prior to construction, such plans shall be submitted to the municipal clerk, who will forward the plans to the city engineer for approval or disapproval. In the event of disapproval, such plans must be revised to meet the requirements of the city engineer. After approval, at least 24 hours' notice must be given the city engineer before construction begins. 
(2)  Inspection, certification of completion of work; map of house service connections. During construction, the city engineer may inspect the work to determine that proper materials and techniques are being used. After completion, the city engineer will require that the owner's engineer furnish the city with a certificate that the sewers have been tamped, metered for infiltration and the trench tamped and that the sewers have been built in general accordance with the plans. The owner's engineer shall also submit to the city a map showing the locations of house service connections. 
(3)  Acceptance by city. The city may accept such sewers in the city sewer system upon the city engineer certifying to the city that the requirements of the city and the city engineer have been met. 
(4)  Fee for services of city engineer. The owner of the sewer system shall be required to pay for the services of the city engineer at his regular charge of salaries plus 125 percent, plus expenses. 
(Code 1994, §§ 22-1, 22-2)  
Sec. 40-2. - Connections generally; connection fees. 
(a)  No sewer connection or tap of any kind whatsoever may be made into the city's sewer system without obtaining a permit therefor from the city. All connections must be made according to the requirements of the city and inspected and approved by a representative of the city before the ditch has been backfilled. 
(b)  All properties annexed into the city shall be required to connect to the city sewer system within 60 days after annexation if sewer service is reasonably available to the annexed property at the time of annexation. Council may, in its discretion, annex property which does not have sewer reasonably available at the time of annexation. If sewer service to the annexed property is not reasonably available at the time of annexation, but subsequently becomes available, then the annexed property must connect to the city sewer system within 60 days after sewer service becomes available to said property. City council shall have the sole discretion to determine whether or not sewer service is reasonably available to any property located within the city or under consideration for annexation. In the event that the septic tank system of a property owner fails when sewer service becomes available, then said property owner must immediately connect to the sewer system and the 60-day time period to connect to the system shall not apply. 
(c)  A sewer tap fee is imposed for all new construction or additions which require a new sewer tap within the city. The amount of such fee is set from time to time, and a schedule of such fees is on file in the municipal clerk's office. 
(d)  All owners of improved real estate using a septic tank where sanitary sewer service is available shall connect to the sewer system prior to the sale of such property. 
(e)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-6. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1994, § 22-3; Ord. No. 733, 4-16-2012) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to require sewer connections, impose connection charges, etc., S.C. Code 1976, § 5-31-2010.  
Sec. 40-3. - Connections for subdivisions. 
No subdivision or portion of a subdivision which is not a subdivision of record with streets fully constructed as of the date when the contract for the sanitary sewer system for the city is signed shall be sewered by the city. The developer or owner thereof shall be required on any such subdivision or portion of subdivision to install sewer lines within such subdivision as may be required by the city, to connect the same to each lot in such subdivision and to connect the sewer line to the city sewer system. All necessary sewer and drainage easements shall not be accepted or approved by the city until this section has been fully complied with. 
(Code 1994, § 22-4)  
Sec. 40-4. - Interfering with manhole covers; dumping trash, or other waste into manholes. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to open, move or tamper with any manhole cover of the public sewer system of the city without written permission of the city. It shall further be unlawful for any person to dump any trash, waste or other material into any manhole of the city without receiving prior approval of the city. Any person violating this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Code 1994, § 22-5) 
Cross reference— Solid waste management, ch. 34. 
State Law reference— Interference with sewers, manholes, etc., S.C. Code 1976, §§ 5-31-20, 6-11-280.  
Sec. 40-5. - Sewer services fee. 
(a)  Every sewer user in the city, having a water tap, shall be charged an annual fee to be collected quarterly on the billing made by the Greenville Water System in accordance with the schedule for sewer services, maintenance, and operation except water meters used exclusively for landscape irrigation. The amount of such fee shall be set by city council resolution, and such schedule of fees shall be on file at the municipal clerk's office. All industrial, commercial and residential users outside the city limits utilizing city sewer lines shall be charged in accordance with the sewer service fee schedule. The revenue will go into the designated sewer fund. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided for in section 1-6. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1994, § 22-6; Ord. No. 517, § 22-6, 6-19-2000)  
Sec. 40-6. - Installation of backflow preventers. 
(a)  Any user of the city sanitary sewer system who has a private sewer service line which: 
(1)  Is below or near the level of the sewer collection line; 
(2)  Has previously back flowed or surcharged; 
(3)  Is, after study and determination by the public works department or building official, in danger of a backflow or surcharge during periods of heavy rain; or 
(4)  Is new residential construction that is either in a condition described in subsection (a)(1) or (a)(3) of this section, 
shall, after receiving written notice from the city, install, at the expense of the user, a city-approved swing check backflow preventer fixture. Such written notice may be by mail to the occupant of the property. 
(b)  Failure of the user or the person in control of the property to install the backflow preventer within 60 days thereafter shall be a violation of this section and the standard building codes. Violations will be enforced in a manner prescribed in the Code. 
(Code 1994, § 22-7)  
Sec. 40-7. - Annexation. 
(a)  Any property owner seeking sewer service from the city whose property is contiguous to the city must annex the property into the city limits before a sewer permit may be issued in the event that the mayor and council decide to annex the property. 
(b)  Any property owner seeking sewer service from the city whose property is not presently contiguous must sign appropriate documents that the property will be immediately annexed into the city when it becomes contiguous to the city limits before a sewer permit may be issued in the event that the mayor and council decide to annex the property. Sewer service to any property owner shall be terminated if the property owner refuses to annex into the city limits when the property becomes contiguous thereto. 
(Ord. No. 666, 12-17-2007)  
Secs. 40-8—40-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SEPTIC TANKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to make regulations relative to septic tanks, S.C. Code 1976, § 5-31-2010. 
 
Sec. 40-41. - Where permitted. 
Where public sewers are inaccessible or nonexistent and construction of a multiple use sewage collection and disposal system is impracticable, a septic tank sewage system may be used for disposal of domestic waste. 
(Code 1994, § 22-31)  
Sec. 40-42. - Conditions for use. 
Septic tanks and drainfields may be used for disposal of domestic waste; provided, however, that: 
(1)  The groundwater elevation shall be at least 36 inches below the surface or not less than six inches below the bottoms of the ditches within the absorption field, whichever shall be greater. Rock formations or other impervious strata shall be at a depth greater than six feet below the surface. 
(2)  No part of a septic tank or drainfield shall be constructed within 50 horizontal feet of a private or public well or an impounded or natural body of water, including open drainage ditches. 
(3)  The area of the lot or plot of ground is of sufficient size so that no part of the disposal system will be within five feet of the building, property line or under a building, driveway or parking area. 
(4)  The soil on the lot is suitable for the proper functioning of this type of disposal system. Standard procedures shall be followed in performing percolation tests, if used to determine the suitability of the soil. 
(5)  The designed system is of adequate size, properly located on the lot. 
(Code 1994, § 22-32)  
Sec. 40-43. - Permission to construct. 
Application for permission to construct a septic tank system in the city must be made to the county health department or a duly elected or approved sanitary district commission, and approval must be secured therefrom. 
(Code 1994, § 22-33)  
Sec. 40-44. - Maintenance not to create nuisances, health hazards; permitting overflow. 
All septic tanks and drainfields shall be maintained so that they shall not constitute a nuisance or health hazard. No septic tank shall be allowed to overflow onto the surface of any property, including streets and walkways. The occupants of the premises shall be responsible under the terms of this section. Any person violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1994, § 22-34)  
Sec. 40-45. - Compulsory termination of use and connection to public sewer system. 
If the building inspector determines that any septic tank in the city is not properly functioning or is inadequate, and, further, that a public sewer line is available to serve the property, the building inspector may give the owner of such property notice to discontinue the use of such septic tank and connect to the public sewer system within 30 days from such notice. 
(Code 1994, § 22-35)  
Secs. 40-46—40-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 40-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Proper maintenance means preventing deterioration of stormwater management systems and repairing damage or replacement of the practice if one or more of its components fail. Proper maintenance shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Fertilization and management of vegetation as well as cutting or spraying with approved herbicide to remove undesirable vegetation. 
(2)  Removal of all foreign materials from systems. 
(3)  Removal of silt from the system if the design capacity is reduced by two percent. 
(4)  Repair of erosion or other damage. 
(5)  Any other item that, in the opinion of the county engineer, is detrimental to the proper functioning of the system. 
Required by the city means any stormwater management system installed by an owner or developer of any site prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the city. 
Stormwater management system means any system that controls the flow and/or volume of stormwater runoff. Stormwater management systems include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Detention ponds. 
(2)  Underground detention. 
(3)  Retention ponds. 
(4)  Underground retention. 
(5)  Rooftop storage. 
(6)  Parking lot storage. 
(7)  Gravel and/or grass areas designed to limit or control stormwater runoff. 
(Code 1994, § 18-66) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 40-82. - Requirements. 
The following requirements shall apply to stormwater management systems: 
(1)  Maintenance. Any stormwater management system required by the city must be properly maintained at all times by the owner. 
(2)  Modifications. No stormwater management system required by the city may be modified or altered in any way without prior written approval of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 18-67)  
Sec. 40-83. - Penalties. 
Violation of the provisions of section 40-82 shall be deemed a misdemeanor by the owner punishable, upon conviction, in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Code 1994, § 18-68)  
Chapter 42 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 8; damaging shrubbery in cemeteries, § 12-2; environment, ch. 18; parks and recreation, ch. 30; collection of tree limbs, cuttings, shrubbery and leaves, § 34-9; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 42-1. - Purpose and intent of chapter. 
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to encourage the preservation, protection and replacement of trees in open spaces within the city, and to prevent their unnecessary destruction. 
(Code 1994, § 21-1)  
Sec. 42-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Tree (except as used in section 42-5) means any woody plant which: 
(1)  Has a trunk four inches or more in diameter at four and one-half feet above the ground; or 
(2)  Is of horticultural or an ornamental variety including, but not limited to, dogwood, redbud, crab apple, buckeye or holly, and has a trunk diameter of three inches or more at one foot above the ground, or a height of eight or more feet. 
Tree protective zone means that portion of any parcel of land coinciding with the front, side and rear yard setback requirements as established by applicable city zoning ordinances. 
(Code 1994, § 21-2) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 42-3. - Application and exemption. 
This chapter shall apply to all property located within the city except as excluded by section 42-7 and this section. 
(1)  Public property shall include that property of the city, or agency thereof, including that owned entirely by such public body, or over which it holds a right-of-way or easement on any streets, roads, parks, malls or other public lands. Private property, property subject to ad valorem property taxes and all easements and rights-of-way across such property are excluded from this subsection. 
(2)  Private property shall include all other property not excluded in this chapter except it shall not include single-family lots which now exist or appear on recorded plats of subdivisions which have been approved by the necessary governmental authorities. 
(Code 1994, § 21-3)  
Sec. 42-4. - Procedures and enforcement; failure to comply. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-6. Each tree destroyed or damaged in violation of this chapter shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1994, § 21-4)  
Sec. 42-5. - Requirements. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, no person on public property shall: 
(1)  Damage, cut, carve, abuse or harm any tree or injure the bark. 
(2)  Pick the flowers or seeds of any tree. 
(3)  Attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree unless necessary for its support. 
(b)  No person on public property under the authority of the city shall trim, spray, plant, set out or remove trees without obtaining the prior written approval from the city administrator. 
(Code 1994, § 21-5; Ord. No. 686, § 1, 1-26-2009)  
Sec. 42-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 686, § 1, adopted Jan. 26, 2009, enacted provisions which repealed former § 42-6 in its entirety, due to a conflict with the more restrictive language of § 6:17 of the zoning ordinance. Former § 42-6 pertained to approval of site plan, and derived unamended from § 21-6 of the Code of 1994.  
Sec. 42-7. - Utilities. 
Public and private utility companies shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter, provided that they file with the city administrator the policies and procedures followed in their tree trimming and removal practices and a mutually acceptable standard is agreed upon, and such utilities abide by the policies and procedures filed pursuant hereto. 
(Code 1994, § 21-7)  
Sec. 42-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 686, § 1, adopted Jan. 26, 2009, enacted provisions which repealed former § 42-8 in its entirety, due to a conflict with the more restrictive language of § 6:17 of the zoning ordinance. Former § 42-8 pertained to trees of historic value, and derived unamended from § 21-8 of the Code of 1994.  
Secs. 42-9—42-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TREE BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 696, adopted July 20, 2009, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 42-41—42-59, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 567, adopted Sept. 16, 2002, and Ord. No. 619, adopted Jan. 23, 2006. 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and committees, § 2-201 et seq. 
 
Sec. 42-41. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Park trees means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas, owned by the city, or to which the public has free access such as a park, bike, jogging, or walking trail, or small street or civic garden. 
Street trees means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues, or ways within the city. 
(Ord. No. 696, 7-20-2009) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 42-42. - Creation and establishment. 
There is hereby created and established a tree board for the city, which shall consist of a seven member board. Tree board members shall be citizens and residents of the city with one member being a representative from the city council. The director of parks and recreation will serve as a nonvoting ad hoc member of the board. All appointed members shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 696, 7-20-2009)  
Sec. 42-43. - Term of office. 
The initial term of office for two members appointed to the tree board shall be for two years; the initial term of office for the other three members shall be four years. Thereafter, their term of office for the appointed tram board members shall be for four years. The city council representative term shall be an annual appointment by the mayor and approved by the city council. If a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, a successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(Ord. No. 696, 7-20-2009)  
Sec. 42-44. - Compensation. 
Members of the tree board or related committees shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 696, 7-20-2009)  
Sec. 42-45. - Duties and responsibilities. 
It shall be the responsibility of the tree board to make recommendations annually for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets, bike trails, and in other public areas. The tree board, when requested by the mayor and city council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of its work. 
(Ord. No. 696, 7-20-2009)  
Sec. 42-46. - Operation. 
The tree board shall elect all officers including chairman, vice chairman and secretary, make its own rules and regulations and keep minutes of its proceedings. All officers will have a one-year length of term with eligibility for reelection. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for transaction of business. 
(Ord. No. 696, 7-20-2009)  
Sec. 42-47. - Street tree species to be planted. 
The following list constitutes the official street tree species of the city. No species other than those included in this list may be planted as street trees without permission of the city tree board. 
Willow Oak Quercus phellos 
Water Oak Quercus nigra 
Red Oak Quercus rubra 
Red Maple Acer rubrum 
Sugar Maple Acer saccharum 
Pecan Carya illinioensis 
Tulip-tree Liriodendron tulipifera 
Live Oak Quercus virginiana 
Southern Magnolia Magnolia grandiflora 
Laurel Oak Quercus laurifolia 
Black Walnut Juglans nigra 
Shagbark Hickory Carya ovata 
Pignut Hickory Carya glabra 
American Hornbeam Carpinus caroliniana 
Eastern Hop Hornbeam Ostrya virginiana 
American Beech Fagus grandifolia 
American Chestnut Castanea dentata 
White Oak Quercus alba 
Black Oak Quercus velutina 
Red Mulberry Morus rubra 
Black Mulberry Morus nigra 
Ginkgo Ginkgo biloba (male species only) 
Sassafras Sassafras albidum 
American Sycamore Platanus occidentalis 
London Planetree Platanus X acerifolia 
Redbay Persea borbonia 
Black Cherry Prunus serotina 
Eastern Redbud Cercis canadensis 
American Holly Ilex opaca 
Silver Maple Acer saccharinum 
Norway Maple Acer platanoides 
Planetree Maple Acer pseudoplatanus 
Horse Chestnut Aesulus hippocastanum 
Carolina Basswood Tilia caroliniana 
Flowering Dogwood Cornus florida 
Sourwood Oxydendrum arboreum 
White Ash Fraxinus americana 
Green Ash Fraxinus pennsylvanica 
Crepe Myrtle Lagerstoemia indica (red color) 
(Ord. No. 696, 7-20-2009)  
Sec. 42-48. - Distance from the curbs and sidewalks. 
The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be no closer than six feet. 
(Ord. No. 696, 7-20-2009) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 36.  
Sec. 42-49. - Distance from street and fireplugs. 
No tree shall be planted closer than 30 feet of any street corner, measured from the point of the nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street tree shall be planted closer than eight feet of a fireplug. 
(Ord. No. 696, 7-20-2009)  
Sec. 42-50. - Utilities. 
No street tree other than those listed may be planted under or within 15 feet of any overhead utility wire, or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. 
(Ord. No. 696, 7-20-2009) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 40.  
Sec. 42-51. - Public tree care. 
The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public ways to promote safety or preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The city tree board may remove or cause or order to be removed any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, water lines, or public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners providing that the selection and location of trees is in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 696, 7-20-2009)  
Sec. 42-52. - Tree topping. 
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger that three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this chapter at the determination of the city tree board. 
(Ord. No. 696, 7-20-2009)  
Sec. 42-53. - Pruning; corner clearance. 
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of 14 feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Such owners shall remove all dead, diseased, or dangerous trees or broken or decayed limbs, which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight or interferes with the visibility of any traffic control device or sign. Pruning shall conform to standards described in ANSI A-300, the American National Standards for Tree Care Operations. 
(Ord. No. 696, 7-20-2009)  
Sec. 42-54. - Dead or diseased tree removal on private property. 
The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city when such trees constitute a hazard to life or property, or harbors insects or disease which constitutes a potential threat to other trees within the city. The city will notify in writing the owners of such trees and may charge the cost of the removal on the owner's property tax notice. 
(Ord. No. 696, 7-20-2009)  
Sec. 42-55. - Removal of stumps. 
All stumps of street trees or park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
(Ord. No. 696, 7-20-2009)  
Sec. 42-56. - Interference with board. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay, or interfere with the city tree board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing any street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 696, 7-20-2009)  
Sec. 42-57. - Arborist license and bond. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the business and occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street trees or park trees within the city, without first being a certified arborist by the International Society of Arboriculture in addition to any other license required by law. No certification shall be required of any public service company or city employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. Tree care work performed by licensed, certified arborists shall follow the tree care standards described in ANSI A-300, American National Standards for Tree Care Operations, and the safety standards described in ANSI Z-133.1. 
(Ord. No. 696, 7-20-2009)  
Sec. 42-58. - Review by the mayor and city council. 
The mayor and city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts, and decisions of the city tree board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the city tree board to the mayor and city council who may hear the matter and make a final decision. 
(Ord. No. 696, 7-20-2009)  
Sec. 42-59. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of the chapter shall be, upon conviction or plea of guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 per tree. Any person who willfully and/or maliciously maims, injures, kills any street tree or park tree will be made to pay restitution, in addition to any fines or assessments for the replacement cost of the tree. 
(Ord. No. 696, 7-20-2009) 


ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF MAULDIN, SOUTH CAROLINA 

1999 Edition 
Adopted June 10, 1968 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
PREFACE 
    This volume is a publication of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Mauldin, South Carolina, as adopted June 10, 1968, revised April 19, 1999, and kept current through June 2014. 
    This zoning ordinance establishes zoning regulations for the City of Mauldin, South Carolina, and provides for the administration, enforcement, and amendments thereof, and creates a board of zoning appeals in accordance with the provisions of the South Carolina Local Government Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act of 1994, S.C. Code Title 6, Chapter 29. 
    The 2014 publication was under the direct supervision of Katrina Hansen, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Kim Hamel, Director of Business and Development, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that the efforts have resulted in a Code which will make the active zoning laws of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida  
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Includes/ 
Omits Supp. No. 782 12-15-2014 Include 1 783 12-15-2014 Include 1 786  3-16-2015 Include 1 788  5-18-2015 Include 2 789  6- 1-2015 Include 2 805  5-16-2016 Include 3 815  2-20-2017 Include 4 822  4-17-2017 Include 4 831  9-18-2017 Include 5 832  9-18-2017 Include 5 833  9-18-2017 Include 5 834  9-18-2017 Include 5 835 11-20-2017 Include 6 836 11-20-2017 Include 6 845  4-16-2018 Include 6 861  9-17-2018 Include 7 863 10-15-2018 Include 7 882  1-22-2019 Include 7  
ARTICLE 1. - PURPOSE, AUTHORITY 

Sec. 1:1 - Purpose. 
The zoning regulations and districts as herein set forth have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan and are designed to lessen traffic congestion; to secure safety from fire, panic, and other danger; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements. Such regulations have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, to the character of each district and to its peculiar suitability for particular uses, and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City of Mauldin. 
Sec. 1:2 - Authority. 
The provisions of this ordinance are adopted under authority of the South Carolina Local Government Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act of 1994, S.C. Code Title 6, Chapter 29. 
Sec. 1:3 - Jurisdiction. 
In an annexation by Petition, the Mayor and Council shall establish the initial zoning use for the newly annexed property, which shall be included in the annexation ordinance. After annexation, a property owner who desires a change in the zoning established by Mayor and Council at the time of the annexation must comply with the provisions of Section 4:1.2 of the Zoning Ordinance of the City concerning amendments to the zoning map. 
ARTICLE 2. - OFFICIAL MAP 

Sec. 2:1 - Official Zoning Map. 
The boundaries of each zoning district are shown on a map entitled Official Zoning Map, Mauldin, South Carolina, which is hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this Ordinance. 
2:1.1 Amendments. 
Amendments to the Official Zoning Map shall be made as necessary so that the map at all times portrays the current status of the zoning districts or zoning district boundaries. 
2:1.2 Custodian of Map. 
Copies of the Official Zoning Map shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and copies shall be available at all times for inspection by the public. 
Sec. 2:2 - Interpretation of District Boundaries. 
When uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply. 
2:2.1 Delineation. 
District boundary lines are intended to follow the center lines of streets, highways, alleys, easements, and other rights-of-way; the center lines of streams or other water channels; and platted lot or other property lines. In the absence of visual district boundaries or specified distances on the Official Zoning Map, dimensions or distances shall be determined by scaling the distance on the Official Zoning Map. 
2:2.2 Interpretation. 
When the physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, the Board of Appeals shall interpret the district boundaries. 
2:2.3 Divided Lot. 
Where a district boundary divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this Ordinance, the Board of Appeals may permit, as a special exception, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed fifty (50) feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot. 
ARTICLE 3. - ZONING DISTRICTS, GENERAL STANDARDS, DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 3:1 - Zoning Districts. 
The City of Mauldin, as now or hereafter established, is hereby divided into the following districts: 
R-20 Residential District R-15 Residential District R-12 Residential District R-10 Residential District RM-1 Mixed Residential R-M Residential, Multifamily District O-D Office District CRD Central Redevelopment District C-1 Commercial District C-2 Commercial District S-1 Services District I-1 Industrial District PD Planned Development AP Airport Protective Area POD Planned Office District  
Sec. 3:2 - General Standards. 
3:2.1 Application. 
The regulations set forth in this Ordinance affect all land, every building, and every use of land and/or buildings and shall apply as follows. 
3:2.2 New Uses or Construction. 
After the effective date of this Ordinance, any new construction or uses of land shall conform to the use and dimensional requirements for the district in which it is to be located. 
3:2.3 Open Space Requirements. 
After the effective date of this Ordinance, no part of a yard, court, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or parking and loading space required for any other building. 
3:2.4 Reduction of Lot and Yard Area Prohibited. 
No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall be reduced in size or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established herein. 
( Ord. No. 786 , amd. 7, 3-16-2015) 
Sec. 3:3 - Definitions. 
Except where specifically defined herein, all words used in this ordinance shall carry their customary meanings. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular number includes the plural. The word "shall" is mandatory, not directory. 
AAN Standards. The American Standard for Nursery Stock, published by the American Association of Nurserymen (AAN), current edition. 
Abandoned sign or sign structure. A sign or sign structure which was erected on a property in conjunction with a particular use, said use having been discontinued for a period of one-hundred eighty (180) calendar days or more or a sign of which the contents pertain to a time, event, or purpose which no longer applies or which has occurred. Signs on property shall be considered abandoned when there is clear evidence that a business or activity has vacated the building or grounds. 
Accessory Apartment. A separate and complete dwelling unit that is contained on the same lot as the structure of a single-family detached dwelling or a business. 
Accessory Dwelling. A residence located on premises with a main non-residential use and occupied only by a caretaker or guard employed on the premises and, as applicable, his or her family. 
Accessory Structure. A structure that is clearly incidental and subordinate in area to a principal use and/or structure. An accessory structure shall only be permitted when it is located on a parcel that contains a principal use. 
Accessory Use. A use of land or of a building or portion thereof customarily incidental to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with such principal use. For the purpose of this ordinance, accessory uses include swimming pools, game courts, and satellite dish antennas and shall meet the requirements of Section 3:10. 
Acre means forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet. 
Adaptive Reuse. Refers to the process of adapting old structures for new purposes while retaining some of the architectural details that make the building unique. 
Addition. New construction involving an existing building where the gross floor area of the structure is increased or where a portion of the gross floor area is relocated. 
Adjacent. Meeting and touching at some point, or having nothing of the same kind intervening. 
Adult Day Care Center. A nonresidential facility in which custodial care is provided for adults, related or unrelated, who are in need of supervision and/or assistance with routine daily functions but who are not in need of regular medical attention, and where the adults are receiving said care on a regular and recurring basis during a part of the twelve-hour period between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., for not less than three (3) and not more than twelve (12) hours. Such a facility shall comply with all state and local codes and/or ordinances regarding zoning, building, fire, and health. Adult Day Care Center facilities located in residential districts are limited to providing care for up to sixteen (16) adults. Such a facility shall comply with all state and local codes and/or ordinances regarding zoning, building, fire, and health. 
Adult Day Care Home. A home occupation (accessory use) consisting of a private family home in which custodial care is provided for not more than five (5) adults, related or unrelated, who are in need of supervision and/or assistance with routine daily functions but who are not in need of regular medical attention, and where the adults are receiving said care on a regular and recurring basis during a part of the twelve-hour period between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., for not less than three (3) and not more than twelve (12) hours. Such a facility shall comply with all state and local codes and/or ordinances regarding zoning, building, fire, and health. 
Advertising device. Any structure or device erected or intended for the purpose of displaying advertising or for which is designed to or attracts attention to the premises, situated upon or attached to real property. For purposes of this Code Section, an advertising device is a "sign." 
A-frame Sign (also known as a Sidewalk or Sandwich Board sign). A self-supporting, portable sign with one (1) or two (2) faces that are adjoined at the top and displayed at an angle, which is not permanently anchored or secured. 
A-Frame Sign Examples:

Alteration, sign. Any change to a sign or sign structure because of construction, repair, maintenance. 
Alteration, structure. Any change, addition, or modification in construction or occupancy of an existing structure. 
Animated sign. A sign with action, motion, sound, or changing colors, which accomplishes such action, motion, sound, or changing colors with or without electrical energy. This includes signs with lights or other illuminating devices that blink, flash, fluctuate, or have a changing light intensity, brightness, or color. This definition does not include a time, date and temperature or electronic message signs as defined by this Code Section. 
Antenna. A device, dish or array used to transmit or receive telecommunications signals. 
Apartment. See "Dwelling, Multifamily." 
Approved Plant List. List of trees, shrubs, and ground covers, approved for use in the City of Mauldin for compliance with Section 6:2 and the Mauldin City Code: Chapter 21, Sections 1-8 for tree preservation and planting regulations. 
Appurtenance. An accessory, something added to the main structure or land. 
Area of sign. The area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem, figure, or character together with any frame, other material, open space, or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such writing, representation, emblem, figure, or character from the background against which it is placed. For double-faced signs, only the largest display face shall be measured in computing the sign area, or only one (1) face shall be measured in computing sign area if the display faces are the same size. The display of street address on a ground sign, wall, or window shall not be computed in determining the maximum allowable area of a ground, wall, or window sign. 
Assisted Living Facility. A structure or structures containing two (2) or more rooming units in occupancy and occupied by persons unable to live independently and may include spouses or partners (except for rooms occupied by resident staff personnel), and which provide indoor, conveniently located, shared food preparation service and major dining areas, and common recreational, social, and service facilities for the exclusive use of all the residents. Such a facility shall comply with all state and local codes and/or ordinances regarding zoning, building, fire, and health. 
Attached sign. Any sign attached to, applied on, or supported by any part of a building, including but not limited to, a wall, window, projecting sign, or a sign on a canopy or awning. 
Authorized Healthcare Provider. An individual authorized by law and currently licensed in the State of South Carolina to provide specific treatment, care, or services to residents. 
Automobile Parts Sales. A wholesale or retail store that only sells automobile parts and may not be involved in any shop-related activities such as parts rebuilding, refurbishing, or installation. 
Automobile Parts Sales and Shop. A wholesale or retail store that sells automobile parts and is involved in shop-related activities such as parts rebuilding, refurbishing, or installation. 
Automobile Salvage-wrecking yard. A lot or parcel of land on which the dismantling or wrecking of used motor vehicles or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles or their parts occur. The presence of two (2) or more vehicles on a parcel of land being used for nonresidential purposes which, for a period exceeding forty-five (45) days, have not been capable of operating under their own power or from which parts have been or are to be removed for reuse or sale, constitutes evidence of an automobile salvage-wrecking yard. (This definition does not include Automobile towing service uses that provide for the removal and temporary storage of functioning, inoperable or wrecked vehicles.) 
Awning. An architectural projection or shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building and composed of a covering of rigid or non-rigid materials and/or fabric on a supporting framework that may be either permanent or retractable. 
Awning sign. An awning that contains letters, numbers, symbols, pictures, logos, or visual display, or other communication, attached, painted on, or made an integral part of an awning. For purposes of this Code Section, "awning signs" shall be considered "wall signs." 
Banner. A sign with or without characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentation applied to cloth, paper, plastic, or natural or synthetic fabric of any kind with only such material for a backing. For purposes of this Code Section, a "banner" is a "sign." 
Bar. Any establishment including cocktail lounges, taverns, etc., however designated, whose primary function is the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and cannot be licensed as a restaurant under state A.B.C. regulations. 
B & B. Roots of plant material which have been balled and burlapped, in accordance with AAN Standards, in preparation for delivery and transplanting. 
Berm. An earthen mound formed to shield undesirable views, decrease noise, and/or add topographical interest. The slope of a berm should not exceed a rise of one (1) foot in four (4) horizontal feet, unless approved otherwise. 
Block Face. The properties abutting on one (1) side of a street and lying between the two (2) nearest intersecting or intercepting street(s), un-subdivided land, watercourse, or city boundary. 
Example of Block Face: 

Boarding House. An establishment where the owner or manager is a full-time resident of said establishment, and which provides lodging for compensation to three (3) or more tenants; is enclosed within one (1) structure, which shall only have one (1) kitchen, a common dining room or study area, and no dining facilities or kitchens in the lodger's rooms; and where meals may be prepared or served; excludes hotels, motels, bed and breakfast homestays and inns. 
Buffer. An area of land used to separate visibly one (1) use from another or which acts as a separation between two (2) land uses of different intensity. 
Bufferyard. A linear strip of land combined with a vertical element such as plants, berms, fences, or walls, which physically separates and screens incompatible land uses. 
Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any person, process, equipment, or goods. 
Building, Accessory. A structure attached to or detached from a principal building on the same lot and customarily incidental in use to the principal building. 
Building, Principal. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot. 
Building Setback Line. A line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the nearest portion of any building excluding steps, gutters, and similar fixtures and the property line when measured perpendicularly thereto. 
Business Signs on Vehicles. Signs displaying a business name, trademark, or other identifier shall be allowed provided they are moved periodically during the normal course of business and maintain a current and valid registration. When not in use, said vehicles are to be parked in such a manner so as to minimize their visibility from the street and other public property. 
Candela. The unit of luminous intensity equal to one-sixtieth ( 1/60 ) of the luminous intensity per square centimeter of a blackbody radiating at the temperature of solidification of platinum (2,046 degrees Kelvin) also called a candle. 
Canopy. A permanent attached structure which projects from and is supported by a building, which serves as a cover providing shelter or decoration and which extends beyond the building. 
Canopy, attached. A multi-sided structure or architectural projection supported by attachment to a building on one (1) or more sides and also supported by columns at additional points. Signs placed on attached canopies are considered "wall signs" for the purposes of this Code Section. 
Canopy, freestanding. A multi-sided structure or architectural projection supported by columns. Signs placed on freestanding canopies are considered "wall signs" for the purposes of this Code Section. 
Canopy sign. A sign on a canopy. For purposes of this Code Section, a sign on a canopy is a "wall sign" (see figure, "Types of Attached Signs"). 
Car Title Loan Business. An establishment that makes small consumer loans that leverage the equity of a car or other vehicle as collateral where the title to such vehicle is owned free and clear by the loan applicant and any existing liens on the car or vehicle cancel the application. Failure to repay the loan or make interest payments to extend the loan allows the lender to take possession of the car or vehicle. 
Catering Truck. A truck, van, or similar vehicle from which the vendor offers for sale food and beverages that are prepackaged. 
Certificate of Occupancy. A statement signed by the Zoning Administrator setting forth that the building, structure, or use complies with the Zoning Ordinance and that the same may be used for the purpose stated herein. 
Certified Treated Wood. Wood that has been treated with a permanent preservative as defined by the American Wood Preservers Association. 
Change of Use. The act of eliminating the type of land use in a structure or on a lot and replacing it with another type of land use; or the act of adding another type of land use in a building or on a lot which did not previously exist there. A change of use may or may not involve any type of new construction or building renovation. Single tenant developments where a use has ceased or is no longer in operation for a period of one hundred eighty (180) calendar days or more shall render the prior use inactive and subsequent uses of the property shall be considered as new development and reviewed, as such. Multi-tenant developments where fifty (50) percent or more of the gross floor area of a structure or lot (accommodating two (2) or more uses) has ceased or is no longer in operation for a period of one hundred eighty (180) calendar days or more shall be considered new development and reviewed as such. 
Changeable Copy. Any permanently unframed sign, illuminated or not which is principally devoted to and designed for changeable copy text and graphics, but which specifically excludes time/date/temperature signs and electronic message signs as herein defined. Changeable copy signs may involve either manual or automatic changeable copy. No changeable copy sign may have its copy changed more than two (2) times in a twenty-four-hour period. Any automatic changeable copy sign which changes more than two (2) times in a twenty-four-hour period shall be defined to be an electronic message sign. Portable or moveable signs are not considered changeable copy signs. 
Check Cashing Business. An establishment that provides one (1) or more of the following and is regulated pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 41 of Title 34 of the S.C. Code of Laws. 
A.  An amount of money that is equal to the face of the check or the amount specified in the written authorization for an electronic transfer of money, less any fee charged for the transaction; or 
B.  An agreement not to cash a check or execute an electronic transfer of money for a specified period of time; or 
C.  The cashing of checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or other commercial paper for compensation by any person or entity for a fee. 
Child Day Care Center. A facility providing care for more than six (6) children who do not reside in the facility, are present primarily during daytime hours, do not regularly stay overnight, and that may include some instruction. Such a facility shall comply with all state and local codes and/or ordinances regarding zoning, building, fire, and health. 
Child Day Care Home. A home occupation (accessory use) in which a permanent occupant of the dwelling provides for the care of up to six (6) children. Those receiving care are not all related to the occupant or to each other by blood or marriage and are not the legal wards or foster children of the attendant adults. Those receiving care and who are not dependents of the occupant do not reside on the site. Such a facility shall comply with all state and local codes and/or ordinances regarding zoning, building, fire, and health. 
Civic Event. An event sponsored by government organization. 
City Sponsored event means that the city, solely or in partnership with another entity, produces and/or coordinates the event. 
Cluster Subdivision. A form of residential subdivision that permits housing units to be grouped on sites or lots with dimensions, frontages, and setbacks reduced from conventional sizes, provided the density of the tract as a whole shall not exceed the density allowed by the zoning district under existing regulations and the remaining land area is devoted to common open space. 
Commissary. A commissary is defined as a permitted fixed food establishment that serves as an operating base for a mobile food vehicle. The commissary is where the vehicle will be stored, parked, serviced, cleaned, supplied, and maintained. 
Common Open Space. Land and/or water within or related to a cluster residential development, not individually owned, which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development, or the public, which may contain such accessory structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for passive recreational purposes and utilities. A condition of the cluster residential development approval shall be that common open space may not be further subdivided. 
Communications Tower. A tower, pole, or similar structure of any size which supports communications (broadcast or receiving) equipment utilized by commercial, governmental, or other public and quasi-public users above ground in a fixed location, freestanding, guyed, or on a building. This does not include private home use of satellite dishes and television antennas or amateur radio operators as licensed by the Federal Communications Commission. 
Conforming sign. A sign that is legally installed and is in compliance with all applicable local laws and ordinances. 
Construction. The erection of any on-site improvements on any parcel of ground whether the site is presently improved, unimproved or becomes unimproved by demolition, destruction of the improvements located thereon by fire, windstorm or other casualty. 
Construction Sign. A sign whose message is limited to identification of architects, engineers, contractors, and other persons involved with the construction project or to the name of the building being constructed, the intended purpose of the building and the expected completion date. 
Convenience Store. Any retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged food products, household items, and similar products, which meet the convenience shopping needs of its patrons. These establishments may or may not offer gasoline for sale; however, they do not offer any automobile maintenance services or repair. 
Critical root zone. The minimum area beneath a tree which must be left undisturbed and protected from construction disturbance in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to give a tree a reasonable chance of survival. The critical root zone is delineated by a concentric circle with the tree trunk as the center. The radius of the critical root zone equals one (1) foot for every one (1) inch of tree diameter. Example: a twenty-inch diameter tree will have a critical root zone radius of twenty (20) feet. 
Cutoff Fixture. An outdoor lighting fixture shielded or constructed in such a manner that no more than two and one-half (21/2) percent of the total light emitted by the fixture is projected above the horizontal plane of the fixture. 
Debt Relief Company. Any establishment that advertises and/or promises to reduce unsecured debt through settlement and accepts any funds, payments or fees in advance of said settlement. This also applies to any firm that offers debt management, consolidation, advice, assistance, elimination, financing, negotiation, payoff, relief, settlement, or other solution that requires discontinuation of legitimate debt payments. This definition shall not apply to depository institutions or attorneys or retail businesses such as pawnshops or jewelry stores who obtain a precious metal dealer license in the normal course of their retail business and that are properly licensed by South Carolina. 
Deferred Presentment Lender. A business or use that regularly accepts a check from a borrower drawn on the borrower's bank account to be presented for payment at a later date and that charges a fee for the service such as those regulated under Chapter 39 of Title 34 of the S.C. Code of Laws. 
Density. The number of dwelling units per acre of land. 
Derelict sign. A sign that is dilapidated or in such condition as to create a hazard or nuisance, or to be unsafe or fail to comply with the Building or Electrical Codes applicable in the jurisdiction. 
Developable Acreage. As it pertains to cluster developments, land that is located outside of designated floodplains and has a slope of less than thirty (30) percent. 
Development. Any human change or alteration to the unimproved or improved state of land, including, but not limited to changes or alteration to vegetation, soil, geology, hydrology, buildings or other structures for any residential, commercial, industrial, utility, or other uses, including, but not limited to, all areas for vehicular access, circulation, and parking and including, but not limited to, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating and drilling operations and any subdivision of land. 
Development Identification Sign. A sign bearing only the name of the multiple tenant development. 
Diameter at breast height (DBH). Means the standard measure of trees which exist on a site. The diameter of the trunk is measured at four and one-half (41/2) feet from the ground. If the tree splits into multiple trunks below four and one-half (41/2) feet, the trunk should be measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. 
Dimensional Requirements, Sign. Those measurements that contain the area, height and spacing requirements for signs. 
Directional Sign. A sign or guide whose sole purpose is to direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the premises on which it is displayed. Examples include: "in" "out", "entrance", "exit", and "driveway". 
Directory sign for multi-tenant development. A sign, distinguished from a project entrance sign, which is allowed on a premises with more than one (1) tenant or occupants of a building. It may be freestanding or a building (wall) sign. Such signs are not usually visible from the public street right-of-way of a development that provides initial access to the property, but rather are located within the development, along a driveway, access way, or parking aisle. 
District, Zoning. Any section of the City of Mauldin in which zoning regulations are uniform. 
Double-faced sign. A sign which has two (2) display areas against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is sixty (60) degrees or less, where one (1) face is designed to be seen from one (1) direction and the other face from another direction. Only one (1) face shall be used in computing allowable sign area. 
Drainage Plan. A site plan showing contours, drainage structures (including, but not limited to, pipes, ponds, ditches, etc.), anticipated flow calculations, destination of run-off to nearest identifiable drainage way and any other data required to clearly define the proposed drainage system. 
Dwelling. Any building or structure, or part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used, and including any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually used therewith, but excluding hotels, motels and rooming and boarding houses. 
Dwelling, Garden Court. A single-family dwelling unit, also known as a patio house, which is located on its lot nearer to one (1) side and/or rear property line(s) than is allowed for normal single-family dwellings; however, such structure cannot be located closer than five (5) feet to the side and/or rear property lines). For the purpose of this ordinance, a garden court dwelling shall be treated as a single-family attached dwelling. 
Dwelling, Multifamily. A residential building containing three or more individual dwelling units located on a single lot or parcel of ground. A multifamily dwelling, commonly known as an apartment house, generally has a common outside entrance for all the dwelling units and the units are generally designed to occupy a single floor one (1) above the other. 
Dwelling, Single-Family. A residential building containing only one (1) dwelling unit and not occupied by more than one (1) family. 
Dwelling, Single-Family Attached. Two (2) or more single-family dwelling units, each with its own outside entrance, which are generally joined together by a common party wall or connecting permanent structures such as breezeways, carports, or garages whether or not such a group is located on a single lot or parcel of ground or on adjoining individual lots. For the purpose of this ordinance, dwellings such as garden court dwellings, patio houses, rowhouses, townhouses, and zero lot line dwellings shall be treated as single-family attached dwellings. 
Dwelling, Single-Family Detached. A single dwelling unit on its own lot that is developed with open yards on all sides, but excluding manufactured homes, mobile homes, recreational motor vehicles or trailers. 
Dwelling, Two-Family. A residential building containing two (2) individual dwelling units located on a single lot or parcel of ground. 
Dwelling Unit. One (1) or more rooms physically arranged so as to create an independent housekeeping establishment for occupancy by one (1) family with separate toilets and facilities for cooking and sleeping. In no case shall a dwelling unit be rented or leased for intervals of less than one (1) month. 
Dwelling, Zero Lot Line. A single-family dwelling, which has a zero-foot setback from a side and/or rear property line. For the purpose of this ordinance, a zero lot line dwelling shall be treated as a single-family attached dwelling. 
Electronic Message Board (EMB's). A permanent sign consisting of text, symbolic imagery, or both, that uses an electronic display created through use of a pattern of lights in a dot matrix configuration allowing the sign face to intermittently change the image without having to physically or mechanically replace the sign face. An EMB message changes more than two (2) times in a twenty-four-hour period, and shall be visible for a minimum of three (3) seconds and shall be kept accurate. These will not be deemed to constitute changeable copy or animated signs. 
Erect. To construct, build, raise, assemble, place, affix, attach, create, paint, draw, or in any other way bring into being or establish, but it shall not include any of the foregoing activities when performed as an incident to the change of advertising message or the normal maintenance or repair of a sign structure. 
Expansion. Any construction that increases the size of a building or structure in terms of site coverage, height, length, width, or gross floor area. 
Expressway. Expressways involve those facilities containing some at-grade intersections but with limited access. 
Façade. The exterior wall of a structure or building exposed to public view or that wall viewed by persons not within the building, including parapets walls. 
Façade, Primary. A primary façade is a building's principle or face elevation that typically fronts a street. On commercial buildings, the primary façade generally includes the storefront, principle entryway, prominent architectural features, a building cornice and window and door opening. Some commercial buildings may feature multiple primary façades, such as those structures located on a street corner. 
Façade, Secondary. A secondary façade has limited architectural features and generally does not have a storefront or other openings. For the purposes of signage, a secondary façade must be architecturally finished with at least one (1) opening (window or secondary entrance) and shall be constructed with similar materials and details as the primary façade. 
Family. A person living alone, or a group of people, including domestic employees, living together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit and sharing common living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitary facilities as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse or other group living facility or visitor accommodations. 
Fencing: Non-opaque. A fence that can be seen through by persons outside its confines and which does not act as a privacy screen. 
Fencing: Privacy fence, Screening. A fence and/or wall constructed of solid, opaque materials made up of wood, vinyl, brick, stone and/or other architectural masonry finishes that are intended to block the line of sight into a premises; and/or to screen specific site and/or building features from view. 
Flag. A sign with or without characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentation applied to cloth, paper, plastic, or natural or synthetic fabric of any kind with only such material for a backing. For purposes of this Code Section, except as otherwise provided herein, a "flag" is a "sign." 
Flashing Sign. A sign illuminated by direct or indirect artificial light that flashes on and off in regular or irregular sequences, including, but not limited to strobe light. 
Flood Light. A form of lighting designed to cast direct its output in a diffused, less specific direction. 
Food Trailer (Concession Style). An enclosed attached or detached trailer that is equipped with facilities for the preparing, cooking and selling of various types of food products. 
Food Truck. An enclosed motor vehicle equipped with facilities for preparing, cooking and selling various types of food products. 
Foot-Candle (FC). A quantitative unit measuring the amount of light cast onto a given point, measured as one (1) lumen per square foot. 
Freestanding Ground Sign, see also Monument Sign. All freestanding ground signs shall be mounted on a monument structure that is equal to or greater than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) the width of a sign itself. Monument structures shall be constructed of brick, stone or stucco materials that have the appearance of brick, stone, or stucco or other durable architectural materials consistent with the design of the primary building on the site. 
Freestanding Pole Sign. A sign which is permanently affixed to the ground by a pole or other structure and which is not part of a building. Freestanding poles shall not be permitted. 
Freeway. Freeways involve those facilities with complete control of access through the use of grade separation and interchanges. 
Frontage, building. The width in linear feet of the front exterior wall of a particular building in which an establishment is located. 
Frontage, road. The distance in linear feet of each lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
Full Cutoff Fixtures. An outdoor light fixture shielded or constructed in such a manner that it emits no light above the horizontal plane of the fixture. 
Gallon. Unit of physical measure for defining the size of root balls of plant material in a standard container (e.g. three-gallon size), in accordance with AAN Standards, in preparation for delivery and transplanting. 
Glare. The effect produced by a light source within the visual field that is sufficiently brighter than the level to which the eyes are adapted, so as to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss of visual acuity. 
Gross Floor Area. The sum of the total horizontal areas of each floor of a building, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or in the case of a common wall separating two (2) buildings, from the centerline of such common wall. The term gross floor area shall include any area with a ceiling height of seven (7) feet or greater, all elevator shafts, stairway shafts; and attics and basements. Up to one thousand (1,000) square of floor area used to house mechanical, electrical, and communications equipment may be excluded in the calculation of gross floor area when such devices are located in the basement, first floor, or penthouse of said building. Gross floor area shall also include areas covered by canopies and like structures when an active use is occurring such as: drive-through service, gasoline pumping, loading and/or storage of materials, and similar activities. Gross floor area does not include the floor area in parking structures/decks. 
Gross Leasable Area. The total floor area designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines, and upper floors, if any, expressed in square feet and measured from the center line of joint partitions and from outside wall faces. 
Ground Covers. Ground covers shall be defined as any evergreen plant material, forming a continuous coverage, with a mature height ranging from one (1) inch to eighteen (18) inches. 
Ground sign. A permanently affixed sign which is wholly independent of a building for support (i.e., freestanding). A ground sign must be attached to a monument structure and may consist of more than one (1) sign panel, provided all such sign panels are attached to or integrated into one (1) sign structure. 
Group and Family Care Center. An establishment where more than five (5) persons, not regularly employed due to age or disability are lodged, kept or temporarily confined, whether such persons be supported by charity or fees charged therefore, as opposed to a rooming house or boardinghouse. A group home is one (1) that provides a support setting for persons, who by reason of mental or physical disability, addiction to drugs or alcohol or family and/or school adjustment problems, require a specialized residential setting. Such a facility shall comply with all state and local codes and/or ordinances regarding zoning, building, fire, and health. 
Group and Family Day Care Home. A residential home that serves as a personal care facility for five (5) or less persons. Only those residing in the home may be involved in the day-to-day operation of the adult/child home. (Personal care service: The care of persons who do not require chronic or convalescent medical or nursing care. Personal care involves responsibility of the safety of the persons while at home. Such a facility shall comply with all state and local codes and/or ordinances regarding zoning, building, fire, and health. 
Group Development. A planned mix of permitted uses. 
Group Non-residential Development. A building or group of buildings which consists of more than one (1) office, commercial, retail or industrial structure erected on one (1) or more parcels of ground developed with a common plan for the protection, maintenance and improvement of the parcels. 
Group Residential Development. A building or group of buildings containing three (3) or more dwelling units located on one (1) or more parcels of ground developed with a common plan to protect, maintain and improve the parcels. Where permitted, a group residential development might also include a planned mix of residential uses, and low impact non-residential uses. 
Guarantee in lieu of construction of improvements. Cash, irrevocable letters of credit, bonds, or similar financial instruments deposited with and accepted by the City to insure that improvements required as part of a development will be satisfactorily completed. 
Handheld Signs or Devices (Also referred to as human signs, sign spinners, living signs and sign walkers.) Signs that are carried, waved, or otherwise displayed by persons either on private or public right-of-way or in a manner visible from a private or public right-of-way and are prohibited. 
Hardship. A practical difficulty in carrying out the requirements of this chapter. Unless otherwise indicated, financial difficulties, in and of themselves, do not constitute a hardship. 
Height. The vertical distance measured from the finished grade at the front building line to the cornice line. The cornice line as used herein shall mean the horizontal line on the exterior of a building at which the roof system intersects the exterior wall. 

Height of sign. The distance in vertical feet from the ground at normal grade to the highest point of the sign, whether that highest point is the frame of the sign face or panel or the support of the sign. 
Holiday decorations. Displays erected on a seasonal basis in observance of religious, national, or state holidays, which are not intended to be permanent. 
Home Occupation. Any activity carried out for gain by a resident conducted as an accessory use in the resident's principal dwelling unit. 
Home Occupation Sign. A sign used for a home occupation. 
Homeowners Association. A private non-profit association which is organized by the developer of a residential development in which individual owners share common interests in open space and/or facilities and are in charge of preserving, managing, and maintaining the common property, and enforces certain covenants and restrictions. 
Hotel or Motel. A building or group of buildings containing individual sleeping or living units designed for the temporary occupancy of automobile tourists or transient guests and which has a garage attached or parking space conveniently located to each unit. 
Ice Cream Truck. A motor vehicle containing a commercial freezer and from which a vendor sells frozen prepackaged food products such as ice cream, frozen yogurt, frozen custard, flavored frozen water and similar. 
Identification Sign. A sign used to identify, indicate or advertise the name, logo or other identifying symbol of a building, business, profession, institution, service, or entertainment conducted on a lot upon which the sign is located. 
Impervious surface. Any surface which in whole or in part, restricts or prevents the natural absorption of water into the ground. Such surfaces may include, but not be limited to, compacted earth, traffic-bearing gravel, concrete, asphalt, or other paving material, and all area covered by the footprint of buildings or structures. Uncovered slatted decks and the water area of a swimming pool, pond, or other water body are considered pervious. 
Incidental Sign. A single face professional or announcement sign attached wholly to a building, window or door containing information relative to emergencies, store hours, credit cards honored, and other similar accessory information. 
Industrial use. Uses that primarily involve the assembly, packaging, processing, production, and manufacturing of goods. 
Infill development. New development or redevelopment that occurs within established urban areas where the site or area is either vacant or has previously been used for another urban purpose. 
Inflatable sign. Any sign that is or can be filled with air or gas. 
Institutional use. Includes but is not limited to religious and charitable organizations, hospitals, and educational institutions. 
Interim Temporary Use. A use (and/or structure containing a use), which is located on a property often for periods exceeding one hundred twenty (120) days due to the nature of the use. 
Intermittent Mobile Food Sales. Food transactions from a mobile vehicle where the vehicle only remains idle for a period of fifteen (15) minutes or less (e.g. ice cream trucks, food vendors at construction sites). 
Internally illuminated sign. Any sign designed to provide artificial light either through exposed lighting on the sign face or through transparent or translucent material from a light source within the sign. 
Island or median. An unpaved area within a parking lot or street, usually surrounded by a curb or other raised element, which is surrounded by a paved or gravel surface on at least three (3) sides. 
Joint Identification Sign. A sign bearing the name of individual tenants located within a multiple-tenant (multi-tenant) development and which includes the name of the development. 
Junk Yard. Any land or area used in whole or in part for commercial storage and/or sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, or other junk, and including storage of vehicles and machinery and/or dismantling of such vehicles or machinery. 
Landscaping. Landscaping shall consist of any of the following materials or combination thereof, such as grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges, or trees, and any commonly used non-living durable material commonly used in landscaping, such as but not limited to rocks, pebbles, mulch, walls or fences, but excluding paving. 
Light Industrial use. Uses that primarily involve the assembly, packaging, processing, production, and manufacturing of goods if such activities are conducted wholly within an enclosed building; and if operated in a manner that prevents external effects of the activity such as (but not limited to) smoke, soot, dirt, vibration, odor from being detectable at any property line. 
Light Pollution. Excessive illumination that, because of quantitative or directional characteristics, results in annoyance, distraction, or impairment of visual acuity. 
Light Trespass. The encroachment of unwanted light from private property onto another private property or onto public property. 
Local Government. Any county, incorporated village, town or city, or any combination of counties, incorporated villages, towns, and cities, acting through a joint program pursuant to provisions of the Act. 
Logo. A business symbol or trademark. 
Lot. A parcel of land designated by number or other symbol as a part of a legally approved and recorded subdivision, or as described by metes and bounds and recorded in the office of Greenville County Register of Mesne Conveyance. 
Lot, Corner. A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets. 
Lot Depth. The average horizontal distance between the front and rear property lines of a lot. 
Lot, Double frontage, through-lot, non-residential parcels. A lot having frontage on two (2) non-intersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot. Non-residential lots under this classification shall have a front setback applied on both streets as provided for in Section 3:11.1.C., Double Frontage, through-lots, non-residential parcels - setbacks. 
Lot, Double frontage, through-lot, residential parcels. A lot having frontage on two (2) non-intersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot. Structures on residential lots abutting two (2) opposite streets shall be provided with a front setback and a rear setback as provided for in Section 3:11.1.D., Double Frontage, through lots, residential parcels - setbacks. 
Lot for sign regulations. Any number of contiguous lots or portions thereof, upon which one (1) or more main structures for a single use are to be erected. 
Lot Line, Front: The boundary line of a lot that abuts a public street. 
Lot Line, Rear. Ordinarily, the boundary line of a lot that is opposite and does not intersect the front lot line. 
Lot Line, Side. The portion of a lot that is not adjacent to a street and also not classified as a front, corner or rear lot line. 
Lot of Record. A lot existing before the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance and as shown or described on a plat or deed in the records of the Greenville Register of Mesne Conveyance. 
Lot Width. The distance between the side lot lines at the setback line as measured along a straight line parallel to the front lot line or parallel to the chord thereof. 
Lot, Zoning. A parcel of land which is indicated by the owner at the time of application for a building or zoning permit as being that land which he proposes to develop under one (1) ownership. 
Lumen. The amount of light that falls upon an area of one (1) square meter, every point of which is one (1) meter from a source of one (1) candela (one (1) candela equals 12.57 lumens). 
Manufactured Home. See "Sectional Home." 
Marquee Sign. A sign painted in, attached to, or hung from a marquee. For purposes of this Code Section, a marquee shall be considered "wall sign". 
Menu Board. A freestanding or wall mounted sign primarily designed for the display of menu items and prices for the purpose of placing orders for such items in conjunction with a restaurant utilizing drive-through or walk up service. 
Mobile Food Vendor Vehicle. A self-contained, motorized vehicle mounted food service unit that returns daily to its base of operations (Commissary) as approved by DHEC and is used for either the preparation or the sale of food products, or for both. 
Mobile Home. A mobile home is a portable unit designed and built to be towed on its own chassis comprised of frame and wheels, connected to utilities, and designed to be used without a permanent foundation for a permanent residence. A unit may contain parts that may be folded, collapsed, or telescoped when being towed and expanded later to provide additional cubic capacity as well as two (2) or more separately towable components designed to be joined into one (1) integral unit capable of being again separated into components for repeated towing. Mobile units can be designed to be used for residential, commercial, educational, or industrial purposes excluding, however, travel trailers, travel motorized homes, pick-up coaches, and camping trailers. 
Mobile Home Park. Any place, area, or tract of land maintained, offered, or used for parking of two (2) or more mobile homes used or intended to be used for living or sleeping purposes, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
Mobile Home Space. That portion of land in a mobile home park allotted to or designed for the accommodation of one (1) mobile home. 
Mobile Market Food Truck. An enclosed motor vehicle equipped with facilities for the sale of locally grown fresh produce. The produce sold is in its original form and has not been altered or cooked in any other way inconsistent with it coming fresh from the fields and/or gardens in which it was grown. 
Mobile Module. A mobile module is a factory fabricated, transportable building unit designed to be incorporated at a building site into a permanent structure to be used for residential, commercial, educational, or industrial purposes. 
Monument sign. A free-standing ground sign that is supported by a solid base (other than poles) and having no more than twenty-four (24) inches of air space visible within or between any portion of the sign display area and sign structure. All freestanding ground signs shall be mounted on a monument base that is equal to or has a length of at least seventy-five (75) percent of the width of the sign face and supporting structures combined. Monument structures and sign supports shall not have any exposed poles and shall be constructed of durable architectural materials (i.e., brick, stucco, or stone) that are consistent with the design and features of the primary facade of the building on the site. 
Examples of a Freestanding Monument Ground Sign (monument structure):

Motel. See "Hotel or Motel." 
Mulch. A protective covering (such as pine straw, shredded bark, or other materials) spread evenly around trees, shrubs, and ground covers to reduce evaporation, maintain even root temperatures, prevent erosion, control weeds, and enrich the soil. 
Multiple message sign. A sign, display, or device, which changes the message or copy on the sign electronically by movement or rotation of panels or slats. 
Multiple (Multi) Tenant Development (also referred to as Group Development). A development in which there exists a number of individual and separate occupiable spaces and/or buildings and in which there are appurtenant-shared ancillary facilities (such as parking areas, driveways or pedestrian mall areas) with each space having a separate and operable public entrance opening onto or leading to the area of shared facilities. 
Nit. A unit of illuminative brightness equal to one (1) candle per square meter, measure perpendicular to the rays of the source. 
Nonconforming Lot. A lot of record at the time of passage of this ordinance which does not meet the requirements for area and/or width generally applicable in the district in which such lot is located. 
Nonconforming sign. A legally established sign that does not conform to the minimum standards and provisions of the effective date of this article and/or are made nonconforming by subsequent amendments to this Chapter. Nonconformities include but are not limited to: sign type, sign height, sign copy size and location (both on-premises and off-premises). 
Nonconforming Use or Structure. A land use or structure that existed lawfully on the date this Zoning Ordinance became effective and which does not conform to the permitted uses for the zoning district in which it is situated. Nonconforming uses are incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. Such nonconformities are permitted to continue until they are removed. 
Non-Depository Financial Institution. Any check cashing business, payday advance/loan business, or title loan business as defined in this section. This definition excludes a state or federally chartered bank, savings and loan association or credit union. 
Off-premises sign. Any sign used for the purpose of displaying, advertising, identifying, or directing attention to business products, operations or services sold or offered at a site other than the site where such sign is displayed. 
On-premises sign. Any sign used for the purpose of displaying, advertising, identifying, or directing attention to business products, operations or services sold or offered on the lot site where the sign is located. 
Parapet. That portion of a building wall that rises above the roofline. 
Parapet wall. That portion of a building wall that rises above the roofline. 
Parking Space. That storage space for one (1) automobile of not less than nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet or as described in subsection 6:1.1.5 and shown on the parking standards, plus the necessary access space, and located outside the dedicated street right-of-way. 
Patio House. Same as "Dwelling, Garden Court." 
Pawnbroker. Any person engaged in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or engaged in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time. Pledged goods means tangible personal property, other than vehicles required to be registered and licensed pursuant to South Carolina Code Title 56, choses in action, title, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness, which property is deposited with or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in the course of his business in connection with a pawn transaction. 
Pawnshop. The location at which or premises in which a pawnbroker regularly conducts business. 
Payday Advance/Loan Business. An establishment that makes small consumer loans, usually backed by a postdated check or authorization to make an electronic debit against an existing financial account, where the check or debit is held for an agreed-upon term, or until a customer's next payday, and then cashed unless the customer repays the loan to reclaim such person's check. 
Pedestrian Oriented Design. Development designed with an emphasis on pedestrian access and interest from adjoining streets and sidewalks. In pedestrian oriented design, buildings are generally placed close to the street and main entrances are oriented to the street sidewalk; additionally, there are generally windows or display cases along the building facades that face the street. Site characteristics of pedestrian oriented design typically include: site grading that enhances the relationship of the building to the adjoining street(s) and sidewalk(s) from the perspective of the pedestrian; parking facilities placed to the side or rear of the building; and the provision of pedestrian oriented amenities, such as outdoor dining areas, landscaping/hardscaping and seating. 
Pennant. A small, triangular or rectangular flag or multiples thereof, made of lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, individually supported or attached to each other by means of a string, rope, or other material and meant to be stretched across or fastened to buildings, or between poles and/or structures, and which is designed to move in the wind. For purposes of this Code Section, pennants are "signs." 
Pervious Surface. A surface that allows water to pass through (i.e. grass, permeable pavers, pervious pavement) 
Places of Worship. A building or structure(s) including, but not limited to, sanctuaries, accessory classrooms, meeting rooms, offices and housing quarters for religious leaders that are primarily intended for religious services and which operate as a private, non-profit, tax exempt institution. The term includes, but is not limited to, churches, synagogues, and temples. Child care centers, schools, recreational facilities, and other uses developed as part of a Place of Worship shall meet the standards for these uses as set forth in the zoning district in which they are located. 
Planned Shopping Center. A group of commercial establishments, planned, developed, owned, and managed as a unit related in location, size, and type of shops to the trade area that the unit serves; it provides on-site parking in definite relationship to the types and sizes of stores. 
Planned Development. For purposes of this ordinance, a planned development shall be a group of detached, semi-detached, attached, groups of attached, clustered, or multi-storied residential structures, or any combination thereof on a parcel of land under single, corporation, firm, partnership, or association ownership planned and developed as an integrated unit in a single development operation or a definitely programmed series of development operations in accordance with an approved development plan. 
Pole or Pylon Cover. An enclosure for concealing and/or for decorating poles or other structural supports of a ground sign. 
Pole or Pylon Sign. A freestanding sign that is affixed, attached or erected on visible pole support structure(s) such that the bottom of the sign face is three (3) feet or more above grade. 
Examples of Types of Pole Signs without monument base:

Portable, Mobile and Moveable signs. Any sign that is designed or is intended to be readily relocated and is not permanently affixed to the ground or to a building. This shall include signs on wheels, trailers, truck beds, or otherwise, devices which are designed to be transported from one (1) place to another. It is characteristic of a portable sign that the space provided for advertising messages may be changed at will by the replacement of lettering or symbols (i.e., a changeable copy sign). Even if the wheels or supports of such sign are removed and the sign converted and attached, temporarily or permanently, to the ground or other structure, said sign shall remain a portable sign. In addition, signs mounted or painted upon a parked vehicle that is positioned for the primary purpose of advertising a business or business activity to the public not being used in the normal course of business shall constitute a portable, mobile and/or moveable sign. Portable, mobile and moveable signs shall also include: windblown or air blown devices, wind signs, streamers, snipe signs, animated motion signs, attention seizing devises, decorative flags, and handheld devices which are signs that are expressly prohibited. 
Precious Metal. Any article made in whole or in part of gold, silver, or platinum. 
Precious Metal Dealer. Any person, corporation, or partnership who buys precious metal or precious or semiprecious stones or gems from the general public, whether in bulk or in manufactured form, with intent to obtain a monetary profit for himself or for a principal. This definition shall not apply to retail businesses such as pawnshops or jewelry stores who obtain a precious metal dealer license in the normal course of their retail business. 
Principle Structure. The main or predominant structure(s) in which the primary use occurs. Parcels may support more than one (1) principal structure when said structure does not vary in gross floor area by more than twenty (20) percent. 
Principal use sign. Any notice or advertisement, which is permitted in conjunction with (but not necessarily containing copy specifically related to) a single principal use or single principal building located on the property, and which may display a noncommercial, commercial, or other message, the content of which is not regulated by this Code Section. 
Private Recreation Area. A recreation area owned and maintained by members and operated as a nonprofit organization. 
Private Street. A right-of-way of undetermined width with a roadway of undetermined width, which has not been dedicated, recorded, or publicly accepted by the county. 
Projecting sign. A sign projecting more than fourteen (14) inches from the outside wall or walls of any building, or canopy, portico, or awning, upon which it is located (see also figure, "Types of Attached Signs"). 
Public Agency. Any governmental body (including city, county and state bodies or agencies, and special purpose districts such as fire, water, and sewer districts) that has jurisdiction over property or infrastructure within the City of Mauldin. 
Public Awareness Event. An organized, systematic effort through various communications media to alert the general population of a given area to anything of significant interest or concern. Examples include: Paint the Town Teal, Cancer Awareness, Fire Prevention Month, Child Abuse Awareness. 
Quorum. The number of members of any deliberative or corporate body as is necessary for the legal transaction of business, commonly a majority. 
Recreational Vehicle, Dependent. Any self propelled vehicular unit, motorhome, pop-up or truck camper, or coach designed to be mounted on another vehicle, or motorized dwellings, boat or boat trailer, or buses, designed as a temporary dwelling with sleeping facilities for travel, recreational, and vacation use, not more than twenty-six (26) feet in length, and is dependent upon a separate service building for toilet and lavatory facilities, such vehicles shall be in conformance with all National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) regulations including being manufactured or modified by a dealer who has met or consistently meets the requirements of the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (FMVSS) established in order to ensure the reduction of death and injuries attributable to failure or inadequate performance of motor vehicle systems. 
Recreational Vehicle, Independent. Any self propelled vehicular unit, motorhome, pop-up or truck camper, or coach designed to be mounted on another vehicle, or motorized dwellings, boat or boat trailer, or buses, designed as a temporary dwelling, for travel, recreational, and vacation use and containing toilet, lavatory, and sleeping facilities. Such vehicles shall be in conformance with all National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) regulations including being manufactured or modified by a dealer who has met or consistently meets the requirements of the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (FMVSS) established in order to ensure the reduction of death and injuries attributable to failure or inadequate performance of motor vehicle systems. 
Renovation costs. The following shall be considered when determining the site improvements that may be required by ordinance. For zoning purposes, the total cost of renovation shall include any structural or other trades work, permanent equipment or other fixtures that are necessary for the operation and/or occupancy of the building, and shall also include cosmetic work such as but not limited to painting, carpeting, flooring, cabinet installation, and facade work. 
Replacement Cost. Cost of replacing a structure or building at current costs at the time of the loss, identical to the one (1) that was destroyed or is being replaced, without application of depreciation. 
Residential Development. A development consisting of buildings for residential uses such as attached and detached single-family dwellings, manufactured homes, apartment complexes, condominiums, townhouses, cottages, etc. and their associated outbuildings such as garages, storage buildings, gazebos, etc. 
Rest Home. The rooming or boarding of any aged or convalescent persons, whether ambulatory or nonambulatory, for which a license is required by a county, state, or federal agency. 
Restaurant. Any establishment, including drive-ins, however designated whose primary function is the sale of food for consumption on the premises and includes any establishment, which has been licensed by the state A.B.C. Board as a restaurant. 
Roof sign. A sign projecting higher than the front building wall or any sign supported by or attached to said roof. 
Examples of Types of Roof Signs:

Rooming or Boarding House. A dwelling other than a hotel where lodging and/or meals for three (3) or more persons are provided for compensation. 
Rowhouse. Same as "Townhouse." 
Satellite Dish Antenna. A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn, or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to transmit and/or receive ratio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses. This definition is meant to include but not be limited to what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations, TVROs, and satellite microwave antennas. 
Screening. A structure or planting that conceals view from public ways or adjacent property. 
Seasonal Outdoor Sale event. The display and sale of products outside of a building, typically located within a parking area, for a temporary period of time. The following events and similar uses shall qualify as a seasonal sales event: Christmas tree sales, garden sales, produce stands, and pumpkin sales. 
Second Tier Development. A development that is located at least one (1) lot back from a major thoroughfare with no direct street frontage and having shared access with adjacent or adjoining parcels and the development consists of more than one (1) structure on the site or within the development. For purposes of signage, this option does not increase square footage allowances or render a single tenant property as a multi-tenant development unless such conditions are met under another definition in this section. 
Sectional Home. A sectional home consists of two (2) or more units factory fabricated and transported to the home site where they are put on a permanent foundation and joined to make a permanent single-family house. 
Self-Service Storage Facility. A structure containing separate storage spaces of varying size leased or rented as individual leases. No activities other than rental of storage units and pick up and deposit of stored goods shall be allowed on the premises. No outside storage shall be permitted. Radioactive materials, explosives, and flammable or hazardous chemicals shall be prohibited. 
Semi-Cutoff Fixture. An outdoor light fixture shielded or constructed in such a manner that it emits no more than five (5) percent of its light above the horizontal plane of the fixture. 
Service Station. An establishment used for the servicing of automobiles including the sale of gasoline, oil, grease, and minor accessories and washing and polishing but excluding the sale of automobiles, body repairing, major motor repairing, and painting. 
Setback Line. The minimum distance by which any building or structure must be separated from a street right-of-way or lot line as required by the applicable zoning district. 

Shade Tree. Any tree, evergreen or deciduous, whose mature height can be expected to exceed thirty-five (35) feet and whose crown spread can be expected to exceed thirty (30) feet, is considered a shade tree according to standards set forth by the American Association of Nurserymen. The shade tree, existing or planted, shall be at least eight (8) feet in height and six and one-quarter (61/4) inches in circumference, or two (2) inches in diameter, measured at six (6) inches above grade for new trees and measured at four and one-half (41/2) feet above grade for existing trees. 
Shared access. The mutual use of one (1) or more points of ingress or egress by establishments on separate lots. 
Shared parking. The development and use of parking areas on two (2) or more separate properties for joint use by the businesses on those properties. 
Shielding. A design feature or a device that is applied to a light to prevent its luminous output from being visible from selected locations or from horizontal or vertical angles. 
Short-Term Temporary Use. A use (and/or structure containing a use) that is temporary in nature and only active for a specified period of time. 
Shrubs. Shrubs shall be defined as self-supporting woody plants, either deciduous or evergreen, with several stems and a normal mature height of three (3) to twenty (20) feet in Greenville County. 
A.  Small Shrub. Any shrub easily maintained at three (3) to eight (8) feet in height in Greenville County. The minimum size at time of planting shall be eigteen- to twenty-four-inch spread, three-gallon container, in accordance with AAN Standards. 
B.  Large Shrub. Any shrub easily maintained at eight (8) to twenty (20) feet in height in Greenville County. The minimum size at time of planting shall be eighteen- to twenty-four-inch spread, three-gallon container, in accordance with AAN Standards. 
Sight Triangle. Measured from the curb or edge of pavement, the triangle area created by a line connecting points on the front and side for lines at a distance (as indicated below) from the intersection of said lines or extensions of said lines. 

Sight Triangle Illustration
Sign. A lettered, numbered, symbolic, pictorial, illuminated, or colored visual display, device, or communication designed or used for the purpose of identifying, announcing, directing, informing, or bring to the attention of others the subject thereon, that is visible from the public right-of-way, a driveway or parking lot with access to a public right-of-way, or from an adjacent property, except as specifically noted otherwise in this Code Section. For purposes of this Code Section, the term "sign" includes but is not limited to "banners," "balloons," "flags," "pennants," "streamers," "windblown devices," and "advertising devices." Furthermore, the term "sign" includes the sign structure, supports, lighting system, and any attachments, ornaments, or other features used to draw the attention of the observers. This definition shall not include art or works of art provided that the art or works of art does not include logos in their traditional form or the name of the business at whose location the art or works of art are located. The art or works of art shall not be located on the sign or sign panel. 
Signable area. In the case of a wall sign, signable area shall be the building face on which the sign is proposed, excluding windows and doors. In the case of canopies, signable area shall be the area of the marquee or canopy wall on which the sign is proposed. For window signs, signable area shall be measured and calculated on the basis of the proportion of area within each individual window frame, not the total window area of all building windows visible from a street. 
Sign, Billboard. A permanent freestanding off-premises sign. 
Sign face. That part of a sign that is or can be used for advertising purposes. 
Sign, Owner. Shall include the person receiving benefit from the sign and/or the property owner. 
Sign, On-Premises. Any sign that disseminates information that directly relates to the use of the property on which it is located and is not a separate and distinct use. 
Sign Structure. Any structure that supports, has supported or is capable of supporting a signs, including any decorative cover for said sign structure. 
Single Tenant. A single business establishment, or activity or use, which does not share any facilities, such as driveways, parking, storage areas, entrances, etc. with another use. For the purposes of the sign code, a single tenant may also include a use or business that is located on a leased site or individual parcel within a planned development that complies with all development and design codes that are applicable to a stand-alone business located on an individual parcel. 
Site visibility triangle. An area that is measured from the curb or edge of pavement, the triangle area created by a line connecting points on the front and side for lines at a distance (as indicated below) from the intersection of said lines or the extensions of said lines. 
Example of a Site Triangle:

Snipe Sign. A temporary sign which is not permitted or authorized under any provision of this code, and which is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glazed, or otherwise affixed to a tree, pole, stake, fence, traffic control device, or another other object or the ground. 
Example of Snipe Sign:

Special Event. A temporary event is an activity sponsored by a governmental, charitable, civic, educational, religious, business, or trade organization which is infrequent in occurrence and limited in duration. Examples include arts and crafts shows, community festivals, carnivals, fairs, circuses, concerts, conventions, exhibitions, trade shows, outdoor religious events, and other similar activities. 
Static. Characterized by a lack of movement, animation or progression. 
Streamers. See "Pennants." 
Street. A dedicated public right-of-way which affords the principal means of access to abutting property and which has been accepted for maintenance by the City of Mauldin, Greenville County or the State Highway Department. For the purposes of these regulations, the term street or streets shall also mean avenues, boulevards, roads, lanes and other public ways. 
Residential Arterial Street. A Federal or State highway designed primarily for the movement of large volumes of traffic from one (1) area to another. 
Residential Collector Street. A public way designed primarily to connect residential service streets with arterial streets or to provide a direct connection between two (2) arterial streets and may be expected to carry a significant volume of traffic having neither origin nor destination on the street. 
Residential Service Street. A public or private way used primarily for providing direct access to abutting property. 
Street frontage. That portion of a lot that adjoins a public street right-of-way and is measured in linear feet. See example of street frontage below. 
Example of Street Frontage:

Streetscape. The scene as may be observed along a public street or way composed of natural and manmade components, including buildings, paving, planting, street furnishings, and miscellaneous structures. 
Structure. Anything constructed or erected which requires permanent location above grade. For purposes of this ordinance, "structure" does not include landscape features such as ornamental pools, planting boxes, sculpture, bird baths, open terraces, walkways, driveways, walls, or fences; shelters for pets, playhouses, open stairs, recreational equipment, flagpoles, light standard game courts, swimming pools, underground fallout shelters, air conditioning compressors, pump houses or wells, mailboxes, outdoor fireplaces, gate houses, burial vaults, or bus shelters. 
Telecommunications. The transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the users choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received (as defined in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996). 
Temporary Event. A single day or multi-day event such as but not limited to: fundraisers, promotional events, arts and crafts shows, carnivals, fairs, circuses, concerts, trade shows, outdoor religious events, and other similar activities. 
Temporary sign. A sign(s) with or without a frame, not permanently affixed to a building or frame, not permanently attached to a building or structure or the ground and is intended for advertisement of a business or service during a limited period of display. Such temporary signs shall only be permitted in conformance with the provisions set forth in subsection 6:4.1.12B, Temporary Signs. 
Examples of Temporary Signs and Temporary Signs with Support Structures:

Through lot. A parcel having its front and rear yards each abutting on a street. Excluding single family development, both street sides of a through lot shall be treated as a front lot line. 
Time, temperature and date signs. A sign containing numerals or letters, which may be alternately displayed, and which alternating portion only shows the time, date and/or temperature. This sign shall not be considered a flashing or an animated sign. 
Title Loan Lender. A supervised lender which regularly extends short-term secured loans such as those regulated by S.C. Code § 37-3-413, and accepts as security title to motor vehicles. The term does not include supervised lenders, banks, credit unions, savings banks, and like depository institutions, other than those specializing in short-term vehicle secured loans. 
Tower Height. The distance from the base of the tower to the top of the structure. 
Townhouse. A two-story, single-family attached dwelling with each unit having a separate entrance on the ground floor. 
Tract. An area, parcel, site, piece of land, or property which is the subject of a development proposal and applications. 
Trademark. A name, symbol, or other device identifying a product that is officially registered and legally restricted to use by its owner. 
Traditional Urban Neighborhood Housing. A walkable and pedestrian-oriented neighborhood that offers a range of diverse housing types and is designed with some of the following characteristics: alleys, shaded sidewalks, pedestrian amenities, streets laid out in a grid system, buildings oriented towards the street, front porches on houses, neighborhood village squares and greens. 
Transition Buffer. An area of natural or planted vegetation or an area of such vegetation in conjunction with berms, fences, or walls serving as a separation between two (2) areas or land uses. 
Travel Trailer. Travel or recreation vehicles, camping trailers, boats and boat trailers, or any vehicular portable unit mounted on or intended to be mounted on wheels, designed, suitably equipped, and intended to serve as short term shelter/temporary living quarters for recreational camping, or travel use and drawn by a separate motorized vehicle, such trailers shall be in conformance with all National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) regulations including being manufactured or mounted by a dealer who has met or consistently meets the requirements of the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (FMVSS) established in order to ensure the reduction of death and injuries attributable to failure or inadequate performance of motor vehicle systems. 
Tree Formed Shrub. Any large deciduous or evergreen multi-stem shrub which has been pruned of its lower limbs and other foliage, to a minimum height of four (4) feet, to reveal three (3) to seven (7) main vertical supporting branches. 
Tree. Any living, self-supporting woody perennial plant which normally obtains a trunk diameter of at least two (2) inches and a height of at least ten (10) feet and typically has one (1) main stem and many branches. 
Tree, Canopy or Large Maturing. Any tree whose height under average regional growing conditions will exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height at maturity. 
Tree, Understory or Small Maturing. Any tree whose height under average regional growing conditions will be less than thirty-five (35) feet in height at maturity. 
Useable Wall Area. The exterior wall or surface area of a building or structure including windows and doors. 
Uses Permitted by Special Exception. Uses allowable where facts and conditions detailed in this ordinance as those upon which a use may be permitted are found to exist. 
Utility, Public. Any agency which, under public franchise or ownership, provides the general public with electricity, gas, heat, steam, communication, rail transportation, water, sewage collection, or other service. 
Vacant. The term "vacant" as used herein applies to any property, on which there is no building or structure, or vehicular parking area, within two hundred (200) feet of any common property line shared by the developing property and any adjacent property. 
Variance. A variance is a relaxation of the dimensional terms of the Zoning Ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship and does not involve a change in the use of property. 
Vehicular Canopy. A roofed, open, drive-through structure designed to provide temporary shelter for customers and their vehicles while at a place of business. 
Vehicular Display Area. Any area, paved or unpaved, used to display motorcycles, automobiles, pickup trucks, vans, motor homes, delivery vehicles, passenger buses, transfer trucks, and/or vehicles used for towing other vehicles, for the sole purpose of conducting sales. 
Vehicular Parking Area. Any area, paved or unpaved, used to store or park motorcycles, automobiles, pickup trucks, vans, motor homes, delivery vehicles, passenger buses, transfer trucks, and/or vehicles used for towing other vehicles. 
Vehicular use area (VUA). All driving surfaces including: parking, drive aisles, driveways, loading areas, and maneuvering areas that are paved or gravel. 
Veterinary Clinic. A facility for diagnosis, treatment, and care of large and small animals. Animals may be boarded in this facility. All activities related to this facility shall be enclosed in a self-contained, freestanding building wholly occupied by the activities related to the veterinary clinic. 
Veterinary Hospital. A facility for diagnosis, treatment, and care of large and small animals. The facility shall be a freestanding building wholly occupied by the activities related to the veterinary hospital. Animals may be boarded in this facility. Activities are not restricted to the interior of the building. 
Veterinarian Office. A facility for diagnosis, treatment, and care of small domestic animals. Sick or injured animals may be boarded on a short-term basis. No commercial boarding is allowed in the veterinary office facility. All activities related to this facility shall be enclosed in a self-contained, freestanding building wholly occupied by activities related to the veterinary office. 
Visible. Capable of being seen by the unaided eye in the daylight. 
Wall. An upright structure of masonry, wood, plaster or other building material serving to enclose, divide or protect an area. 
Wall Pack. A type of fixture typically mounted on a vertical wall surface. 
Wall sign. A sign painted or attached flat against and parallel to the exterior wall or surface of a building or other structure and/or which projects from that wall or surface. (see also figure, "Types of Attached Signs"). 
Windblown or air-blown device. Any device not otherwise specifically defined in this Code Section, that is designed to inform or attract, whether or not such device carries a message, and which all or part of the device is set in motion by wind or mechanically compressed air. For purposes of this Code Section, windblown devices are a considered "signs." 
Wind Sign. A suspended or tethered sign made of flexible material such as canvas, sail cloth, plastic or waterproof paper, including but not limited to, banners, pennants, spinners, streamers or balloons. 
Window sign. A sign installed on or within two (2) feet of an exterior window or door and intended to be visible from the exterior of the building. Displays which show products or depict services sold on the premises and which are more than two (2) feet from an exterior window or door shall not be classified as window signs (see also figure, "Types of Attached Signs"). 
Yard, Front. A yard situated between the front lot line and the front of the building line extending the full width of the yard. 
Yard, Rear. A yard situated between the rear lot line and the rear of the building line extending the full width of the lot. 
Yard, Required. The open space between a lot line and the buildable area within which no structure may be located except as otherwise provided in this ordinance. All yards referred to in this ordinance are minimum required yards. 
Yard, Side. A yard situated between the side lot line and the side building line extending from front yard to the rear yard. 
Zoning Certificate/Building Permit. A certification by the Zoning Administrator that a proposal to use or occupy a tract of land or a building; or to erect, install, or alter a structure, building, or sign fully meets the requirements of this ordinance. 
Zoning permit. A permit issued by the City of Mauldin stating that a particular development or redevelopment project, change in use or addition, is in compliance with the ordinances of the city pertaining to use of the land on which such use is situated. 
( Ord. No. 782 , amd. 2, 12-15-2014; Ord. No. 783 , amd. 2, 12-15-2014; Ord. No. 786 , amd. 2, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 805 , § 2, 5-16-2016; Ord. No. 815 , amd. 1, 2-20-2017; Ord. No. 822 , amds. 2-4, 4-17-2017; Ord. No. 832 , amd. 1, 9-18-2017; Ord. No. 836 , amd. 1, 11-20-2017; Ord. No. 863 , amd. 1, 10-15-2018) 
Sec. 3:4 - Relationship of Buildings to Lots. 
There shall be not more than one (1) principal building and its accessory buildings on one (1) lot, except group, large-scale and multifamily developments as provided in Section 3:2 and Article 7. 
Sec. 3:5 - Public Access to Property. 
Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be located on a lot adjacent to and have access to a public street, highway, road, or other public way. 
Sec. 3:6 - Projections into Public Streets and Street Rights-of-Way. 
No commercial signs or other structures shall project in or over any right-of-way line of any street. No shrubbery shall project into any public street right-of-way. 
Sec. 3:7 - Parking and Storage of Certain Vehicles. 
3:7.1 Vehicles without Current License Plates. 
Automobiles, trucks, or trailers of any kind or type without current license plates or current inspection stickers shall not be parked or stored on any lot zoned for residential use, other than in completely enclosed buildings, except that unlicensed and uninspected vehicles may be stored outside on a residential lot as follows: 
A.  Not more than one (1) shall be stored outside per lot. 
B.  Parking should be limited to driveways or other off-street parking. 
C.  No vehicle shall be parked within ten (10) feet of any property line in the rear yard. 
D.  All vehicles so parked will be covered with a close-fitting weatherproof cover maintained in good condition. 
3:7.2 Parking, Storage, or Use of Travel Trailers, Dependent or Independent Recreational Vehicles in Residential Districts. 
Travel trailers, dependent or independent recreational vehicles (hereafter referred to as units) are permitted to be parked, stored, or used in a residential district subject to the following restrictions: 
[A.]  Occupancy. 
1.  Not more than one (1) unit shall be permitted for each family living on the lot or premises, except as allowed in subsection A. 3. 
2.  The unit shall not be occupied temporarily or otherwise except by obtaining a temporary certificate of occupancy from the Business and Development Services Director to allow limited occupancy by nonresident guests for a period not to exceed fourteen (14) days. Such certificates may be granted no more than two (2) times per calendar year for any one (1) lot, which terms shall not be consecutive. 
3.  The total number of units on any residential lot shall be limited to two (2). The second unit will only be allowed as a variance by the Board of Appeals. However, this does not include those units kept in a garage or other totally enclosed building. 
[B.]  Setbacks. 
1.  Units shall not be parked within a drainage or utility easement, or building, or zoning setback; and 
2.  Units must be parked in the rear or side yard, not projecting beyond the front of the building wall nearest to the street of the principle dwelling on the lot; or 
3.  On a corner lot or double frontage lot, the unit must be parked in the rear or side yard, not projecting beyond the building wall nearest to the street of the principle dwelling on the lot. If parked in the rear or side yard, the unit must be completely screened from view by evergreen vegetation from all streets that run along the rear or side yard in which it is parked. 
4.  When the unit is parked temporarily for loading and unloading for a period of no more than twenty-four (24) hours, it must be entirely on the residential lot in a safe and orderly condition. If parked on a driveway, it shall not be an impediment or interfere with the visibility of persons or vehicles entering or exiting adjacent driveways, persons passing on the sidewalk, or persons in vehicles passing on any street. 
[C.]  Other. 
1.  Any utility connections must have a special building permit from the Business and Development Services Director, and sewage dumping shall be only in approved facilities. 
2.  The owner of such a unit or of the residential lot on which the unit is parked may not have rental units on the premises. 
3.  Units shall not be located on any residential lot without current license plates and proof of liability insurance in accordance with the state insurance laws, and must be able to pass state inspection standards for safety and performance, except those units in completely enclosed buildings. 
4.  Units which are not fully operational and in a safe, driveable condition shall not be parked or stored on any lot, except units in completely enclosed buildings. 
5.  If there is no reasonable access to the rear or side yard, garage, or carport on a residential lot, the owner may apply to the Board of Appeals for a variance to park one (1) unit on the driveway or other hard surface area (asphalt, paving stones, shell rock, or concrete) on the lot, between the road right-of-way and the principle dwelling on the lot. 
6.  If, upon adoption of this Ordinance, there exists any unit in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance, it shall not be considered a nonconforming use. Any owner may apply to the Board of Appeals for a variance in accordance with the provisions of Section 4:1.2 of the Mauldin Zoning Ordinance. 
7.  Maximum lot coverage for all permitted uses, including all permitted and permissible buildings, accessory structures and units, shall be forty (40) percent, except as required to meet other regulations herein. 
3:7.3 Commercial Vehicles. 
Not more than one (1) commercial vehicle, which does not exceed one and one-half (11/2) tons rated capacity, per family living on the premises shall be permitted in a residential district; no commercial vehicles used for hauling explosives, gasoline, hazardous materials, or liquefied petroleum products shall be permitted. 
Sec. 3:8 - Height. 
The following provisions qualify and supplement the specific height regulations set forth in Article 5, zoning districts. 
3:8.1. Building Height Bonuses. 
With the exception of single-family detached dwellings, duplexes, and their related accessory structures, the Business and Development Services Director may grant bonuses to buildings to exceed the minimum height of the respective zoning district where the building meets the design criteria outlined below. 
A.  Design Criteria. 
1.  Roof Design. Roof lines shall vary and be expressed in a visually interesting manner that complements the composition of the building and the surrounding area. This can be achieved through the use of dormers, varied cornice lines and/or parapets, and other similar architectural features. Roofs shall reflect the traditional character of the immediately surrounding area-the roof shall be a type that is commonly found in the surrounding area as determined by the Business and Development Services Director. 

2.  Façade-Horizontal Massing. Buildings shall incorporate varied massing and design across long façades. Building walls shall be articulated at a minimum of every 50 feet. Articulation may include storefront bays with modulating building elements such as recesses, projections, expressed entries, building form, columns, pilasters, colonnades, arcades, and/or other clearly expressed architectural details. No horizontal section of the building façade shall exceed 50 feet without incorporating visible changes in the façade elevation. 

3.  Façade-Vertical Massing. In order to modulate their scale, multi-story buildings shall individually articulate the base, middle, and cap through the use of expression lines, cornices, string cornices, step-backs, or similar articulating feature. For the purposes of this section, the base generally includes the ground floor of the building, including entryways and windows; the middle is generally described as the upper stories of a building and typically features windows and/or balconies; the cap includes the area from the top floor to the roof of the building. 

4.  Façade-Fenestration. Blank, windowless walls shall be prohibited where visible from any public right-of-way. Any façade visible from a public right-of-way shall incorporate windows and doorways that account for at least thirty (30) percent of the façade, but not more than ninety (90) percent of the façade. Windows and doorways should incorporate decorative elements such as sills, trim, lintels, transoms, and awnings. Where windows are used, they shall be transparent. 
5.  Setback from Residential. Adjacent to any single-family zoning district, the building setback abutting that single-family zoning district shall be increased by one (1) foot for every two (2) feet that the building height exceeds the minimum height of the underlying zoning district. 
B.  Height Bonuses. 
Table 3:8.1-A.: MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT BONUSES DISTRICT MAXIMUM HEIGHT with BONUS R-M1 40 feet R-M 50 feet POD, O-D 50 feet C-1 50 feet CRD 65 feet C-2 65 feet S-1 65 feet  
C.  Special Exception Height Bonuses. 
The Board of Zoning Appeals may approve by special exception height bonuses in excess of those prescribed herein where the applicant demonstrates high-quality design above and beyond the minimum criteria set forth herein and where the application meets the appropriate special exception criteria. 
3:8.2 Exceptions to the Maximum Height. 
A.  Mechanical space for building equipment placed on the building roof may be allowed above the maximum height specified, provided that such mechanical space is set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from any exterior wall, does not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height and is adequately screened from view. 
B.  The height limitations generally shall not apply to church spires, steeples, belfries, cupolas, chimneys, smokestacks, fire or parapet walls, flagpoles, water towers, communication towers, transmission lines, or other minor common building appurtenances provided such appurtenances are proportional to the building and are not intended for human occupancy, as determined by the Business and Development Services Director. 
( Ord. No. 832 , amd. 2, 9-18-2017; Ord. No. 835 , amd. 1, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 3:9 - Visibility at Intersections. 
On any corner lot on which a front and side yard is required, nothing shall be erected, planted, or allowed to grow which obstructs sight lines between a height of two and one-half (21/2) feet above the crown of the adjacent roadway and ten (10) feet within a triangular area formed by measuring from the point of intersection of the front and exterior side lot lines a distance of twenty-five (25) feet along the front and side lot lines and connecting the points so established to form a triangle on the area of the lot adjacent to the street intersection. 
Sec. 3:10 - Game Courts, Swimming Pools, and Satellite Dish Antennas. 
Game courts, swimming pools, and satellite dish antennas are allowed as accessory uses in residential districts in conjunction with one-family, one-family mobile home, and two-family dwellings, subject to the following provisions: 
A.  Game courts, swimming pools, and satellite dish antennas shall be located in the rear yard. 
B.  Game courts, swimming pools, and satellite dish antennas shall be set back not less than five (5) feet from any lot line. 
C.  Setback requirements for game courts, swimming pools, and satellite dish antennas on corner lots shall be the same as those for accessory buildings. 
D.  Game courts shall not occupy more than sixty-five (65) percent of the rear yard, and swimming pools and satellite dish antennas shall not occupy more than fifty (50) percent of the rear yard. 
E.  Lighting for game courts and swimming pools shall have proper shielding from glare. 
F.  All satellite dish antennas shall employ (to the extent possible) materials and colors that blend with the surroundings. 
Sec. 3:11 - Required Setbacks; allowable encroachments into required setbacks. 
Features permitted within required setbacks. Unless otherwise specifically stated, driveways, walkways, on-grade patios, in-ground pools, plants, retaining walls, pergolas, arbors, and other landscape features may be located within any required setback subject to the specific limitations noted in the below table: 
Table 3:11-A. : FEATURES ALLOWED WITHIN REQUIRED SETBACKS Features That May Encroach

Into the Setback  
LimitationsEaves, sills, cornices, and/or similar ornamental features projecting from the principal building May encroach up to eighteen (18) inches into any required setback. Bay windows, chimney's, and similar features projecting from the principal building May encroach three (3) feet into the required setback, but no closer than five (5) feet to the side or rear property line or buffer. Open porches, balconies, breezeways, and other similar features (may be roofed but not enclosed except with screen wire mesh); raised patios, decks, steps and similar features (with a finished floor of thirty (30) inches or less above the lowest adjacent grade measured at base) Residential properties: May encroach into a required setback for the property, but no closer than twenty (20) feet to the front property line and no closer than five (5) feet to the side or rear property line or buffer. 
  
Non-residential properties: May encroach into a required setback for the property, but no closer than twelve (12) feet to the front property line or buffer and no closer than 5 feet to the side or rear property line or buffer. Steps (with a finished floor of thirty (30) inches or less above the lowest adjacent grade measured at base) Fencing and Walls Refer to section 5:1.3, for Residential Fencing Standards. All other: Fencing and/or walls may be constructed up to the property line provided a fence or wall in a side yard or rear yard shall not be opaque above a height of seven (7) feet and a fence or wall in a front yard shall not be opaque above a height of thirty (30) inches. (Height is measured from the finished grade at the base of the fence or wall.) Handicapped accessibility (such as wheelchair ramps, elevators, mechanical access devices, and other structures intended to facilitate access for the disabled) 
  
Life safety features required by the International Code Series (ramps, fire escapes, etc.) Handicapped accessibility and life safety features may encroach into any required setback, but no closer than three feet from a side or rear property line. If a handicapped accessibility or life safety feature cannot meet this requirement due to the location of an existing structure or other impeding site feature on a residential lot, then the setback requirement for these structures can be adjusted to the extent necessary by the Director of Business and Development Services.  
3:11.1 Method of Application. 
A.  Minimum setback. Minimum setback is the space defined by measuring perpendicularly from and along the entire boundary of the lot (property line) to the building line. Front setbacks shall be measured from the street right-of-way line. 
A setback may be the front, rear, or side or a corner side setback. For illustrations of the location of front, rear, or side setbacks, see Figure 3:11.1A, Standard Lot Configuration below. Except as set forth for double frontage, through-lots in subsection 3:11.1C, (Double Frontage, through-lots, non-residential parcels - setbacks) below, there shall be one (1) front setback area that is determined at the time of site plan approval and issuance of the zoning permit. 
Figure 3:11.1A, Standard Lot Configuration 

B.  Corner lots - setbacks. Unless otherwise specified in the zoning district or an overlay zoning district, the front and corner side setbacks shall be determined based on the building orientation, architectural front of the building and the street proposed driveway access to the lot. Refer to Figure 3-11.1B, Corner Lot for standard setback application. 
Figure 3:11.1B, Corner Lot 

C.  Double Frontage, through-lots, non-residential parcels - setbacks. Unless otherwise specified in the zoning or an overlay district both street sides of a double frontage, through-lot shall be considered a front yard and shall conform to the front setback requirements. Parcels abutting an alley at the rear of the lot are not considered through lots and rear setback requirements would apply along the rear property line. Refer to figure 3:11.1C, Double Frontage, Through-Lot, for application of setbacks. 
Figure 3:11.1C, Double Frontage, Through-Lot 

D.  Double Frontage, through-lots, residential parcels - setbacks. As defined, structures located on residential lots abutting two (2) opposite streets shall be provided with a front setback and a rear setback. The Director or their designee shall determine the location of the front and rear setbacks based on the building orientation, architectural front of the building and the proposed street driveway access to the lot, which shall be limited to a single point of access. For purposes of selecting the front, the architectural front of the structure shall be designated as the front yard and a front setback shall apply. Refer to Figure 3:11.1D, Double Frontage, Through-Lot, Residential Parcel below for setback application. 
Figure 3:11.1D, Double Frontage, Through-Lot, Residential Parcel 

3:11.2 Flexible development standards, Setbacks. The purpose of this section is to provide the Business and Development Services Director with the authority to allow minor deviations from the development standards for setbacks in order to promote the orderly and efficient development of property. 
A.  Applicability. The Business and Development Services Director shall have the discretion to reduce the otherwise required front, rear, side and corner side setbacks for residential and nonresidential principal buildings by an amount not to exceed ten (10) percent of the otherwise required minimum setback upon determination that one (1) or more of the following conditions exists: 
B.  1.  There are site or structural conditions that preclude strict adherence to the setback requirements, such as, but not limited to: the lot does not meet the dimensional standards established for the zoning district in which it is located; the lot is atypical or unusually shaped, the lot has topographic limitations or other environmental conditions that require placement of the structure into the required setback area; or the structure is physically in line with an existing, legally established wall or walls of a principal structure already within the minimum setback area. 
2.  The part of the proposed structure that would encroach into the minimum setback area is less than fifty (50) percent of the width of the affected building façade(s), and provided the part of the structure that would encroach into a front setback is either open (such as a porch or screen room) or not subject to occupancy (such as a chimney). 
3.  The part of the proposed structure that encroaches into the minimum setback area is necessitated by a life-safety code, flood hazard reduction, Americans with Disabilities Act or other public safety code requirements. 
4.  The proposed structure will allow the preservation of significant existing vegetation. Significant vegetation shall include any trees with a minimum seven (7) inch caliper. 
C.  Additional exceptions. Unless otherwise specified in the zoning district or an overlay zoning district, the following exceptions may be applied at the discretion of the Business and Development Services Director: 
1.  Residential parcels: The Business and Development Services Director shall have the discretion to establish a different front setback for a residential single-family dwelling that is less, or greater than the otherwise required front setback in order to maintain the existing pattern of front yards established by the principal uses contiguous to, and on either side of, the dwelling. If the front yards of the neighboring uses are not the same, the Director shall establish a setback that represents the average of the two (2) neighboring yards. 
2.  Non-residential parcels: On a double frontage, through-lot where one (1) of the front yards that would normally be required is not in charter or in keeping with the prevailing yard pattern established along the street or block, or is inconsistent with adopted plans and/or an overlay zoning district, the Director may waive the requirement for the normal front yard and substitute a special yard requirement, which shall not be less than ten (10) feet. Side and rear setbacks shall be determined based upon both the orientation of the lot and upon the orientation of structures built or to be built on the lot. 
( Ord. No. 805 , § 4, 5-16-2016; Ord. No. 836 , amd. 2, 11-20-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 805 , § 4, adopted May 16, 2016, repealed former § 3:11 and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former § 3:11 pertained to additional minimum setback requirements for certain streets, and derived from the original zoning ordinance. 
 Subsequently, Ord. No. 836 , amd. 2, adopted Nov. 20, 2017, changed the title of § 3:11 from "Allowable Encroachments into the Required Setbacks" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 3:12 - Conforming Uses. 
After the effective date of this Ordinance, structures or the uses of land or structures which then conform to the regulations for the district in which such structures or uses are located may be continued; provided that any structural alteration or change in use shall conform with the regulations herein specified. 
3:12.1 Nonconforming Uses. 
After the effective date of this Ordinance, structures or uses of land or structures which would be prohibited under the regulations for the district in which such structures or uses are located shall be considered as non-conforming. Nonconforming structures or uses may be continued provided they conform to the provisions contained in Article 3, subsection 3:12.3. Nonconforming single-family residential structures may be extended or enlarged, provided they conform to the provisions contained in Article 3, subsection 3:12.4. 
3:12.2 Nonconforming Lots. 
In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, if a lot of record at the effective date of adoption of this Ordinance does not contain sufficient land area to permit a building to conform to the dimensional requirements of the Ordinance, such lot may be used as a building site for a single-family residence provided there is conformance to the minimum front and side yard requirements set forth in this Ordinance for the district in which the residence is located; and further, that any permitted use serviced by a private septic tank system shall meet minimum County Health Department regulations. 
3:12.3 Continuance of Nonconforming Uses of Land and Structures. 
Unless otherwise provided for in another section of this Ordinance, when a nonconforming use of land ceases for a continuous period of ninety (90) calendar days, subsequent use of the land shall conform to the regulations for the district in which the land is located. 
3:12.3.1 Extension of Nonconforming Uses and Nonconforming Structures. 
Nonconforming uses of land or structures existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance shall not hereafter be enlarged or extended in any way, with the exception of nonconforming single-family residential structures. Nonconforming single-family residential structures may be enlarged or extended in any zoning district provided the new additions conform to the setback requirements provided in the zoning district in which such structures or uses are located. 
3:12.3.2 Change of Nonconforming Use. 
Any nonconforming use may be changed to any conforming use, or with the approval of the Board of Appeals, to any use more in character with the uses permitted in the district. In permitting such change, the Zoning Board of Appeals may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
3:12.3.3 Cessation of Nonconforming Uses. 
When a nonconforming use of land ceases for a continuous period of ninety (90) calendar days, subsequent use of the land shall conform to the regulations for the district in which the land is located. 
3:12.3.4 Cessation of Nonconforming Uses of Structures. 
When a nonconforming use of a structure is discontinued or abandoned for ninety (90) calendar days, the use shall not be resumed; and the subsequent use shall conform to the regulations for the district in which the structure is located. 
3:12.3.5 Repair and Alteration of Nonconforming Uses. 
Normal maintenance and repair of a building occupied by a nonconforming use is permitted; provided no other provisions of this Ordinance are violated. 
3:12.3.6 Damage or Destruction of Nonconforming Uses. 
Any conforming structure or any structure containing a nonconforming use, which has been damaged by fire or other causes, may be reconstructed and used as before within the same footprint as the original structure, provided that a building permit(s) applied for such reconstruction within six (6) months of such damage and provided that the size of the structure is not increased. Any structure which is not reestablished in the exact same footprint shall meet all the bulk and setback requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. 
3:12.3.7 Temporary Nonconforming Uses of Land. 
Temporary nonconforming uses of land for carnivals and similar uses may be permitted according to the provisions of Article 4, subsection 4:1.1.4. 
( Ord. No. 783 , § 4, 12-15-2014; Ord. No. 835 , amd. 2, 11-20-2017) 
ARTICLE 4. - ADMINISTRATION, DECISION MAKING AND ADVISORY BODIES 

Sec. 4:1.1 - General Administration, Review and Decision Making. 
4:1.1.1 Administration. 
This ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the designated Zoning Administrator of the City of Mauldin with the assistance of such persons or departments as the City of Mauldin with the assistance of such persons or departments as the City Administrator may direct. The City Administrator has appointed the Business and Development Services Director as the Zoning Administrator for the City of Mauldin. 
4:1.1.2 Zoning Administration. 
a.  The duties of the Zoning Administrator shall include management of the Business and Development Services Department including: receiving and processing all permit applications, issuing permits, issuing zoning compliance approvals, inspecting premises and issuing Certificate of Occupancy for uses and structures that meet the requirements of this ordinance and all other applicable local ordinances and stat adopted codes. 
b.  The Zoning Administrator shall also receive and process applications that require review and approval by appointed City boards and commissions and the Mauldin City Council. Applications include: variance request, interpretation appeals, special exception permits, rezoning request, annexation petitions, and map and text amendments. 
c.  The Zoning Administrator shall also be responsible for maintaining public records related to zoning and building permits and other related permits and reviews in accordance with South Carolina Records Retention schedule for municipal records. 
4:1.1.3 Permit Procedures. 
No land shall be used, occupied, or excavated and no building or structure shall be erected, structurally altered, added to, or moved until a zoning permit and building permit have been issued by the Zoning Administrator and Building Official in conformity with this ordinance and other applicable local ordinances and state adopted codes. 
Zoning Permit. 
An application for a zoning permit shall be filed with the Business and Development Services Department on a form provided by the office. A zoning permit shall be required for the construction or development of any new residential or commercial use(s) or new structure(s) within the City of Mauldin corporate limits. In addition, a zoning permit shall also be required for the relocation, alteration and expansions of existing uses, change in tenant occupancy and change of use as defined by the ordinance. 
a.  Residential Construction for single-family and duplex developments, including but not limited to new construction, additions, decks, patios and accessory structures. 
1.  Information Required. Each application for a zoning permit shall contain the information required on the application form including the Tax Map number of the parcel being developed, site address, a description of work and cost of project. Other information necessary to show that the use or structure complies with the standards set forth in the ordinance shall also be provided. 
2.  Site Plan. The applicant shall provide two (2) copies of a site plan drawn to scale of not less than one (1) inch equals sixty (60) feet. The plan shall show all property lines, lot dimensions and area: location of abutting street(s) and association right(s) of way: the sizes, location, and dimensions of existing and proposed structures to include driveways and setbacks from all property lines. 
3.  Restrictive Covenants and Home Owner Association (HOA) documentation. It shall be the sole responsibility of the homeowner and/or applicant to ensure that all proposed uses, construction, and all other activities requiring a permit are in compliance with any existing lawful restrictive covenant. In the event a permit is issued and a conflict between the restrictive covenant and the zoning ordinance is determined, the more restrictive requirement of the two (2) shall prevail. 
4.  Fees. An application fee as determined by the Permit Fee schedule shall be due and payable when application is submitted. 
5.  Staff Review. Provided the application is complete, staff shall have ten (10) business days to review the application for compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
6.  Issuance. If the proposed plan conforms to the provisions of this ordinance, the site plan will be stamped approved and a zoning permit will be issued. One (1) copy of the plan approval and permit will be returned to the applicant for display on site during construction; the City will also retain one (1) copy. 
7.  Permit Validity. Upon approval of a zoning permit, the applicant shall have one (1) year to obtain a building permit and complete the work and/or establish said use described in the application. Upon issuance of the building permit, the zoning permit shall remain valid as long as a valid building permit exists for the project. Any unapproved changes in the approved plans shall render the zoning permit invalid. Reapplication for zoning permits will be required for all expired zoning permits according to the zoning laws in effect at the time of reapplication. 
8.  Variances. Requests for variances from the standards requiring zoning permits set forth in this ordinance shall be heard by the Zoning Board of Appeals and subject to Section 4:1.2 of the Mauldin Zoning Ordinance. 
b.  Commercial Construction: including but not limited to residential projects consisting of three (3) or more dwelling units, new construction, additions, alterations, renovations, accessory structures: 
1.  Information Required. Each application for a zoning permit shall contain the information required on the application form including the Tax Map number of the parcel being developed, site address, a description of work and cost of project. Other information necessary to show that the use or structure complies with the standards set forth in the ordinance shall also be provided. 
2.  Site Plan. The applicant shall provide four (4) copies of a site plan drawn to scale of not less than one (1) inch equals sixty (60) feet. The site plan shall be prepared in accordance with the Commercial Site Plan Checklist provided by the Business and Development Service Department. 
3.  Restrictive Covenants and Home Owner Association (HOA) documentation. It shall be the sole responsibility of the homeowner and/or applicant to ensure that all proposed uses, construction, and all other activities requiring a permit are in compliance with any existing lawful restrictive covenant. In the event a permit is issued and a conflict between the restrictive covenant and the zoning ordinance is determined, the more restrictive requirement of the two (2) shall prevail. 
4.  Fees. An application fee as determined by the Permit Fee schedule shall be due and payable when application is submitted. 
5.  Staff Review. Provided the application is complete, staff shall have ten (10) business days to review the application for compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
6.  Issuance. If the proposed plan conforms to the provisions of this ordinance, the site plan will be stamped approved and a zoning permit will be issued. One (1) copy of the plan approval and permit will be returned to the applicant for display on site during construction; the City will also retain one (1) copy. 
7.  Permit Validity. Upon approval of a zoning permit, the applicant shall have one (1) year to obtain a building permit and complete the work and/or establish said use described in the application. Upon issuance of the building permit, the zoning permit shall remain valid as long as a valid building permit exists for the project. Any unapproved changes in the approved plans shall render the zoning permit invalid. Reapplication for zoning permits will be required for all expired zoning permits according to the zoning laws in effect at the time of reapplication. 
8.  Variances. Requests for variances from the standards requiring zoning permits set forth in this ordinance shall be heard by the Zoning Board of Appeals and subject to Section 4:1.2 of the Mauldin Zoning Ordinance. 
c.  Tenant Occupancy (For establishment of a new business where no construction is proposed). 
1.  Information Required. Each application for a Tenant Occupancy shall contain the information required on the application form including the Tax Map number of the parcel, site address, the proposed use, the prior use of the property, and a letter from the owner of property stating the period of time that the building or space has been vacant. 
2.  Fees. An application fee as determined by the Permit Fee schedule shall be due and payable when application is submitted. 
3.  Staff Review and On-site Inspection. Provided the application is complete, staff shall have ten (10) business days to complete the review of the Tenant Occupancy application. If the proposed use of the space or building is a permitted use in the zoning district, an on-site inspection by the Building Official and Fire Marshal will be conducted to ensure compliance with life safety standards. 
4.  Issuance. Upon approval of the inspection, a Tenant Occupancy Certificate shall be issued. One (1) copy of the certificate will be returned to the applicant, the City will also retain one (1) copy. 
4:1.1.4 Enforcement. 
If the Zoning Administrator shall find that any of the provisions of the Ordinance are being violated, he shall notify, in writing, the person responsible for such violation indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order a discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal building or structures, or of additions, alterations, or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; take any other action authorized by this ordinance to ensure compliance with or prevent violation of its provisions. 
4:1.1.5 Right to Appeal. 
If the request for a zoning permit or zoning certificate is denied, the applicant may appeal to the action to the Board of Appeals in accordance with subsection 4:1.3.8 of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 4:1.2 - Building and Zoning Board of Appeals. 
4:1.2.1 Duties of Administrative Official. 
It is the intent of this Ordinance that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the Business and Development Services Director, and that such questions shall be presented to the Board of Appeals only on appeal from the decision of the Business and Development Services Director, and that recourse from the decision of the Board of Appeals shall be to the Circuit Court and the Supreme Court of the State of South Carolina, as provided by the laws of the State of South Carolina and particularly by the South Carolina Local Government Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act of 1994, S.C. Code Title 6, Chapter 29. 
It is further the intent of this Ordinance that the duties of the City Council in connection with this Ordinance shall not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that may arise. The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as stated in this section and this Ordinance. Under this Ordinance, the City Council shall have only the duty of considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or the repeal of this Ordinance, as provided by law. 
4:1.2.2 Establishment of the Building and Zoning Board of Appeals. 
A Board of Appeals is hereby created with the powers and duties set forth below. 
4:1.2.3 Membership. 
The Building and Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of seven (7) members, to be appointed by the city council. Members shall be residents of the City of Mauldin at the time of their appointment and shall maintain residency throughout the term of office. The term of office of the members shall be three (3) years and shall expire on June 30 of the appropriate year. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by city council. The city council shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause, including but not limited to unexcused absences from three (3) meetings. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
4:1.2.4 Proceedings. 
The Board of Appeals shall draw up and adopt rules governing the conduct of the affairs, which are in keeping with the provisions of this Ordinance. The rules shall provide and require the following, in addition to other rules and regulations the Board shall adopt. 
4:1.2.5 Officials. 
At the first meeting after its establishment, the Board shall elect a chairman, a vice-chairman and such other officers as necessary from among the members. Such officers shall serve one-year terms and may succeed themselves. The chairman, or in his absence, the vice chairman, shall preside at all meetings, may administer oaths, and compel the attendance of witnesses, and the production of papers, records, and other documents by subpoena. 
4:1.2.6 Meetings. 
Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. Due notice shall be given to all parties of interest. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public, and all evidence and testimony shall be presented publicly. 
4:1.2.7 Minutes of Proceedings. 
The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon every question or his absence or failure to vote, indicating such fact, and also keep records of its examinations, findings, determinations, and any other official action. No final action shall be taken unless a majority of the total membership of the Board is present. 
4:1.2.8 Decisions. 
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board of Appeals shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Business and Development Services Director charged with the enforcement of this Ordinance, or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under this Ordinance, or to grant a variance from the provisions of this Ordinance. 
4:1.2.9 Appeal of a Board Decision. 
Every decision of the Board of Appeals shall be subject to review by a court of record, in the manner provided by the laws of the State of South Carolina and particularly by the South Carolina Local Government Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act of 1994, S.C. Code Title 6, Chapter 29. 
4:1.2.10 Filing Fee. 
A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid to the City Clerk for each application to the Board of Appeals to cover the necessary administrative costs. 
Sec. 4:1.3 - Board of Appeals: Powers and Duties. 
4:1.3.1 Reviews: Variances, Uses Permitted by Special Exception, Appeals. 
The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties. 
Review. The Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Business and Development Services Director in the enforcement of this Ordinance. 
4:1.3.2 Variances. 
The Board of Appeals may authorize upon written appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship or peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties. 
Before action is taken on a request for a variance, the Board of Appeals shall hold one (1) or more public hearings, at which any party may appear in person, or by agent or attorney. 
4:1.3.3 Public Notice of Hearing. 
Notice of a public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. The notice shall be blocked in, carry an appropriate descriptive title, and shall state the time, dates, and place of the hearing. Following any request for variance, the City shall properly post and maintain on the subject property a Notice of Public Hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the public hearing. Such signs must be placed in a conspicuous place or places on the affected premises and posted at the City Hall. 
4:1.3.4 Board Actions to a Variance Request. 
A variance from the terms of this Ordinance may be granted by the Board of Appeals upon a finding that: 
A.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property. 
B.  These conditions do not generally apply to other property in the vicinity. 
C.  Because of these conditions, the application of the Ordinance to the particular piece of property would effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property. 
D.  The authorization of a variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property or to the public good, and the character of the district will not be harmed by the granting of the variance. 
No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district, and no permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
Under no circumstances shall the Board of Appeals grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this Ordinance in the district involved. 
4:1.3.5 Uses Permitted by Special Exception. 
The Board of Appeals may hear and decide upon Uses Permitted by special exception specifically authorized by the terms of this Ordinance. A use permitted by special exception shall not be authorized by the Board of Appeals unless and until: 
A.  A public hearing shall be held; 
B.  The Board shall make findings; 
C.  The Board shall make written findings certifying compliance with the regulations governing the special use. 
4:1.3.6 Public Notice of Hearing. 
Notice of public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. The notice shall be blocked in, carry an appropriate descriptive title, and shall state the time, dates, and place of the hearing. Following any request for a use permitted by special exception, the City shall properly post and maintain on the subject property a Notice of Public Hearing at least ten (10) days prior the date of the public hearing. Such signs must be placed in a conspicuous place or places on the affected premises, and posted at the City Hall. 
4:1.3.7 Additional Powers-Interpretation of District Boundaries. 
In addition to the powers conferred upon the Board of Appeals, the Board shall have authority to interpret district boundaries where boundaries on the ground are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map. 
In granting any variance, the Board of Appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards shall be a violation of this Ordinance and punishable under Section 12:3. 
Under no circumstances shall the Board of Appeals grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this Ordinance, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this Ordinance in the district involved. 
4:1.3.8 Interpretation Appeals and Hearings. 
Appeals to the Board of Appeals concerning interpretation or administration of this Ordinance may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the city. Such appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the Board of Appeals by general rule, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds. 
The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board, after notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Board or by a court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal, give due notice of hearing to the parties concerned, and decide the same within forty-five (45) days. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and shall make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as in its opinion ought to be made on the premises, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
Sec. 4:2 - Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment and Zoning Map Amendment. 
The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this Ordinance may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed by the City Council. Prior to final action by City Council under this article, the Planning Commission shall review the amendment and offer any comments and make recommendations. All action shall be done in accordance with the procedures outlined below. 
Sec. 4:2.1 - Application. 
An application for any change or amendment to the text or zoning district map of this Ordinance shall contain a description and/or statement of the present and proposed zoning regulation or district boundary to be changed, and include the names, addresses of the owner or owners of the property. Such application shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the published schedule of zoning deadline and meeting dates. 
In order for an application to be processed by staff, all required information and forms must be completed. Incomplete applications and forms may be returned to the applicant and rescheduled to a subsequent public meeting time upon completion of the application as required. 
4:2.1.1 Fee. 
When a proposed amendment to the zoning ordinance text or zoning district map is initiated by individuals or parties other than the City Council, Planning Commission, or Board of Appeals, a fee shall be paid for each application for administrative and advertising expenses as set forth in the fee adopted by City Council. 
4:2.1.2 Action by the Applicant. 
Applicants for amendments to the zoning ordinance text or any zoning district map adopted hereunder shall take action in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
4:2.1.3 Initiation of Amendment. 
City Council, Planning Commission, or Board of Appeals may initiate proposed changes or amendments to the zoning ordinance text. Petitions for text changes or amendments by any interested property owner or resident of the City of Mauldin must first be presented to the Building Codes Committee and Planning Commission prior to final Council consideration and action. 
Proposed changes or amendments to the zoning district map may be initiated by City Council, City Planning Commission, Board of Appeals, or by petition of any interested property owner with a property interest in the parcel of property being petitioned for a zoning district map change. Petitions for amendments to the zoning district map must first be presented to the Planning Commission prior to final Council consideration and action. 
4:2.1.4 Notice of Hearing. 
Notice of a public hearing for either a zoning ordinance text amendment or zoning district map amendment shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. The notice shall be blocked in, carry an appropriate descriptive title, and shall state the time, date, and place of the hearing. 
Following a request for an amendment to the zoning district map, staff shall properly post and maintain on the property a City Notice Sign at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the public hearing. 
Sec. 4:2.2 - Action by the Planning Commission. 
Upon receipt of a completed application and request for an amendment to the zoning ordinance text or zoning district map, staff shall review the request and make written recommendations to the Planning Commission. 
Before the Planning Commission makes a recommendation on any zoning district map amendment, the Planning Commission shall be informed of the relation of the application to the provisions of the City's Comprehensive plan. In the absence of such information one (1) or more of the following shall be found applicable. Such finding shall be recorded in the minutes and records of the Planning Commission: 
A.  That the original zoning classification given to the property is inappropriate or improper. 
B.  That there have been major changes of an economic, physical or social nature within the area involved which were not anticipated in the City's Comprehensive Plan and which have substantially altered the basic character of such area. 
The Planning Commission shall, upon receipt of a request hold a public hearing consistent with subsection 4:2.1.4 of this Ordinance. The Planning Commission shall have thirty (30) calendar days within which to provide a written recommendation to the City Council concerning the request. If the Planning Commission fails to submit a report to City Council within the prescribed time period, the request shall be deemed approved and forwarded to the City Council for consideration. 
4:2.2.1 Public Hearing. 
Upon receipt of a completed application for an amendment to the zoning ordinance text or zoning district map, staff shall place the request on the agenda for the next scheduled public hearing. No amendment to the zoning ordinance text or zoning district map shall be eligible for final consideration by City Council until after public notice and a hearing by the Planning Commission has been made. 
Sec. 4:2.3 - Action by City Council. 
4:2.3.1 City Council Consideration. 
The City Council may consider proposed zoning ordinance text or zoning district map amendments at any meeting of Council. No amendment, however, shall be adopted by the City Council until public notice and a hearing has occurred in accordance with the ordinance. 
4:2.3.2 Action by City Council. 
Upon receipt of the Planning Commission's recommendation for an amendment to the zoning ordinance text or zoning district map, staff shall forward a written report to City Council that includes the Planning Commission's comments and recommendations for Council to consider. 
City Council shall consider the staff's review, recommendation received from the Planning Commission and any other information presented at the hearing before final consideration of the request. 
Before City Council approves and zoning district map amendment, City Council shall be informed of the relation of the application to the provisions of the City's Comprehensive plan. In the absence of such information one (1) or more of the following should be considered and such findings shall be recorded in the minutes and records of City Council: 
A.  That the original zoning classification given to the property is inappropriate or improper. 
B.  That there have been major changes of an economic, physical, or social nature within the area involved which were not anticipated in the City's Comprehensive Plan and which have substantially altered the basic character of such area. 
If the Planning Commission has recommended denial of a request for a zoning ordinance text or zoning district map amendment the City Council may reject the recommendation of the Planning Commission by a favorable vote of five (5) members to Council. 
4:2.3.3 Protests. 
In case of a protest against any proposed zoning change by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more of the lots included in the proposed change, or those immediately adjacent to, in the rear, or on either side extending one hundred (100) fee, or those directly opposite extending one hundred (100) feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, any amendment shall not become effective except by favorable vote of five (5) members of City Council, including the mayor. 
No protest petition shall be valid unless it is: (1) written, (2) bears the actual signatures of the requisite number of property owners and states that they protest the proposed amendment, and (3) is received by the Zoning Administrator in time to allow at least two (2) normal working days (excluding weekends and legal holidays) prior to the public hearing on the amendment, so as to allow time for municipal personnel to check the accuracy and sufficiency of the petition. 
4:2.3.4 Reconsideration of Request for Amendment. 
When an applicant for an amendment is withdrawn at the request of the applicant after such time as the application has been legally advertised for public hearing, it shall not be considered for an amendment affecting the same property for six (6) months from the date of withdrawal. 
When the City Council shall have denied a request for an amendment, it shall not consider the same reclassification for an amendment affecting the same property until one (1) year from the date of the previous denial. 
4:2.3.5 Effective Date of Change in Zoning Ordinance or Map. 
Any Ordinance affecting a change in the text of the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map shall not become effective until the day following the second reading by City Council 
Sec. 4:3.1 - General. 
The purpose of the neighborhood meeting is to provide an opportunity for communication between applicants, occupants, and owners of nearby properties who may be affected by development proposals; to educate the occupants and owners about the proposed rezoning; to receive comments and address concerns about the development proposal; and to resolve conflicts and outstanding issues, where possible. 
( Ord. No. 788 , 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 4:3.2 - Neighborhood meeting encouraged. 
A neighborhood meeting is strongly encouraged for all applications requiring a public hearing prior to submission of an application. Furthermore, the Chairperson of the Planning Commission, the Chairperson of the Building and Zoning Board of Appeals or a member of City Council may, during a public hearing, suggest to the applicant that they conduct a neighborhood meeting if it is determined that the application could potentially have negative land use, appearance, traffic, or public facility impacts on neighboring properties. 
( Ord. No. 788 , 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 4:3.3 - Neighborhood meeting required. 
A neighborhood meeting shall be required for all proposed Map Amendments (e.g. Rezoning and Planned Development requests) and shall take place a minimum of twenty (20) days prior to the scheduled public hearing. 
( Ord. No. 788 , 5-18-2015) 
Sec. 4:3.4 - Procedures. 
If a neighborhood meeting is convened it should generally comply with the following procedures: 
1.  Time and Place. The neighborhood meeting should be held during the hours of 5:30 - 9:00 p.m., Monday through Friday at a place that is generally accessible to occupants of property in close proximity to the land subject to the application unless affected property owners request a different time. Meetings shall be held at least twenty (20) calendar days prior to the scheduled public hearing. Failure to do so will result in a delay of the public hearing schedule. 
2.  Notification. The applicant shall post a Neighborhood Meeting sign (provided by the Business and Development Services Department) at the development site location along each road front, at least ten (10) days prior to the neighborhood meeting. In addition, the applicant shall provide notice of the meeting via first class mail. Notices must be postmarked a minimum of seven (7) calendar days prior to the Neighborhood Meeting. The notification shall state the time, place and subject of the meeting and shall mailed to the following: 
a.  All owners and occupants of properties located within a two hundred (200) feet of the land/properties subject to the application; 
b.  Any neighborhood organization that represents citizens within the area; and 
c.  The City of Mauldin Business and Development Services Department. 
3.  Meeting Agenda and Conduct. A sign-up sheet shall be provided at the meeting to collect and record the names and addresses of all attendees. The Neighborhood Meeting agenda is to cover the following items: 
• Introduction of the meeting organizer (developer, property owner, etc.); 
• Description of the application and rezoning request; 
• Explanation of why the request is being made (including any plans for future development) and why the application is reasonable and compatible with the surrounding area; and 
• Time devoted to address community questions and concerns. 
4.  Meeting Summary. Subsequent to the neighborhood meeting, and at least fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled public hearing, the applicant shall provide the City with a written summary of the Neighborhood Meeting. The summary shall include the following: 
• A copy of the mailed notice of the neighborhood meeting with a mailing list of all residents and/ or businesses that were notified of the meeting. 
• A list of attendees and their addresses. 
• A summary of concerns and issues expressed during the meeting. 
• A summary identifying how the applicant addressed concerns and issues expressed during the meeting. 
5.  Staff Report. In addition to the application and staff report typically provided for a public hearing review, staff shall also include a copy of the Neighborhood Meeting summary. 
( Ord. No. 788 , 5-18-2015) 
ARTICLE 5. - ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 5:1 - General Regulations for all Residential Districts. 
5:1.1 Utilities. 
It shall be unlawful to construct or occupy any residential dwelling that is not connected to an approved water supply and sewerage disposal facility. Wherever public or community water and sewerage systems are available, dwellings shall be connected to such systems. In every other case, individual water supply and sewerage disposal facilities must meet the requirements set by the Greenville County Health Department. 
5:1.2 Utilities-Lots of Record. 
Area requirements for individual lots in all districts are minimum requirements with an approved water and sewerage disposal system accessible to the lot. If a lot of record with less than the minimum area is proposed for use and does not have an approved water and sewerage system available, a certificate from the Greenville County Board of Health approving the proposed facility must accompany a request for a zoning certificate. 
5:1.3 Fencing. 
A.  Front Yard, parallel with the street: Fencing that is located within the designated front yard and positioned to run parallel with the street shall be of a decorative, non-opaque material and shall not exceed forty-eight (48) inches in height. 
B.  Front Yard, parallel with the side property line: Fencing located in this area shall adhere to the side and rear yard standards of Section 5:1.3(c) below, with the exception that such fencing is set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the street right-of way line. 
C.  Side and rear yard: Fencing may be constructed up to the side and rear property line(s) at a maximum height of eight (8) feet provided that any portion of the fence above the height of six (6) feet shall be non-opaque. 
D.  Double Frontage, through-lot and Corner Lots: Fencing may be located within the designated district setback when such fencing complies with the following standards: 
1.  Fencing shall not obstruct visibility at street intersections and shall comply with the site visibility requirements of Section 3:3, Site visibility triangle and illustration; and 
2.  The finished side of the fence shall face the street; and 
3.  Any fencing greater than six (6) feet in height that is adjacent to or abuts a residential arterial and/or residential collector street (as defined in Section 3:3, Definitions, Street) shall comply with the following screening standards in order to assist in mitigating noise, and provide a visually aesthetic appearance along the street: 
a)  A minimum of one (1) evergreen tree and/or large maturing evergreen shrub shall be planted on the street side for every eight (8) feet of fencing proposed. 
b)  Vegetation shall be located in a planting strip of at least five (5) feet in width and shall consist of foliage that will cover at least fifty (50) percent of the height of the fence at maturity. 
E.  Permitting Requirements: 
1.  Building Permit Required. All fencing greater than seven (7) feet in height requires a building permit and submittal of plans with footings designed and sealed by a South Carolina licensed engineer. 
2.  Site Plan Required. Corner and Double frontage-through lots. A zoning site plan review (to ensure compliance with the landscape requirements of Section 5:1.3D3. is required for any fencing that is greater than six (6) feet in height and is to be located along a corner street side and/or double-frontage, through-lot street side. 
5.1.4 Landscaping, Buffering and Screening Standards. 
Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as required in Section 6:2 of this Ordinance. 
5.1.5 Lighting Standards. 
Exterior Lighting shall be provided as required in Section 6:3 of this Ordinance. 
5:1.6 Parking and Loading Standards. 
Unless otherwise stipulated, parking shall not be permitted in the front setback for any non-residential use(s) located in a residential district. Off-street parking and loading shall be provided as required by Section 6:1 of this Ordinance. 
5:1.7 Zoning Review and Permitting. 
All new construction, building additions, and accessory structures shall require a zoning permit and shall be provided in accordance with Section 4:1.1.3 of this Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 786 , amd. 3, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 805 , § 1, 5-16-2016; Ord. No. 836 , amd. 3, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 5:2 - Residential Districts: R-20, R-15, and R-12. 
These low density residential districts are established as areas in which the principal use of land is for single-family dwellings and for related recreational, religious, and educational facilities normally required to provide an orderly and attractive residential area. The standards are intended to protect the districts residential character while promoting a suitable environment for single-family living. 
5:2.1 Uses Permitted. 
Residential Dwellings: 
Detached, Single Family. 
Detached, Cluster Housing (in accordance with Section 8:2). 
Temporary Uses and Structures (as defined and in accordance with Article 9). 
5:2.2 Uses Permitted by Special Exception. 
The following uses are permitted on review by the Building and Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the procedures established in Article 4 and the Special Exception standards outlined in Article 7 of this Ordinance: 
Fire and Police Substations 
Golf Course (including a Clubhouse and other associated accessory uses). 
Libraries. 
Private Recreation Areas. 
Public: Parks, Playgrounds and Recreational Facilities and Uses. 
Public Utility Buildings and Uses. 
Schools: Public, Parochial, and Private. 
Other public and semi-public uses that are considered to be comparable with the aforementioned uses. 
5:2.3 Conditional Uses. 
The following uses are permitted by Conditional Use in accordance with the provisions set forth in Article 10, Conditional Uses, of this Ordinance: 
Accessory Structures. 
Adult Day Care Home. 
Child Day Care Home. 
Home Occupation. 
Places of Worship. 
5:2.4 Dimensional Standards Table. 
TABLE 5.2.4 TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL ZONES: 

R-20, R-15 AND R-12 District and Use 
[1,5] Min. Lot Area 
(sq. ft.) Min. Lot Width 
(ft.) 
[2] Minimum Required Setbacks [1,5] Max. Height 
(ft.) Max. Gross 
Density 
(DU/AC) Front 
(ft.) Side 
(ft.) Rear 
(ft.) Side/Rear 
(ft.) 
Accessory Structures 
[4,5] Corner 
Side R-20 District Dwelling, Detached Single Family 20,000 100 30 10 25 5 1/2 of front setback 30 2.2/ac Non-residential uses 30,000 200 30 20 25 10 25 30 N/A R-15 District Dwelling, Detached Single Family 15,000 100 25 10 25 5 1/2 of front setback 30 2.9/ac Non-residential uses 30,000 200 30 20 25 10 25 30 N/A R-12 District Dwelling, Detached Single Family 12,000 80 25 10 25 5 1/2 of front setback 30 3.6/ac Non-residential uses 30,000 200 30 20 25 10 25 30 N/A Housing Developments: R-20, R-15, R-12 Dwelling, Cluster: Detached: Subject to provisions of Section 8:2 Applicable to all Districts Uses Permitted by Special Exception: Subject to provisions of Article 7 Conditional Uses: Subject to provisions of Article 10 Notes: 
[1] Non-residential uses permitted by Special Exception: When more than one (1) setback or other design standard applies, the most restrictive standard shall be met as provided for in Article 7. 
[2] Minimum lot width shall be measured at the setback line, not the public right-of-way or edge of pavement for private drives. In cases where a lot is bounded by two (2) or more streets, the minimum lot width is only required at the setback line for the front yard. 
[3] Areas within a designated public right-of-way shall not be used to calculate compliance with the minimum lot size requirements. 
[4] Residential Accessory Structures: The maximum floor area of all accessory structures shall not exceed 50% of the gross floor area of the principle structure (Refer to Section 10:2). 
[5] Conditional Uses: When more than one (1) setback or other design standard applies, the most restrictive standard shall be met as provided for in Article 10.  
( Ord. No. 786 , amd. 4, 3-16-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 786 , amd. 4, adopted March 16, 2015, changed the title of § 5:2 from "R-20, R-15, R-12, and R-10 Residential Districts" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 5:3 - Residential Districts: R-10, R-8, and R-6. 
These medium density residential districts are intended to provide (primarily) single family living and also encourage diverse functioning neighborhoods that may include various types of residential development, and limited nonresidential uses normally required to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area. 
5:3.1 Uses Permitted. 
Residential Dwellings: 
Detached, Single Family dwelling. 
Cluster Housing, Attached (in accordance with Section 8:2). 
Cluster Housing, Detached (in accordance with Section 8:2). 
Temporary Uses and Structures (as defined and in accordance with Article 9). 
5:3.2 Uses Permitted by Special Exception. 
The following uses are permitted upon review by the Building and Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the procedures established in Article 4 and the Special Exception standards outlined in Article 7 of this Ordinance: 
Fire and Police Substations. 
Golf Course (including a Clubhouse and other associated accessory uses). 
Libraries. 
Private Recreation Areas. 
Public: Parks, Playgrounds and Recreation Facilities and Uses. 
Public Utility Buildings and Uses. 
Schools: Public, Parochial, and Private. 
Other public and semi-public uses that are considered to be comparable with the aforementioned uses. 
5:3.3 Conditional Uses. 
The following uses are permitted by Conditional Use in accordance with the provisions of Article 10 of this Ordinance: 
Accessory Apartments. 
Accessory Structures. 
Adult Day Care Home. 
Child Care Home. 
Dwelling, Attached Single Family Housing. 
Dwelling Cluster Development: Traditional Urban Neighborhood Housing (In accordance with Section 8.2 and Section 10.8 of this Ordinance). 
Dwelling, Two-family (Duplex - In accordance with Section 10:9 of this Ordinance). 
Home Occupation. 
Places of Worship. 
5.3.4 Development Standards Table 
TABLE 5.3.4 TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL ZONES: 

R-10, R-8 AND R-6 District and Use 
[1,5] Min. Lot Area 
(Sq. ft.) Min. Lot Width 
(ft.) 
[2] Minimum Required Setbacks [1,5] Max. Height 
(ft.) Max. Gross Density 
(DU/AC) Front 
(ft.) Side 
(ft.) Rear 
(ft.) Side/Rear 
(ft.) 
Accessory Structures 
[4,5] Corner 
Side R-10 District Dwelling, Detached Single Family 10,000 70 25 10 25 5 1/2 of front setback 30 4.4/ac Non-residential uses 30,000 200 30 20 25 10 25 30 N/A R-8 District Dwelling, Detached Single Family 8,000 50 20 6 15 5 1/2 of front setback 30 5.4/ac Non-residential uses 30,000 200 30 20 25 10 25 30 N/A R-6 District Dwelling, Detached Single Family 6,000 50 20 6 15 5 1/2 of front setback 30 7.3/ac Non-residential uses 30,000 200 30 20 25 10 25 30 N/A Housing Developments: R-10, R-8 and R-6 Minimum Tract Area Dwelling, Attached Single Family Housing: Subject to provisions of Section 10.8 2 Acres Dwelling, Cluster: Attached Housing: Subject to provisions of Section 8:2 2 Acres Dwelling, Cluster: Detached Housing: Subject to provisions of Section 8:2 2 Acres Dwelling, Cluster: Traditional Urban Neighborhood Housing: Subject to provisions of Section 8:2 and Section 10:8. 5 Acres Applicable to All Districts Uses Permitted by Special Exception: Subject to provisions of Article 7 Conditional Uses: Subject to provisions of Article 10 Notes: 
[1] Non-residential uses permitted by Special Exception: When more than one (1) setback or other design standard applies, the most restrictive standard shall be met as provided for in Article 7. 
[2] Minimum lot width shall be measured at the setback line, not the public right-of-way or edge of pavement for private drives. In cases where a lot is bounded by two (2) or more streets, the minimum lot width is only required at the setback line for the front yard. 
[3] Areas within a designated public right-of-way shall not be used to calculate compliance with the minimum lot size requirements. 
[4] Residential Accessory Structures: The maximum floor area of all accessory structures shall not exceed 50% of the gross floor area of the principle structure (Refer to provisions of Section 10:2.) 
[5] Conditional Uses: When more than one (1) setback or other design standard applies, the most restrictive standard shall be met as provided for in Article 10.  
( Ord. No. 786 , amd. 4, 3-16-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 786 , amd. 4, adopted March 16, 2015, changed the title of § 5:3 from "R-M1, Mixed Residential Districts" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 5:4 - Residential District: R-M1, Mixed Residential District. 
This residential district is established to provide for medium residential density. The principal use of land is for one- and two-family dwellings and recreational, religious, and educational facilities normally associated with residential development. This district also allows a mixture of residential, professional offices and low impact service and retail uses provided design and review conditions are met. 
5:4.1 Uses Permitted 
Residential Dwellings: 
Detached, Single Family. 
Two-family (Duplex). 
Cluster Housing, Attached (in accordance with Section 8:2). 
Cluster Housing, Detached (in accordance with Section 8:2). 
Temporary Uses and Structures (as defined and in accordance with Article 9). 
5:4.2 Uses Permitted by Special Exception. 
The following uses are permitted upon review by the Building and Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the procedures established in Article 4 and the Special Exception standards outlined in Article 7 of this Ordinance: 
Assisted Living Facilities. 
Fire and Police Substation. 
Fruit and Vegetable Markets. 
Golf Course (including a Clubhouse and other associated accessory uses). 
Group/Family Care Home. 
Group Residential Developments that includes a planned mix of residential (single-family and two-family housing) and low impact non-residential uses as provided for in the district (in accordance with Section 8:1, Design Standards for Residential Housing Developments). 
Libraries. 
Private Recreation Areas. 
Professional Offices, (subject to provisions of Section 7:11). 
Public: Parks, Playgrounds, Recreational Facilities and Uses. 
Schools: Public, Parochial, and Private. 
Senior Housing Retirement Center. 
Low Impact retail sales establishments, which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to, permitted principal office uses, such as but not limited to, the following: 
Bakery, Coffee, Sandwich, and Ice-cream shops. 
Barber, Beauty Shop. 
Bookstores. 
Cafeteria. 
Florists. 
Medical Office: Optician, Dentist. 
Medical supply sales. 
Pharmacy. 
Restaurants (no drive-thru service permitted). 
Similar retail uses which are designed primarily to serve the convenience of persons working or receiving services in the building in which the accessory use is located, provided that such accessory use is clearly incidental and subordinate to principal permitted office uses. 
5:4.3 Conditional Uses. 
The following uses are permitted by Conditional Use in accordance with the provisions of Article 10 of this Ordinance: 
Accessory Apartments. 
Accessory Structures. 
Adult Day Care Home. 
Adult Day Care Center. 
Child Day Care Home. 
Child Day Care Center. 
Dwelling: Attached Single Family Housing. 
Dwelling: Cluster Development: Traditional Urban Neighborhood Housing (In accordance with Section 8.2 and Section 10.8 of this Ordinance). 
Dwelling, Multi-family: Quadraplex (four (4) attached units). 
Dwelling, Multi-family: Triplex (three (3) attached units). 
Dwelling, Two-family (Duplex). 
Home Occupation. 
Places of Worship. 
5.4.4 Development Standards Table. 
TABLE 5.4.4 TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL ZONE:

RESIDENTIAL MEDIUM DENSITY MIXED USE (RM-1) DISTRICT District 
and Use 

[1,5] Min. Lot Area 
(sq. ft.) Min. Lot Width 
(ft.) 
[2] Minimum Required Setbacks [1,5] Max. Height 
(ft.) Front 
(ft.) Side 
(ft.) Rear 
(ft.) Side/Rear 
(ft.) 
Accessory Structures 
[4,5] Corner Side Dwelling, Detached Single Family 6,000 50 20 6 15 5 1/2 of front setback 30 Two-Family (Duplex) 7,500 50 20 6 15 5 1/2 of front setback 30 Non-residential uses 30,000 200 30 20 25 10 25 30 Housing Developments Minimum Tract Area Dwelling, Attached Single Family Housing: Subject to provisions of Section 10.7 N/A Dwelling, Cluster: Attached Housing: Subject to provisions of Section 8:2 2 Acres Dwelling, Cluster: Detached Housing: Subject to provisions of Section 8:2 2 Acres Dwelling, Cluster: Traditional Urban Neighborhood Housing: Subject to provisions of Section 8:2 and Section 10:8 5 Acres Other Uses: Dwelling, Quadraplex & Triplex : Subject to provisions of Section 10:9 Refer to Article 10 Group Developments: Subject to provisions of Section 8:3 2 Acres Professional Office Development - Subject to provisions of Section 7:11 2 Acres Applicable to All Districts Uses Permitted by Special Exception: Subject to provisions of Article 7 Conditional Uses: Subject to provisions of Article 10 Notes: 
[1] Non-residential uses permitted by Special Exception: When more than one (1) setback or other design standard applies, the most restrictive standard shall be met as provided for in Article 7. 
[2] Minimum lot width shall be measured at the setback line, not the public right-of-way or edge of pavement for private drives. In cases where a lot is bounded by two (2) or more streets, the minimum lot width is only required at the setback line for the front yard. 
[3] Areas within a designated public right-of-way shall not be used to calculate compliance with the minimum lot size requirements. 
[4] Residential Accessory Structures: The maximum floor area of all accessory structures shall not exceed 50% of the gross floor area of the principle structure (Refer to provisions of Section 10:2.) 
[5] Conditional Uses: When more than one (1) setback or other design standard applies, the most restrictive standard shall be met as provided for in Article 10.  
( Ord. No. 786 , amd. 4, 3-16-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 786 , amd. 4, adopted March 16, 2015, changed the title of § 5:4 from "R-M, Residential, Multifamily District" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 5:5 - Residential: Multi-Family District (RM). 
This residential district is established to provide a full range of medium to high density multi-family housing types along with single-family detached and attached residences population density. Other uses include recreational, religious, and educational facilities normally required to provide an orderly and attractive residential area. This district is also intended to provide a transitional area between single-family districts and commercial districts where certain land uses may not be compatible. 
5:5.1 Uses Permitted. 
Residential Dwellings: 
Detached, Single Family. 
Group Residential Developments (subject to provisions of Section 8:1). 
Multi-family (Three (3) or more units, subject to provisions of Section 8:1). 
Cluster Housing, Attached (subject to provisions of Section 8:2). 
Cluster Housing, Detached (subject to provisions of Section 8:2). 
Temporary Uses and Structures (as defined and in accordance with Article 9). 
5:5.2 Uses Permitted by Special Exception. 
The following uses are permitted upon review by the Building and Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the procedures established in Article 4 and the Special Exception standards outlined in Article 7: 
Assisted Living Facilities. 
Fire and Police Substation. 
Golf course (including a Clubhouse and other associated accessory uses). 
Library. 
Group/Family Care Home. 
Mobile Home Park (subject to provisions of Section 7:2). 
Private Recreation Area. 
Public: Park, Playground, Recreational Facility or Uses. 
Public Utility Use and Building. 
School: Public, Private, and Parochial. 
Senior Housing Retirement Center. 
Other public and semipublic uses which are considered to be compatible with the aforementioned uses. 
5:5.3 Conditional Uses. 
The following uses are permitted by Conditional Use in accordance with the provisions of Article 10: 
Accessory Apartments. 
Accessory Structures. 
Adult Day Care Center. 
Adult Day Care Home. 
Child Day Care Center. 
Child Day Care Home. 
Dwelling, Attached Single Family. 
Dwelling: Cluster Development: Traditional Urban Neighborhood Housing (in accordance with Section 8:2 and Section 10:8). 
Home Occupation. 
Places of Worship. 
5:5.4 Development Standards Table. 
TABLE 5.5.4: TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL ZONE:

RESIDENTIAL MULTI-FAMILY (RM) DISTRICTDistrict 
and Use 

[1,5] Min. Lot Area 
(sq. ft.) Min. Lot Width 
(ft.) 
[2] Minimum Required Setbacks [1,5] Max. Height 
(ft.) Front 
(ft.) Side 
(ft.) Rear 
(ft.) Side/Rear 
(ft.) 
Accessory Structures 
[4,5] Corner Side Dwelling, Detached Single-Family 5,000 50 20 6 15 5 1/2 of front setback 30 Two-Family (Duplex) 7,500 50 20 6 15 5 1/2 of front setback 30 Non-residential uses 30,000 20 30 20 25 10 25 30 Group Residential/Multi-family Developments (3 units or more): 
Also: Subject to the Design Standards of Section 8:1 
Min. Lot Area (sq. ft.) 15,000
Min. Lot Width (ft.) 50
Side/Rear Setback (ft.) 10
Accessory Structures Max. Height (ft.) 45
Max. Gross Density (DU/AC) 16 units/acre   
Minimum Required Setbacks: Front
Side Rear  20 4 or fewer units per building: 
10 feet 
Five or more units per building: 
1) When adjacent to multi-family or non-residential uses: 10 feet 
2)  When adjacent to Single family uses: 10 feet for the first unit plus 2 add'l feet per each add'l unit in the building up to a maximum of 30 feet. 4 or fewer units per building: 
15 feet 
Five or more units per building: 
1) When adjacent to multi-family or non-residential uses, the following: 15 feet; 
2) When adjacent to Single family uses, the following: 15 feet for the first unit plus 2 add'l feet per each add'l unit in the building up to a maximum of 30 feet. Housing Developments Minimum Tract Area Dwelling, Attached Single Family Housing: Subject to provisions of Section 10:7 N/A Dwelling, Cluster: Attached Housing: Subject to provisions of Section 8:2 2 ACRES Dwelling, Cluster: Detached Housing: Subject to provisions of Section 8:2 2 ACRES Dwelling, Cluster: Traditional Urban Neighborhood Housing: Subject to provisions of Section 8:2 and Section 10:7 5 ACRES Applicable to All Districts Uses Permitted by Special Exception: Subject to provisions of Article 7 Conditional Uses: Subject to provisions of Article 10 NOTES: 
[1] Non-residential uses permitted by Special Exception: When more than one (1) setback or other design standard applies, the most restrictive standard shall be met as provided for in Article 7. 
[2] Minimum lot width shall be measured at the setback line, not the public right-of-way or edge of pavement for private drives. In cases where a lot is bounded by two (2) or more streets, the minimum lot width is only required at the setback line for the front yard. 
[3] Areas within a designated public right-of-way shall not be used to calculate compliance with the minimum lot size requirements. 
[4] Residential Accessory Structures: The maximum floor area of all accessory structures shall not exceed 50% of the gross floor area of the principle structure (Refer to provisions of Section 10:2.) 
[5] Conditional Uses: When more than one (1) setback or other design standard applies, the most restrictive standard shall be met as provided for in Article 10.  
( Ord. No. 786 , amds. 4, 13, 14, 3-16-2015) 
Sec. 5:6 - CRD, Central Redevelopment District. 
The intent of this district is to encourage the re-development of the central core of the city in such a way as to create an identifiable and pedestrian friendly downtown, and to create a district where individuals can live, dine, shop, and work. 
5:6.1 Uses Permitted. 
• Bank and other Financial Institutions. 
• Barber shop and Beauty salons. 
• Dressmaker and Tailor. 
• Dwelling, multifamily (subject to subsection 5:6.10). 
• Eating establishments. 
• Farmers market. 
• Florist shop. 
• Grocery store. 
• Laundry and Dry cleaning establishments. 
• Lodging, Hotel or Motel. 
• Medical facility (other than hospital). 
• Nursery and Garden supply stores. 
• Office, Business and Professional. 
• Pet supplies and Grooming establishments. 
• Pharmacy. 
• Post office (excluding distribution). 
• Printing establishments, excluding newspapers and periodicals. 
• Professional services (catering, interior design). 
• Recreation games facility (indoor). 
• Recreational park (outdoor). 
• Retail sales. 
• Studios and Galleries (Art, dance, photography). 
• Specialty food and Retail stores (Candy, pastry, ice cream, snacks shops). 
• Veterinary clinics (no outdoor kennel). 
• Theater (indoor). 
5:6.2 Uses Permitted by Special Exception. 
5:6.3 Conditional Uses. 
• Adult care center. 
• Assisted living facilities. 
• Bed and breakfast inn. 
• College and Universities. 
• Child care center. 
• Convenience store (without a carwash and fuel service). 
• Dwelling, accessory single family attached (townhome). 
• Drinking Establishments: Brewery, Pubs, Wine Bar. 
• Drive-thru facilities. 
• Emergency response facilities (Fire and Police substations). 
• Event venues (Performance Center, Auditorium, Stadium or arena). 
• Government offices. 
• Health Club and Spa. 
• Home occupations. 
• Library and Museums. 
• Parking structures. 
• Vocational and Training schools. 
5:6.4 Dimensional Requirements. 
A.  Height. No structure shall exceed a height of fifty-five (55) feet unless a height bonus is achieved per Section 3:8.1, Building Height Bonuses. New principal structures must be a minimum height of two (2) habitable stories. As an alternative, new one-story principal structures may be permitted only if the height of the building is at least eighteen (18) feet and the building includes a band of clerestory windows at least thirty (30) inches tall. Clerestory windows shall occupy at least sixty-five (65) percent of the length of each façade visible from a public right-of-way or public open space. Clerestory windows shall not count toward the minimum requirement for public entryways and windows for ground floors. 
B.  Setbacks. 
1.  Front and Corner Setbacks. Principal structures shall be built to the front property line and shall not be set back more than fifteen (15) feet from the front property line, except to accommodate for a plaza, forecourt or outdoor dining area. 
Where used, forecourts and plazas shall have a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet and a minimum depth of ten (10) feet. Forecourts and plazas should be substantially paved and enhanced with landscaping. 
2.  Side and Rear Setbacks. No minimum side and rear setbacks shall apply, except on lots adjacent to residential districts, for which the principal structure(s) shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the property line share with the residential district. 
3.  Accessory structures. All accessory structures shall be located entirely in a side or rear yard and located behind the building line of the principle structure. Accessory structures shall be screened (as applicable) in accordance with Section 6:2.9, Additional Screening Requirements: Outdoor Storage Areas, Utility Structures, and Dumpsters. 
4.  Outside merchandise. All outside merchandise for sale and/or on display shall be set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from street right-of-way line. When pedestrian oriented design features are incorporated into the building and site design, the Business and Development Services Director may approve alternate locations for display of outdoor merchandise. 
5:6.5 Screening. 
Mechanical equipment, electrical meter and service components, and similar utility devices, whether ground level, wall-mounted, or roof-mounted, should be located so as to minimize visibility from all streets and public gathering areas. Mechanical equipment and other like appurtenances shall be screened from view at the front property line and any active street side. Exterior screening materials shall be the same as the predominant exterior materials of the principal building. 
Screening shall be provided in accordance with Section 6:2.9, Additional Screening Requirements: Outdoor Storage Areas, Utility Structures, and Dumpsters. 
5:6.6 Off-Street Parking and Parking Structures. 
A.  Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 6:1, Off-Street Parking Requirements. 
1.  Location. In order to minimize the negative impact of large paved surfaces and maintain the quality of the visual environment, new surface parking lots and parking structures should located in the block interior, side and rear yards and not be located between the building and any abutting street. 
2.  Landscaping. In addition, new surface parking lots shall be landscaped in accordance with Section 6:2, Landscape and Design Standards. 
a)  Parking lots installed in the side yard shall also provide the following: 
1.  Continuous landscape screen, consisting of an evergreen or deciduous hedge, shall be provided along the entire street frontage adjacent to the parking area. Hedges shall be planted in a minimum five-foot wide continuous landscape zone. 
2.  Solid masonry wall, at least thirty-six (36) inches tall, can be substituted for hedge to screen parking areas. Materials must match the site's exterior building materials. Where such walls replace hedges, the five-foot landscape zone should be maintained. 

3.  Driveway. In order to create a safe environment for both vehicles and pedestrians, the width of the driveway shall not exceed twenty-seven (27) feet throughout the right-of-way and the required street yard buffer, except for driveways at facilities for emergency response vehicles. 
B.  Parking Structures. Parking structures shall be compatible in color, form, materials, texture and quality with adjacent buildings. Structures should be setback a minimum of six (6) to ten (10) feet from the sidewalk. This setback shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, and ground covers to soften views of the structure, provide visual interest and establish a sense of human scale. Vehicular entries shall be clearly marked. 
Parking structures shall provide adequate ground floor dimensions to allow use by or conversion to pedestrian-active uses. Adequate dimensions shall include floor-to-floor heights, structural, driving aisle and utility layouts within thirty (30) feet of the public right-of-way designed to accommodate occupancy by pedestrian-active uses. 
Parking structures fronting on key pedestrian streets shall only be permitted when the structure's façade provides a compatible streetscape frontage and is concealed with an active habitable space. Parked automobiles, signage, and light sources within the interior of the structure shall not be visible from outside the structure. 
Façade openings which face any public right-of-way or open space shall be vertically and horizontally aligned and the floor fronting on such façades shall be level. 
Exposed parking structures that are not wrapped with an active use shall provide landscape screening at a rate of one (1) tree and two (2) shrubs per thirty (30) linear feet of the parking structure's perimeter. 
5:6.7 Service and Off-Street Loading Areas. 
Service and loading areas should be located to minimize their visibility from public streets. Refuse containers and actively used service and loading areas must be screened from view by the buildings they serve or by solid masonry walls which are designed as an integral part of the building, and finished with compatible materials. 
Off-street loading and screening of service areas shall be provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in subsection 6:1.1.4, Off-street Loading Requirements and the screening requirements of Section 6:2.9, Additional Screening Requirements: Outdoor Storage Areas, Utility Structures, and Dumpster. 
5:6.8 Drainage. 
A complete drainage plan of the entire site shall be submitted meeting the requirements prescribed in the Mauldin City Drainage Ordinance shall be provided. 
5:6.9 Streetscape and Landscaping. 
Landscaping shall generally be provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 6:2, Landscape and Design Standards, except that large maturing deciduous street trees shall be provided along all public streets, spaced at thirty-foot maximum intervals. 
Street trees may be planted in a continuous planting strip of not less than seven (7) feet in width, in-ground planters, or may be located in tree grates, bulb outs (etc.) as part of a coordinated streetscape design. 
5:6.10 Accessory Dwellings. 
Accessory dwelling units are generally permitted in the CRD district. However, accessory dwelling units shall be prohibited on the ground floor adjacent to the right-of-way. Additionally, no more than forty-nine (49) percent of the entire ground floor area of a building may be occupied by a residential use. 

5:6.11 Signage. 
Signage shall be permitted in accordance with Section 6:4, Signs. 
5:6.12 Outside Display or Storage. 
A.  Outdoor Display of Goods and Products. The outdoor display of goods and products is permitted within the public right-of-way when accompanying a shop or store located in an adjacent building. At least six (6) feet of continual sidewalk clearance shall be maintained to provide for adequate pedestrian circulation. Outdoor displays shall also stay clear of display windows and entryways of adjacent businesses. Merchandise must be moved indoors at the close of each business day. 
B.  Outdoor Display or Storage not permitted. Outdoor display of products does not include merchandise or material in boxes, crates, or pallets or other kind of shipping containers. No other outside display of merchandise, or storage of any non-fixed equipment or merchandise is permitted. 
5:6.13 Outdoor Fencing. 
Fencing shall be confined to the side and rear yards of the site and not located closer to the street than the leading edge of the principle structure. Fencing which is visible from a public right-of-way shall be strictly of an ornamental nature (e.g., wrought iron or picket fence). 
5:6.14 Outdoor Dining. 
Outdoor dining is permitted within the public right-of-way when accompanying a restaurant located in an adjacent building. At least six (6) feet of continual clearance shall be maintained to provide for adequate pedestrian circulation and to maintain accessibility. Dining furnishings shall also stay clear of display windows and entryways of adjacent businesses. 
Tables and chairs used in outdoor dining areas shall be constructed of heavyweight, high-quality materials like metal or wood. Lightweight materials such as plastic or vinyl which may be blown astray by moderate winds are prohibited. 
The outdoor dining area shall be maintained in a clean and safe condition at all times, including promptly and properly disposing of all trash generated by the operation. 
No additional parking spaces shall be required for outdoor dining areas. 
5:6.15 Pedestrian Design: Sidewalks. 
A public sidewalk shall be required within the right-of-way along all adjacent streets. The sidewalk shall be constructed of concrete, unless otherwise approved by the Mauldin Public Works Director. The width of the sidewalk shall not be less than ten (10) feet along City-maintained rights-of-way and not less than six (6) feet along other rights-of-way. The thickness of the sidewalk shall not be less than four (4) inches. The sidewalk shall not exceed the maximum grade required by the Standard Building Code in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act. Sidewalks shall align vertically and horizontally with abutting sidewalks. 
Shelter, shade, and/or weather protection in the form of shade trees, awnings, arcades, balconies, overhangs, or other similar means approved by the Business and Development Services Director shall be provided along the public sidewalk. 
5:6.16 Architectural Design. 
Building walls and façades should have perceivable thickness, visual interest, and character. A selection of architectural details such as vertical and horizontal recesses and projections, changes in height, floor levels, roof forms, parapets, cornice treatments, belt courses, pilasters, window reveals, and forms, and color as appropriate to each site can create shadows and texture and add to the character of the building. 
A.  Building Orientation. In order to protect the pedestrian character of this district, the main entrance of each principal building shall face the adjacent street. On corner lots, the main entrance may face either of the streets or be oriented to the corner. With buildings that have more than one (1) main entrance, only one (1) entrance must meet this requirement. 
B.  Exterior Finish Materials and Color. Plain concrete block, plain concrete, corrugated metal, plywood, and sheet pressboard are not allowed as exterior finish material. 
No intense or distracting colors or color schemes shall be used. The City encourages the use of neutral or earth tone colors with low reflectance. Vibrant colors shall only be used to accentuate trim and other architectural elements. 
C.  Horizontal Massing. Buildings should be designed to incorporate varied massing and design across long façades. Building walls shall be articulated at a minimum of every fifty (50) feet. Articulation may include storefront bays with modulating building elements such as recesses, projections, expressed entries, building form, columns, pilasters, colonnades, arcades, and/or other clearly expressed architectural details. No horizontal section of the building façade shall exceed fifty (50) feet without incorporating visible changes in the façade elevation. 

D.  Vertical Massing. Multi-story buildings shall generally include a base, middle, and cap. The base generally consists of the entryway(s) and large transparent windows. The middle is generally described as the upper stories of a building and typically features windows and/or balconies. The cap includes the area from the top floor to the roof of the building. 
In order to modulate their scale, multi-story buildings shall articulate the base, middle, and cap through the use of expression lines, cornices, string cornices, step-backs, or similar articulating features as follows: 
1.  A horizontal expression line between the base and the middle is vital for reinforcing the pedestrian scale at the adjacent sidewalk. The expression line may entail a molding or reveal placed between the first and second stories or over the second story. The molding or reveal shall have a depth of at least two (2) inches and a height of at least four (4) inches. 
2.  The middle may also utilize expression lines to articulate long vertical sections of the building. 
3.  The cap shall include an expression line consisting of a cornice or a roof overhang. 
E.  Expression lines, including moldings, cornices, and windowsills, shall generally align with those of adjacent buildings. 

F.  Entryway Design. Entryways provide a special opportunity to make a building unique while providing a highly visible customer entrance and discernable public address. All buildings shall have their principal entrance face the street, square, plaza, or public sidewalk. The principal entrance shall not open onto a parking lot. Buildings shall maintain a regular rhythm of storefronts with entrances at least every fifty (50) feet on average. 
Building entrances should be prominent and easy to identify. Awnings, changes in the roofline, or other acceptable means shall be used to define the building entrance facing the street right-of-way. Pedestrian lighting shall be provided at building entrances. Appropriate fixtures, devices, and placement shall be considered so as to prevent or eliminate glare from the lighting. Doors may be recessed up to five (5) feet into the face of the building to provide a sense of entry and to add variety to the streetscape. Doors which are not recessed into the face of the building shall not pivot or swing open into any right-of-way or public sidewalk. 

G.  Windows/Fenestration Design. The ground floors of all buildings shall be designed to encourage and to complement pedestrian-scale activity by the use of windows and doors arranged so that the uses are visible from and/or accessible to the street. At the ground level, at least sixty (60) percent, but not more than ninety (90) percent, of the total surface area of the each elevation adjacent to a public street shall be in public entryways, windows (including retail display windows but not including clerestory windows), and transoms. The bottom of windows used on storefronts shall be at least twelve (12) inches but not more than thirty-six (36) inches above the grade of the adjacent sidewalk and shall be separated from the ground by a bulkhead. Reflective and heavily tinted windows at the ground level are prohibited. 
On upper stories above the ground level, windows, doors and other openings shall make up at least thirty (30) percent, but not more than sixty (60) percent, of the wall surface of the upper stories. 
All windows shall incorporate decorative architectural features such as sills, trim, and lintels. Windows should be inset a minimum of three (3) inches from the exterior wall surface to add visual relief to the wall. 

H.  Galleries and Arcades. Galleries and arcades are permitted to encroach into the right-of-way provided that they are set back from the curb at least two (2) feet. Galleries and arcades shall extend for a width of at least ten (10) feet. Any gallery or arcade which overlaps a sidewalk shall maintain a minimum clearance of at least ten (10) feet above the sidewalk. Galleries shall not exceed a height of two (2) stories. Columns and arches shall be shall be spaced at least eight (8) feet apart. The height and proportions should be consistent with the architectural style of the building. 
I.  Awnings and Canopies. Awnings, canopies, and other features that provide shade for pedestrians are strongly encouraged and should be integrally designed with the building. Awnings should fit within framed-in storefronts, primarily covering openings such as windows and doors and not extending along the entire façade. 
Awning shape, size, color, and material should be consistent with the architectural style and character of the building. Awnings should be compatible with adjacent awnings. The shape, size, and height of each awning should be proportional to the façade. Awnings shall be made of fabric, metal, glass, or similar durable material. 
Awnings may encroach into right-of-way provided that they are set back from the curb at least two (2) feet. Any awning which overlaps a sidewalk shall maintain a minimum clearance of at least eight (8) feet above the sidewalk. 

J.  Balconies. Balconies are permitted to encroach into the right-of-way provided that they are set back from the curb at least two (2) feet. Any balcony which overlaps a sidewalk shall maintain a minimum clearance of at least ten (10) feet above the sidewalk. 

K.  Roof Design. Roof lines should vary and be expressed in a visually interesting manner that complements the composition of the building and the surrounding area. Flat roofs shall incorporate a strong, attractively detailed cornice or parapet. To create a varied roof line, different types of cornices and varied cornice lines are encouraged. Sculpted roof forms shall employ high quality roofing materials. 

( Ord. No. 786 , amds. 13, 14, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 831 , amd. 1, 9-18-2017; Ord. No. 835 , amd. 3, 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 5:7 - C-1, Commercial District. 
This district is established to provide commercial establishments for the convenience of local residents. 
5:7.1 Uses Permitted. 
Accountant. 
Antique shop. 
Apparel store. 
Appliance sales and service. 
Art store. 
Assisted living facilities. 
Automobile parts sales. 
Automobile parking lot. 
Bakery. 
Bank. 
Barber shop. 
Beauty shop. 
Cafeteria. 
Camera shop. 
Candy store. 
Catering establishment. 
Cleaning and laundry collection station. 
Convenience store (without a carwash and with a maximum size of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, a minimum size of one thousand (1,000) square feet, and limited to one (1) fuel service area that can serve no more than four (4) vehicles at one (1) time). 
Dairy products and ice cream store. 
Dance studio. 
Delicatessen. 
Department store. 
Dressmaker. 
Drug store. 
Dry goods store. 
Florist shop. 
Furniture store. 
Grocery store. 
Hardware store. 
Hobby shop. 
Interior decorating shop. 
Jewelry store. 
Key shop. 
Leather goods store. 
Loan company. 
Medical facility. 
Music store. 
Newsstand. 
Nursery or garden supply store. 
Office, business and professional. 
Office supply and equipment store. 
Optical goods sales. 
Paint store. 
Pet shop. 
Pharmacy. 
Photography studio. 
Places of worship. 
Radio and television sales and service. 
Restaurant. 
Savings and loan company. 
Self service laundry and cleaner. 
Sewing machine sales and service. 
Shoe store and repair shop. 
Shopping centers (As provided in subsection 5:8.9). 
Sign, business (Subject to provisions of Section 6:11). 
Sign, Interstate bonus (Subject to provisions of subsection 6:4.1.12B). 
Sign, temporary (Subject to provisions of subsection 6:4.1). 
Sporting goods store. 
Stationery store. 
Supermarket. 
Tailor. 
Theater (Indoor). 
Toy store. 
Travel bureau. 
Utility easement. 
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses. 
5:7.2 Uses Permitted by Special Exception. 
The following uses are permitted on review by the Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of Article 7: 
Automobile service station. 
Exhibition building. 
Fire station. 
Library. 
Post office. 
Schools-Public, Private, and Parochial. 
5:7.3 Conditional Uses. 
Adult Care Center. 
Child Care Center. 
Multi-family dwellings (in accordance with provisions of Section 8:1 and Section 10:13). 
5:7.4 Height Limitation. 
No structures shall exceed a height of forty-five (45) feet except as provided in Section 3:8. 
5.7.5 C-1, Commercial District, Setback Requirements. 
1.  Front Setback. Principle structures shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the street right-of-way line, except that the minimum setback may be reduced to ten (10) feet where road widening is not anticipated and provided that all parking is located to the side or rear and not closer to the street than the edge of the front façade of the principal structure, and where pedestrian-oriented design features are incorporated in building and site design. 
Accessory structures: All accessory structures shall be located entirely in a side or rear yard and behind the building line of the principle structure. 
Outside merchandise: All outside merchandise for sale and/or on display shall be set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from street right-of-way line. When pedestrian oriented design features are incorporated into the building and site design, the Business and Development Services Director may approve alternate locations for display of outdoor merchandise. 
2.  Side Setback (C-1). None is required, except on corner lots and lots adjacent to any residential district. On corner lots, all commercial buildings, structures, and merchandise on display shall be set back not less than twenty-five (25) feet from the street right-of-way line on the side with street frontage. On lots adjacent to any residential district all commercial buildings, structures, and merchandise on display shall be set back not less than twenty (20) feet from the property line on the side adjacent to the residential district. When a side yard is provided, it shall be not less than five (5) feet in width. 
3.  Rear Setback. No building shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet to a rear lot line. 
5:7.6 Screening. 
A wall, fence, dense hedge, or other permanent year-round foliage, or a combination thereof, which provides a solid, opaque, visual barrier at least six (6) feet in height shall be provided along the side and rear lot lines where any nonresidential use in this district is adjacent to a residential district. Such screening shall also prohibit, for safety reasons, passage by children and/or other pedestrians. Screening design shall visually compliment the surrounding residential district. Additionally, maintenance shall be performed to ensure that the screen continues to meet the provisions set forth herein. Strict enforcement of these provisions shall be in accordance with subsection 4:1.1.1 of this Ordinance. 
5:7.7 Off-Street Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 6:1. 
5:7.8 Off-Street Loading. 
Off-street loading shall be provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in subsection 6:1.2. 
5:7.9 Drainage. 
A complete drainage plan of the entire site meeting the requirements prescribed in the Mauldin City Drainage Ordinance shall be provided. 
5:7.10 Outdoor Fencing. 
Fencing shall be confined to the side and rear yards of the site and not located closer to the street than the leading edge of the principle structure. 
( Ord. No. 786 , amds. 13-15, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 789 , § 1, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 831 , amd. 2, 9-18-2017; Ord. No. 834 , amd. 1, 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 5:8 - C-2, Highway Commercial District. 
This district is established to provide for the development on major thoroughfares of commercial land uses, which are oriented to customers traveling by automobile. Establishments in this district provide goods and services for the traveling public and also for the convenience of local residents. 
5:8.1 Uses Permitted. 
Accountant. 
Amusement center. 
Antique shop. 
Appliance sales and service. 
Assisted living facilities. 
Automatic car wash. 
Automobiles, truck, and trailer rentals. 
Automobile parking lot. 
Automobile parts sales. 
Automobile sales and service (Excluding body repair). 
Automobile upholstery shop. 
Bakery. 
Bank. 
Barber shop. 
Beauty shop. 
Boat sales. 
Bowling alley. 
Broadcasting studios, radio or television. 
Bus station. 
Cafeteria. 
Club, lodge, and similar non-profit organization. 
Convenience store (With or without a car wash and no size restriction). 
Dairy products sales. 
Dance studio. 
Dressmaker. 
Drive-in restaurant. 
Drug store. 
Dry cleaner and laundry. 
Dry goods store. 
Figure salon. 
Florist shop. 
Funeral home. 
Furniture store. 
Garden supply store. 
Golf driving range. 
Greenhouse or plant nursery. 
Grocery store. 
Hardware store. 
Health club. 
Leather goods store. 
Liquor store. 
Loan company. 
Medical facility. 
Miniature golf course. 
Monument sales. 
Motel. 
Music store. 
Office, business or professional. 
Paint store. 
Places of worship. 
Printing, excluding newspapers and periodicals. 
Public utility building and use. 
Radio and television sales and service. 
Recording studio. 
Restaurant. 
Savings and loan company. 
Seed and feed store. 
Self-service laundry and cleaner. 
Service station. 
Sewing machine sales and service. 
Shopping center (As provided in subsection 5:8.9). 
Sign, business (Subject to provisions of subsection 6:4.1). 
Sign, Interstate bonus (Subject to provisions of subsection 6:4.1.12B). 
Sign, occupancy (Subject to provisions of subsection 6:4.1). 
Sign, temporary (Subject to provisions of subsection 6:4.1). 
Skating rink. 
Sporting goods store. 
Supermarket. 
Temporary building, incidental to the construction of buildings permitted in this district and which shall be removed when work is completed. 
Theater (Indoor). 
Tire sales and service. 
Utility easement. 
Veterinary clinic. 
Veterinary office. 
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses. 
Other uses which are considered to be compatible with the aforementioned uses. 
5:8.2 Uses Permitted by Special Exception. 
The following uses are permitted on review by the Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of Article 7: 
Ambulance service. 
Armory. 
Auditorium. 
Baseball park. 
Building materials sales and storage. 
Cemetery. 
Check Cashing Business (Special Provisions). 
Fairgrounds. 
Fire station. 
Football stadium. 
Gymnasium. 
Home for aged persons. 
Hospital. 
Library. 
Museum. 
Police station. 
Post office. 
5:8.3 Conditional Uses. 
Adult Care Center. 
Child Care Center. 
Multi-family dwellings (in accordance with provisions of Section 8:1 and Section 10:13). 
5:8.4 Height Limitation. 
No structures shall exceed a height of forty-five (45) feet except as provided in Section 3:8. 
5:8.5 C-2, Highway Commercial, Setback Requirements. 
1.  Front Setback. Principle structures shall be set back a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet from the street right-of-way line, except that the minimum setback may be reduced to ten (10) feet where road widening is not anticipated and provided that all parking is located to the side or rear and not closer to the street than the edge of the façade of the principal structure, and where pedestrian-oriented design features are incorporated in building and site design. 
Accessory Structures: All accessory structures shall be located entirely in a side or rear yard and behind the building line of the principle structure. 
Gasoline Service Stations: Commercial gasoline islands and canopies shall be set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from all street right-of-way lines. 
Outside merchandise: All outside merchandise for sale and/or on display shall be set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from street right-of-way line. When pedestrian oriented design features are incorporated into the building and site design, the Business and Development Services Director may approve alternate locations for display of outdoor merchandise. 
2.  Side Setback (C-2). None is required, except on corner lots and lots adjacent to any residential district. On corner lots, all commercial buildings, structures, and merchandise on display shall be set back not less than twenty-five (25) feet from the street right-of-way line on the side with street frontage. On lots adjacent to any residential district, all commercial buildings, structures, and merchandise on display shall be set back not less than twenty (20) feet from the property line on the side adjacent to the residential district. When a side yard is provided, it shall be not less than five (5) feet in width. 
3.  Rear Setback. No building shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet to a rear lot line. All outside merchandise on display shall be set back not less than fifteen (15) feet from property lines. 
5:8.6 Screening. 
A wall, fence, dense hedge, or other permanent year-round foliage, or a combination thereof, which provides a solid, opaque, visual barrier at least six (6) feet in height shall be provided along the side and rear lot lines where any nonresidential use in this district is adjacent to a residential district. Such screening shall also prohibit, for safety reasons, passage by children and/or other pedestrians. Screening design shall visually compliment the surrounding residential district. Additionally, maintenance shall be performed to ensure that the screen continues to meet the provisions set forth herein. Strict enforcement of these provisions shall be in accordance with subsection 4:1.1.1 of this Ordinance. 
5:8.7 Off-Street Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 6:1, Off-street parking. 
5:8.8 Off-Street Loading. 
Off-street loading shall be provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in subsection 6:1.2. 
5:8.9 Drainage. 
A complete drainage plan of the entire site meeting the requirements of the Mauldin City Drainage Ordinance shall be provided. 
5:8.9.1 Outdoor Fencing. 
Fencing shall be confined to the side and rear yards of the site and not located closer to the street than the leading edge of the principle structure. 
5:8.10 Requirements for Planned Shopping Centers. 
1.  Height Limitations. No building shall exceed forty-five (45) feet except as provided in Section 3:8. 
2.  Lot Area. The shopping center shall be located on a parcel of land not less than two (2) acres in area. 
3.  Dimensional Requirements. 
(a)  Setback from Streets. All buildings shall be set back from all street right-of-way lines not less than fifty (50) feet. 
(b)  Setback from Side Property Lines. All buildings shall be set back from side property lines not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
(c)  Setback from Rear Property Lines. All buildings shall be set back from the rear property line not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
4.  Screening. A wall, fence, dense hedge, or other permanent year-round foliage, or a combination thereof, which provides a solid, opaque, visual barrier at least six (6) feet in height shall be provided along the side and rear lot lines where any nonresidential use in this district is adjacent to a residential district. Such screening shall also prohibit, for safety reasons, passage by children and/or other pedestrians. Screening design shall visually compliment the surrounding residential district. Additionally, maintenance shall be performed to ensure that the screen continues to meet the provisions set forth herein. Strict enforcement of these provisions shall be in accordance with Section 8:1 of this Ordinance. 
5.  Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 6:1. 
6.  Off-Street Loading. Off-street loading shall be provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in subsection 6:1.2. 
7.  Application Procedure. Each application for a zoning certificate/building permit for a planned shopping center shall be accompanied by the following: 
A.  A development plan of the proposed development at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet showing: 
1.  The location and size of the site; 
2.  The dimensions of the property; 
3.  The location and proposed use of buildings and their general exterior dimensions; 
4.  A traffic, parking, and circulation plan showing proposed locations, arrangements, and dimensions of parking spaces, loading areas, drives, and ingress and egress to and from adjacent streets; 
5.  The proposed location and materials to be used for screening; 
6.  A title showing the names of the developers, the date, scale of the plan, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the plan. 
B.  A statement to be filed with the Business and Development Services Director indicating readiness to proceed with construction of the proposed development within one (1) year from the date the proposal is approved. 
C.  Drainage. A complete drainage plan of the entire site meeting the requirements prescribed in the Mauldin City Drainage Ordinance shall be provided. 
8.  Zoning Certificate/Building Permit. No zoning certificate/building permit shall be issued for any building in a shopping center until a final development plan shall have been approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
( Ord. No. 786 , amds. 13-15, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 789 , § 1, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 831 , amd. 2, 9-18-2017; Ord. No. 834 , amd. 2, 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 5:9 - S-1, Services District. 
This district is established to provide a transition between commercial and industrial districts by allowing (1) commercial uses which are service related; (2) service-related commercial uses which sell merchandise related directly to the service performed; (3) commercial uses which sell merchandise which requires storage in warehouses or outdoor areas; and (4) light industries which in their normal operations would have a minimal effect on adjoining properties. All of the uses permitted in this district shall be conducted in such a manner that no noxious odor, fumes, smoke, dust, or noise will be emitted beyond the property line of the lot on which the use is located. 
5:9.1 Uses Permitted. 
Air conditioning and heating equipment, sales and service. 
Ambulance service. 
Amusements, commercial. 
Animal shelters. 
Assisted living facilities. 
Auction house. 
Automobile body shop. 
Automobile garage. 
Automobile painting. 
Automobile parking. 
Automobile parts or accessories. 
Automobile rental. 
Automobile repairing. 
Automobile sales and service. 
Automobile service station. 
Automobile storage. 
Automobile upholstering. 
Automobile wash. 
Baseball batting range. 
Boat sales and service. 
Building materials sales and storage. 
Cabinet shop. 
Crematorium. 
Dental laboratories. 
Diaper supply service. 
Drive-in business (Theaters, restaurants, etc.). 
Eating establishments. 
Electric motor repair. 
Engravers. 
Exhibition buildings, galleries, or showrooms. 
Farm machinery and implement sales and service. 
Farmer's market. 
Feed and seed store. 
Funeral home. 
Golf courses. 
Golf courses - par three (3). 
Golf driving ranges. 
Group Development (Subject to provisions of Section 7:13). 
Gunsmith. 
Household appliance repair. 
Ice skating rink. 
Laundries, dry cleaning, or linen supply service. 
Linen or towel supply business. 
Lithographing. 
Lumber yards. 
Machine shop. 
Mattress shop. 
Medical clinic or laboratory. 
Mimeographing service. 
Mobile home, travel trailer, and recreational vehicle sales. 
Monument and tombstone sales. 
Motel. 
Motorcycle sales and service. 
Newspaper establishment. 
Nursery-Flower, plant, or tree. 
Nursery supply. 
Offices. 
Office supply and equipment. 
Parking areas. 
Parking structures, commercial. 
Pest or insect control business. 
Photo developing and refinishing. 
Places of worship. 
Plumbing shop. 
Printing or binding. 
Radio or television broadcasting studio. 
Radio or television repair. 
Restaurant. 
Roller skating rink. 
Safe and vault repair. 
Self-service storage facility. 
Service stations. 
Signs, business (Subject to provisions of Section 6:11). 
Sign, Interstate bonus (Subject to provisions of subsection 6:4.1.12B). 
Signs, occupancy (Subject to provisions of subsection 6:4.1). 
Sign painting. 
Sign, temporary (Subject to provisions of subsection 6:4.1). 
Sporting goods sales. 
Swimming pool, commercial sales. 
Taxi business. 
Taxidermist. 
Telephone exchange. 
Tire shop. 
Utility easement or right-of-way. 
Utilities, public or private. 
Venetian blinds-Laundry, servicing, and repairing. 
Veterinary clinic. 
Veterinary office. 
Video poker and like gaming devices. 
Welding. 
Wholesaling and warehousing. 
Other uses that are considered to be compatible with the aforementioned uses. 
5:9.2 Uses Permitted by Special Exception. 
The following uses are permitted on review by the Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of Article 7: 
Accessory dwelling unit (Subject to provisions of Section 7:11). 
Adult oriented entertainment establishments (Subject to the provisions of Municipal Ordinance 390). 
Auditorium. 
Baseball park. 
Cemetery. 
Correctional institution. 
Fairgrounds. 
Fire station. 
Football stadium. 
Gas sales, commercial and industrial (Oxygen and acetylene). 
Hospital. 
Manufacturing: 
A.  Processing of foodstuffs, beverages. 
B.  Fabrication of cloth, wood, leather, paper, plastic, metal. 
Non-depository financial institutions (to include but not limited to): 
Deferred presentment businesses; 
Check cashing establishments; 
Title loan lenders; 
Payday advance lenders/loan businesses; 
Debt relief establishments; 
Precious metal dealers 
And like businesses. 
Police station. 
Schools public, private, and parochial. 
Station, bus or railway. 
Truck terminals. 
Other public uses. 
Certain retail sales establishments which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted principal office uses such as, but not limited to, the following: 
Apothecary. 
Barber shop. 
Beauty shop. 
Cafeteria. 
Florist shop. 
Newsstand. 
Optician. 
Sale or rental of medical supplies and prosthetic devices. 
Sandwich shop. 
School-Public, Private, and Parochial. 
Similar retail uses which are designed primarily to serve the convenience of persons working or receiving services in the building in which the accessory use is located, provided that such accessory use is clearly incidental and subordinate to principal permitted office uses. 
5:9.3 Conditional Uses. 
Adult Care Center. 
Child Care Center. 
Multi-family dwellings (in accordance with provisions of Section 8:1 and Section 10:13). 
5:9.4 Height Limitation. 
No building or structure shall exceed forty-five (45) feet in height except as provided in Section 3:8. 
No building or structure on a lot in the Services District which is adjacent to a residential district shall exceed the maximum building height permitted in the residential district unless there is one (1) additional foot of setback on the sides adjacent to the residential district for each additional foot of height. 
5:9.5 S-1, Services District, Setback Requirements. 
1.  Front Setback. Principle structures shall be set back a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet from the street right-of-way line, except that the minimum setback may be reduced to ten (10) feet where road widening is not anticipated and provided that all parking is located to the side or rear and not closer to the street than the edge of the front façade of the principal structure, and where pedestrian-oriented design features are incorporated in building and site design. 
Accessory structures: All accessory structures shall be located entirely in a side or rear yard and behind the building line of the principle structure. 
Gasoline Service Stations: Commercial gasoline islands and canopies shall be set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from all street right-of-way lines. 
Outside merchandise: All outside merchandise for sale and/or on display shall be set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from street right-of-way line. When pedestrian oriented design features are incorporated into the building and site design, the Business and Development Services Director may approve alternate locations for display of outdoor merchandise. 
2.  Side Setback. No building shall be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to a side lot line except next to rail siding. All outside merchandise on display shall be set back not less than fifteen (15) feet from property lines. 
3.  Rear Setback. No building shall be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to a rear lot line except next to rail siding. All outside merchandise on display shall be set back not less than fifteen (15) feet from property lines. 
5:9.6 Screening. 
A wall, fence, dense hedge, or other permanent year-round foliage, or a combination thereof, which provides a solid, opaque, visual barrier at least six (6) feet in height shall be provided along the side and rear lot lines where any nonresidential use in this district is adjacent to a residential district. Such screening shall also prohibit, for safety reasons, passage by children and/or other pedestrians. 
Screening design shall visually compliment the surrounding residential district. Additionally, maintenance shall be performed to ensure that the screen continues to meet the provisions set forth herein. Strict enforcement of these provisions shall be in accordance with subsection 4:1.1.1 of this Ordinance. 
5:9.7 Off-Street Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 6:1. 
5:9.8 Off-Street Loading. 
Off street loading shall be provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in subsection 6:1.2. 
5:9.9 Drainage. 
A complete drainage plan of the entire site meeting the requirements of the Mauldin City Drainage Ordinance shall be provided. 
5:9.10 Outdoor Fencing. 
Fencing shall be confined to the side and rear yards of the site and not located closer to the street than the leading edge of the principle structure. 
( Ord. No. 786 , amds. 13-15, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 789 , § 1, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 831 , amd. 2, 9-18-2017; Ord. No. 834 , amd. 3, 9-18-2017) 
Sec. 5:10 - I-1, Industrial District. 
This district is established as a district for manufacturing plants, assembly plants, and warehouses. The regulations are intended to protect neighboring land uses from potentially harmful noise, odor, smoke, dust, glare, stream pollution, or other objectionable effects. 
5:10.1 Uses Permitted. 
Automobile and truck repair and rebuilding shop. 
Bottling plant. 
Building contractor and related activities. 
Building materials sales and storage and manufacture. 
Crematorium. 
Farm implements and machinery sales and storage. 
Feed and seed sales and storage. 
Laundry and cleaning plant. 
Manufacturing: 
Apparel and other finished products made from fabrics, leather, and similar materials. 
Chemicals and allied products. 
Fabricated metal products. 
Food and kindred products. 
Furniture and fixtures. 
Household and industrial cleaning products. 
Lumber and wood products (Except furniture). 
Paper and allied products. 
Plastic products. 
Stone, clay, and glass products. 
Textile mill products. 
Milk processing plant. 
Mobile homes or other prefabricated buildings used for temporary offices. 
Petroleum refining and related industries. 
Primary metal industries. 
Printing, publishing, and allied industries. 
Public utility building or use. 
Self-service storage facility. 
Sign, business (Subject to provisions of Section 6:11). 
Sign, occupancy (Subject to provisions of Section 6:11). 
Temporary building which is incidental to the construction of buildings permitted in the district and which shall be removed when work is completed. 
Tire recapping and retreading plant. 
Truck terminal. 
Veterinary hospital. 
Wholesaling and warehousing. 
Other uses which are considered to be compatible with uses permitted. 
All of the uses permitted in this district shall be conducted in such a manner that no noxious odor, fumes, smoke, or dust will be emitted beyond the property line of the lot on which the use is located. No pollution shall leave the premises of a use in this district by way of streams or rivers. 
5:10.2 Uses Permitted by Special Exception. 
The following uses are permitted on review by the Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of Article 7: 
Junk yard: Including automobile wreckers and scrap processors (subject to provisions of Section 7:4). 
Laboratories: analytical, experimental, testing, or industrial processes. 
School-Public, Private and Parochial. 
5:10.3 Conditional Uses. 
5:10.4 Height Limitation. 
No building or structure shall exceed ninety (90) feet in height except as provided in Article 3, Section 3:8. No building or structure on a lot in the industrial district which is adjacent to a residential district shall exceed the maximum building height permitted in the residential district unless there is one (1) additional foot of setback on the sides adjacent to the residential district for each additional foot of height. 
5:10.5 Dimensional Requirements. 
1.  Front Setback. All buildings shall be set back from the street right-of-way not less than fifty (50) feet. An advertising sign shall be permitted no closer than fifteen (15) feet to street right-of-way, and an advertising sign exceeding twenty-five (25) feet in height shall be located no less than thirty (30) feet from a public right-of-way. 
2.  Side Setback. No building shall be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to a side lot line except when the property is adjacent to a railroad right-of-way and written approval from the railroad authorities has been obtained to utilize a railroad spur for loading and unloading. 
3.  Rear Setback. No building shall be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to a rear lot line except when the property is adjacent to a railroad right-of-way and written approval from the railroad authorities has been obtained to utilize a railroad spur for loading and unloading. 
5:10.6 Screening. 
A wall, fence, dense hedge, or other permanent year-round foliage, or a combination thereof, which provides a solid, opaque, visual barrier at least six (6) feet in height shall be provided along the side and rear lot lines where any nonresidential use in this district is adjacent to a residential district. Such screening shall also prohibit, for safety reasons, passage by children and/or other pedestrians. Screening design shall visually compliment the surrounding residential district. Additionally, maintenance shall be performed to ensure that the screen continues to meet the provisions set forth herein. Strict enforcement of these provisions shall be in accordance with subsection 4:1.1.1 of this Ordinance. 
5:10.7 Off-Street Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in Article 6, Section 6:1. 
5:10.8 Off-Street Loading. 
Off-street loading shall be provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in Article 6, subsection 6:1.2. 
5:10.9 Drainage. 
A complete drainage plan of the entire site meeting the requirements of the Mauldin City Drainage Ordinance shall be provided. 
( Ord. No. 786 , amd. 14, 3-16-2015) 
Sec. 5:11 - P-D, Planned Development. 
5:11.1 Intent. 
The PD district is established to encourage innovative and creative design of residential and/or commercial developments and to permit a greater amount of flexibility to a developer by removing some of the restrictions of conventional zoning. It is the intent of the district that such design and planning features be incorporated properly into all PD districts hereafter created, and that the Planning Commission and City Council shall consider the existence and appropriateness of such features before any amendment to the Zoning Map is adopted to create such districts. The district is also intended to encourage developments, which provide a full range of residential types to serve the inhabitants of the district. 
The regulations provide a mechanism to evaluate each application on its own merit. It is recognized that some concepts will be more successful than others will and the approval of an application in one (1) situation does not necessarily indicate the development will be applicable in other situations. It should also be emphasized that these provisions are not to be confused with nor designed to circumvent the intent or use of conventional zoning classifications as set forth in the Ordinance. 
5:11.2 Types of Planned Development Districts. 
Two (2) types of planned development districts accommodating primarily residential or non-residential uses are created as follows: 
A.  PD-R Planned Development-Residential. The PD-R district is intended to accommodate primarily residential uses; with nonresidential uses integrated into the design of such districts as secondary uses. 
B.  PD-C Planned Development-Commercial. The PD-C district is intended to accommodate primarily nonresidential uses; with residential uses integrated into the design of such districts as secondary uses. 
5:11.3 Permitted Principal Uses and Structures. 
Permitted principal uses and structures vary with increasing size and are different for PD-R and PD-C districts. Permitted principal uses and structures for various site sizes and types of PD districts are as follows: 
Site Size in Acres PD-R Uses Permitted PD-C Uses
Permitted 1 but less than 15 Residential, Office, Commercial Commercial, Office 15 or more Residential, Office, Commercial, 
Services All uses  
5:11.4 Maximum Area of Commercial or Industrial Uses in PD-R Districts. 
In PD-R districts in which commercial or service uses are permitted, the area of land devoted to such uses, including structures, parking, and related characteristics and accessory uses thereto shall not exceed the following percentages for any specific site size: 
Site Size in Acres Maximum Percentage
Commercial or Service 2 but less than 8 10 8 but less than 25 20 25 but less than 30 50 but less than 80 40 80 or more 50  
Provided, however, that these percentages shall apply only to commercial and service uses, and not to other non-residential uses such as schools, parks, community buildings, or public facilities. Required parking for commercial and service uses shall be counted towards maximum percentages. 
5:11.5 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. 
Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted as for the least restrictive districts indicated in subsection 5:11.3 for any specific site size. 
5:11.6 Uses and Structures Permitted by Special Exception. 
No review actions by the Board of Appeals are required to establish any specific use. Uses and structures permitted in the least restrictive land use classifications indicated in subsection 5:11.3 for any specific site size are permitted outright, provided that the Planning Commission and City Council shall ascertain that the effects and benefits usually derived from safeguards and conditions normally imposed upon uses permitted by review are upheld. 
5:11.7 Prohibited Uses and Structures. 
Certain uses and structures shall be prohibited as for the least restrictive uses indicated in subsection 5:11.3 for any specific site size. 
5:11.8 Minimum Lot Area. 
No minimum lot area is required for any specific structure; however, a minimum site size to accommodate specific uses shall be as listed in subsection 5:11.3. 
5:11.9 Minimum Lot Width, Minimum Yard Requirements, Maximum Lot Coverage, Maximum Height of Structures. 
No structure shall be erected within twenty-five (25) feet from any external lot line of any planned development. Minimum lot width, minimum yard sizes, maximum lot coverage, and maximum height are not otherwise regulated within PD districts, provided, however, that the Planning Commission and City Council shall ascertain that the characteristics of building siting shall be appropriate as related to structures within the planned development and otherwise fulfill the intent of this Ordinance. 
5:11.10 Minimum Off-Street Parking and Loading. 
The Planning Commission shall not approve a PD site plan until the Zoning Administrator has reviewed and approved a parking scheme for the development. 
5:11.11 Signs. 
Signs are permitted in PD districts only in accordance with provisions of the Sign Ordinance. 
5:11.12 PD Application and Preliminary Development Plan Approval. 
A.  An applicant is encouraged to communicate his intentions to establish a Planned Development district and the proposed characteristics thereof to the Zoning Administrator and Greenville County Planning Commission staff prior to initiating an application for amendment to the zoning map in order to avoid undue delay in the review process after initiating such applications. 
B.  Applications for Planned Development district shall be by amendment to the official Zoning Map in accordance with the provisions of Section 4:2 and shall include the following: 
1.  Preliminary Development Plan. The applicant shall submit one (1) reproducible vellum copy (22? × 27? minimum size) and one (1) paper copy (11? × 17? in size) of the proposed Planned Development which shall include the following: 
a.  Vicinity map, title block, scale, north arrow, and property line survey. 
b.  Total number of acres of overall site. 
c.  Location and number of acres of various areas by type of use (e.g., single-family detached, recreation, office, commercial, etc.). 
d.  Number of units and density of various residential types, such number to represent the maximum number of units. 
e.  Approximate square footage of non-residential use and approximate number of bedrooms in each residential unit. 
f.  Primary traffic circulation pattern, including major points of ingress and egress. 
g.  Approximate number of parking spaces per use. 
h.  An indication that an acceptable drainage system can be designed for the proposed project. 
i.  Any such information or descriptions as may be deemed reasonably appropriate for review. 
2.  Statement of Intent. The applicant shall submit three (3) copies of a descriptive statement setting forth the characteristics for the proposed Planned Development including the following: 
a.  A description of the responsibilities of any proposed homeowners association or group maintenance agreement. 
b.  A statement setting forth the proposed development schedule. 
c.  A statement of the public improvements both on- and off-site that are proposed for dedication and/or construction and an estimate of the timing for providing such improvements. 
d.  A statement from the public facility providers, including water, sewer collection and treatment, schools, garbage collection, fire protection, etc., and letters from the appropriate agencies or districts verifying that such facilities or services are available and adequate to serve the proposed Planned Development. 
e.  A statement concerning the appearance, landscaping, screening, and maintenance of any proposed pond, lake, or retention pond contained in the development. 
f.  Any such information or descriptions as may be deemed reasonably appropriate for review. 
C.  A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission in accordance with procedures set forth in Section 4:2. 
D.  The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation upon the proposed Planned Development, which shall be advisory to City Council. 
E.  The City Council may, after fulfilling all applicable requirements of this section and all applicable requirements of Section 4:2, act to either approve, approve with modification, or disapprove the application for a Planned Development. 
F.  Following approval of a PD district, the official zoning map shall be amended to reflect such approval. Approval of a Planned Development district shall constitute authority for the applicant to submit a Final Development Plan to the Planning Commission for approval in accordance with the provisions of subsection 5:11.14. 
5:11.13 Failure to Submit a Final Development Plan. 
Approval of a PD district granted by City Council shall be valid for one (1) year by the end of which time a Final Development Plan must be submitted. Prior to the expiration of the approval, the Zoning Administrator shall submit a progress report to Council on the status of the development. One-year extensions may be granted by City Council. If an extension(s) is not granted, City Council may rezone the property to its original classification in accordance with Section 4:2. 
5:11.14 Final Development Plan. 
All final development plans in the Planned Development District will require a site plan review and approval by the City of Mauldin. Site plan requirements and procedures for the Planned Development District are outlined in Section 3 of the Mauldin City Land Development Regulations. 
5:11.15 Recording of Final Development Plan and Statement of Intent. 
Following approval of the Final Development Plan by the Planning Commission, one (1) copy of the Final Development Plan and Statement of Intent shall be recorded in the Register of Mesne Conveyances of Greenville County; one (1) copy of both documents shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator; and one (1) copy of both documents shall be filed with the City of Mauldin. 
5:11.16 Subdivision Plats, Building Permits, and Certificates of Occupancy. 
Approval of a Final Development Plan shall constitute authority for the applicant to prepare subdivision plats, if applicable, in accordance with procedures set forth in the Greenville County Subdivision Regulations. No building permit or Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued in a PD district until a Final Development Plan has been recorded. 
5:11.17 Changes to Planned Development Districts. 
Changes to a proposed Planned Development district or to an approved Planned Development district may be permitted in accordance with one (1) of the following procedures as determined by the Zoning Administrator: 
A.  Minor Changes. Changes to a Planned Development district which are of a design nature and which do not alter the original concept or use characteristics of the Planned Development district may be approved by the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedures established by the Land Development Regulations, Section 3 provided that no minor change may be approved by the Planning Commission which is in conflict with specific conceptual considerations previously contained in City Council's preliminary approval. Examples of Minor Changes may include, but are not limited to the following: 
•Reductions in: 
•Density; 
•Signage; 
•Square footage; 
•Increases in: 
•Landscaping; 
•Open space; 
•Setbacks; 
•Landscaping; 
•Lighting; 
•Location of land uses; 
•Parking; 
•Signage; 
•Site plan; 
•Minor changes to allow: 
•Reorientation of structures; 
•Realignment of approved access; 
•More restrictive land uses, e.g. commercial to residential; 
•Shift in approved density from one (1) area of PD to another. 
B.  Major Changes. Changes to a Planned Development district which would alter the basic concept and general characteristics of the Planned Development district may be approved by City Council in accordance with the procedures established by subsection 5:11.12. Approval of a major change by City Council must be followed by final development plan approval with a detailed design plan showing such changes by the Planning Commission in accordance with the Land Development Regulations, Section 3. Examples of major changes include but are not limited to the following: 
•Boundary changes; 
•Changes in the maximum number of structures or residential units; 
•Increased density; 
•Substantial changes to residential housing type; 
•Use changes; or 
•Access changes; etc. 
5:11.18 Failure to Begin, Failure to Complete, or Failure to Make Adequate Progress. 
One (1) year after final approval and each year thereafter, the Zoning Administrator shall present to City Council's Public Works Committee a status report on the progress of the approved development. If there is failure to begin, failure to complete, or failure to make adequate progress as set forth in the Statement of Intent, City Council may change the district classification of the Planned Development in accordance with provisions of Section 4:2. 
Sec. 5:12 - POD, Planned Office District. 
This district is established to accommodate office development, which is found to be compatible with surrounding physical development, particularly neighboring residential properties. Uses permitted in this district are limited to office and research facilities and shall not include any use engaged in retail sales or the stocking and storage of merchandise except as provided by subsection 5:5.2 and [subsection] 5:5.2.1. 
5:12.1 Uses Permitted. 
Uses permitted in the Planned Office District are the same as those uses permitted in subsection 5:5.1, Uses Permitted, and subsection 5:5.2, Uses Permitted by Special Exception, in the O-D, Office District. 
5:12.2 Accessory Retail Uses Permitted. 
Accessory retail uses permitted in the Planned Office District are the same as those permitted in the O-D, Office District, as set forth in subsection 5:5.2.1. 
5:12.3 Relationship of Buildings to Lots. 
One (1) or more principal structures may be permitted on a single lot. 
5:12.4 Minimum Area. 
No minimum area is required. 
5:12.5 Minimum Yard Requirements. 
Front  45 feet 
Side   25 feet 
Rear   25 feet 
For additional minimum setback requirements, refer to Section 3:11 Additional Minimum Setback Requirements for Certain Streets. 
5:12.6 Maximum Height. 
Maximum height of all structures shall not exceed forty-five (45) feet. 
5:12.7 Off-Street Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 6:1. 
5:12.8 Site Plan Review. 
All uses permitted in the Planned Office District will require a site plan review and approval by the Mauldin City Planning Commission. Site plan requirements and procedures for the Planned Office District are outlined in Section 4 of the Mauldin City Land Development Regulations. 
Sec. 5:13 - O-D, Office District. 
This district is established to provide an office district for the convenience of local residents. The uses permitted in this district are limited to office and research facilities and shall not include any use engaged in retail sales or the stocking and storage of goods or merchandise. No use shall be permitted in this district which will be detrimental to the development of the district as an office research park. 
5:13.1 Uses Permitted. 
Accountant. 
Advertising agency. 
Bank. 
Savings and loan. 
Broadcasting studio. 
Brokerage house. 
Employment agency. 
Insurance. 
Places of worship. 
Real estate. 
Signs (Subject to provisions of subsection 6:4.1 
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses. 
Other uses which are considered to be compatible with the aforementioned uses. 
5:13.2 Uses Permitted by Special Exception. 
The following uses are permitted on review by the Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of Article 7: 
Educational institution. 
Exhibition buildings. 
Fire station. 
Library. 
Post office. 
1.  Accessory Retail Uses Permitted by Special Exception by the Board of Appeals. Certain retail sales establishments which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted principal office uses such as, but not limited to, the following: 
Apothecary. 
Barber shop. 
Beauty shop. 
Cafeteria. 
Florist shop. 
Newsstand. 
Optician. 
Restaurant. 
Sale or rental of medical supplies and prosthetic devices. 
Sandwich shop. 
Similar retail uses which are designed primarily to serve the convenience of persons working or receiving services in the building in which the accessory use is located, provided that such accessory use is clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal permitted office uses. 
5:13.3 Conditional Uses. 
Adult Day Care Center. 
Child Care Center. 
5:13.4 Height Limitation. 
No structure shall exceed a height of forty-five (45) feet except as provided in Section 3:8. 
5:13.5 Dimensional Requirements. 
1.  Front Setback. All buildings and structures shall be set back from all street right-of-way lines not less than twenty-five (25) feet. All outside merchandise on display shall be set back not less than fifteen (15) feet from property lines. 
2.  Side Setback. None is required except on corner lots and lots adjacent to any residential district, in which case all commercial buildings, structures, and merchandise on display shall be set back not less than fifteen (15) feet from property lines. When a side yard is provided, it shall be not less than five (5) feet in width. 
3.  Rear Setback. No building shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet to a rear lot line. All outside merchandise on display shall be set back not less than fifteen (15) feet from property lines. 
5:13.6 Screening. 
A wall, fence, dense hedge, or other permanent year-round foliage, or a combination thereof, which provides a solid, opaque, visual barrier at least six (6) feet in height shall be provided along the side and rear lot lines where any nonresidential use in this district is adjacent to a residential district. Such screening shall also prohibit, for safety reasons, passage by children and/or other pedestrians. Screening design shall visually compliment the surrounding residential district. Additionally, maintenance shall be performed to ensure that the screen continues to meet the provisions set forth herein. Strict enforcement of these provisions shall be in accordance with subsection 4:1.1.1 of this Ordinance. 
5:13.7 Off-Street Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 6:1. 
5:13.8 Drainage. 
A complete drainage plan of the entire site meeting the requirements as prescribed in the Mauldin City Drainage Ordinance shall be provided. 
5:13.9 Outdoor Fencing. 
Fencing shall be confined to the side and rear yards of the site and not located closer to the street than the leading edge of the principle structure. 
( Ord. No. 786 , amds. 13-15, 3-16-2015) 
Editor's note- At the request of the city, former § 5:5, O-D, Office District, has been redesignated as § 5:13. 
Sec. 5:14 - AP, Airport Protective Areas. 
5:14.1 Airport Protective Areas Established as Supplementary. 
The "AP" designation is not intended to be utilized as a district classification but as a designation which identifies areas subject to regulations which are supplementary to the regulations of the district to which such designation is attached, appended, or "overlaid." Regulations, which apply to areas, designated on the Zoning map, as being within such appended or overlaid designation must be determined by joint reference to the regulations of both the basic district classification and the appended or overlay classification. The basis for preparing these supplementary regulations is contained in the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR), Vol. XI, Part 77, Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace. 
5:14.2 AP, Intent. 
It is the intent of this Ordinance to restrain influences which are adverse to the proper and safe conduct of aircraft operations in the vicinity of airports, to prevent creation of conditions hazardous to aircraft operations, and to encourage development which is compatible with airport use characteristics within the intent and purpose of zoning. To this end, the "AP" designation, when appended to a basic district classification, is intended to coordinate the purposes and intent of this Ordinance with other regulations duly established by the City of Mauldin whose primary intent is to further the purposes set out above. 
5:14.3 Action Upon Applications Within Areas Designated "AP." 
The Zoning Administrator shall take no action upon issuance of a zoning permit or presentation of an application to the Board of Appeals or other similar administrative procedures until it has been duly certified to him by proper authorities that the proposal upon which he is requested to act is in compliance with regulations of the AP Protective Area regulations as detailed in this section. 
5:14.4 Definitions. 
1.  Airports. Greenville-Spartanburg International Airport, Greenville Downtown Airport, and Donaldson Center. 
2.  Airport Elevation. The highest point of an airports usable landing area measured in feet above mean sea level (MSL). 
3.  Approach Surface. A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in subsection 5:14.6 of this Ordinance. In plan the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 
4.  Approach, Transitional, Horizontal, and Conical Zones. These zones are set forth in subsection 5:14.5 of this Ordinance. 
5.  Board of Appeals. A board consisting of five (5) members and two (2) alternates appointed by City Council as provided in subsection 4:1.2 of the Mauldin City Zoning Ordinance. 
6.  Conical Surface. A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of twenty (20) to one (1) for a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet. 
7.  Hazard To Air Navigation. An obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace. 
8.  Height. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this Ordinance and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level (MSL) elevation unless otherwise specified. 
9.  Heliport Primary Surface. The area of the primary surface coincides in size and shape with the designated takeoff and landing area of a heliport. This surface is a horizontal plane at the elevation of the established heliport elevation. 
10.  Horizontal Surface. A horizontal plane one hundred fifty (150) feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 
11.  Larger Than Utility Runway. A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of greater than twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds maximum gross weight and jet powered aircraft. 
12.  Nonconforming Use. Any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or use of land, which is inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance or an amendment thereto. 
13.  Obstruction. Any structure, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in subsection 5:13.6 of this Ordinance. 
14.  Person. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or governmental entity; includes a trustee, a receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative of any of them. 
15.  Precision Instrument Runway. A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an Instrument Landing System (ILS), Differential Global Positioning System (DGPS) or a Precision Approach Radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or another planning document. 
16.  Primary Surface. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface extends two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of that runway; for military runways or when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in subsection 5:13.5 of this Ordinance. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
17.  Runway. A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and take-off of aircraft along its length. 
18.  Structure. An object constructed or installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission lines. 
19.  Transitional Surfaces. These surfaces extend outward at ninety-degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surfaces, which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of five thousand (5,000) feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at ninety-degree angles to the extended runway centerlines. 
20.  Tree. Any object of natural growth. 
21.  Utility Runway. A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds maximum gross weight and less. 
22.  Visual Runway. A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures. 
5:14.5 Airport Zones. 
In order to carry out the provisions of this Ordinance, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces as they apply to Greenville-Spartanburg International Airport, Greenville Downtown Airport, and Donaldson Center. Such zones are shown on the official Greenville County Zoning Map, which is on display in the Greenville County Planning Commission office. An area located in more than one (1) of the following zones is considered to be only in the one (1) with the more restrictive height limitations. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
1.  Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is two hundred fifty (250) feet wide for utility runways with only visual approaches and five hundred (500) feet wide for utility runways with a non-precision approach on the opposite end. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) feet at a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
2.  Runway Larger Than Utility Visual Approach Zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is five hundred (500) feet wide for such runways with a visual approach or non-precision approach on the opposite end and one thousand (1,000) feet wide for those with a precision approach on the opposite runway end. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet at a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
3.  Precision Instrument Approach Zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is one thousand (1,000) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of sixteen thousand (16,000) feet at a horizontal distance of fifty thousand (50,000) feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
4.  Transitional Zones. The transitional zones are the areas beneath the transitional surfaces. 
5.  Heliport Transitional Zones. These zones extend outward from the sides of the primary surface and the heliport approach zones a horizontal distance of two hundred fifty (250) feet from the primary surface centerline and the heliport approach zone centerline. 
6.  Horizontal Zones. The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs of a given radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The radii of these arcs are as follows: five thousand (5,000) feet for all runways designated utility or visual, and ten thousand (10,000) feet for all other runways. The radii of the arcs for each end of the runway shall be the same and consist of the longest radius determined for either runway end. When a five-thousand-foot arc is encompassed by tangents connecting two (2) adjacent ten-thousand-foot arcs, the five-thousand-foot arc shall be disregarded. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones. 
7.  Conical Zone. The conical zone is hereby established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet. The conical zone does not include the precision instrument approach zones and the transitional zones. 
5:14.6 Airport Zone Height Limitations. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, and with the exception of structures erected for aeronautical purposes, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this Ordinance to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
1.  Utility Runway Visual Approach Zone. Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet along the extended runway centerline. 
2.  Runway Larger Than Utility Visual Approach Zone. Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet along the extended runway centerline. 
3.  Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone. Slopes fifty (50) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet along the extended runway centerline; thence slopes upward forty (40) feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance of forty thousand (40,000) feet along the extended runway centerline. 
4.  Heliport Approach Zone. Slopes eight (8) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a distance of four thousand (4,000) feet along the heliport approach zone centerline. 
5.  Transitional Zones. Slopes seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and approach surface, and extending to a height of one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation, which is 963.8 feet MSL for GSP International Airport, one thousand forty-eight (1,048) feet MSL for Greenville Downtown Airport, and 956.2 feet MSL for Donaldson Center. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, there are established height limits sloping seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet measured at ninety-degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
6.  Heliport Transitional Zones. Slopes two (2) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the heliport approach zones and extending a distance of two hundred fifty (250) feet measured horizontally from and at ninety-degree angles to the primary surface centerline and heliport approach zones centerline. 
7.  Horizontal Zone. Established at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation or at a height of 1,113.8 feet MSL for GSP International Airport, one thousand one hundred ninety-eight (1,198) feet MSL for Greenville Downtown Airport, and 1,106.2 feet MSL for Donaldson Center. 
8.  Conical Zone. Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of three hundred fifty (350) feet above the airport elevation. 
9.  Excepted Height Limitations. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure, or growth of any tree to a height up to fifty (50) feet above the surface. 
5:14.7 Use Restrictions. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this Ordinance in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
5:14.8 Nonconforming Uses. 
1.  Regulations Not Retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this Ordinance shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this Ordinance, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure; the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, and is diligently prosecuted. 
2.  Marking and Lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Greenville-Spartanburg Airport Commission, Greenville Downtown Airport Commission or the Donaldson Center Airport Commission to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the respective Airport Commission. 
5:14.9 Permits. 
1.  Future Uses. Except as specifically provided in a, b, and c hereunder, no material change shall be made in the use of land, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use or structure would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provision of this Ordinance shall be granted unless a variance has been approved. 
a.  In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be required for any structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, such structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones. 
b.  In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a horizontal distance of not less than four thousand two hundred (4,200) feet from each end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zones. 
c.  In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such structure, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for such transition zones. 
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, or alteration of any structure in excess of any of the height limits established by this Ordinance except as set forth in Subsection 5:13.6.9. 
2.  Existing Uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming use or structure to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of this Ordinance or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated all applications for such a permit shall be granted. 
3.  Nonconforming Uses Abandoned or Destroyed. Whenever the Zoning Administrator determines that a nonconforming structure has been abandoned or more than eighty (80) percent torn-down, physically deteriorated or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. 
4.  Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure or use property, not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this Ordinance, may apply to the Board of Appeals for a variance from such regulations. The application for variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and relief granted, will not be contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the spirit of this Ordinance. Additionally, no application for a variance to the requirements of this Ordinance may be considered by the Board of Appeals unless a copy of this application has been furnished to the relative Airport Commission for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the Airport Commission does not respond to the application within fifteen (15) days after receipt, the Board of Appeals may act on its own to grant or deny said application. 
5.  Obstruction Marking and Lighting. All objects penetrating the plane fifty (50) feet beneath the following imaginary surface shall be lighted: 
An approach surface having a 50:1 slope originating two hundred (200) feet beyond the end of an existing or proposed runway, which has a width of one thousand (1,000) feet, expanding uniformly for ten thousand (10,000) feet to a width of four thousand (4,000) feet, thence becoming a 40:1 slope expanding uniformly for a distance of forty thousand (40,000) feet to a width of sixteen thousand (16,000) feet, or for such a distance that the imaginary surface is more than two hundred (200) feet above all terrain. 
Otherwise, all objects must be marked and lighted in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration Advisory Circular 70/7460-1, as amended from time-to-time. 
Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this Ordinance and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure in question to install, operate, maintain, at the owner's expense, such markings and lights as may be necessary. If deemed proper by the Board of Appeals this condition may be modified to require the owner to permit the Airport Commission, at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain the necessary markings and lights. 

6.  Notification. All such persons proposing the construction of objects, whether of a temporary or permanent nature within twenty thousand (20,000) feet of a public use airport and the height of which penetrates a slope of 100:1 from the nearest point of the nearest runway, shall submit a copy of FAA form 7460-1 to the affected airport for review. Said airport shall have ten (10) business days to make any comments. 
5:14.10 Airport Zones Relating to Noise Restrictions. 
As noted in subsection 5:14.2, one (1) of the intentions of AP Protective Areas regulations is to encourage development, which is compatible with airport use characteristics. Noise resulting from aircraft operations is the airport use characteristic, which most affects surrounding development. 
Relating the zoning format to noise criteria is difficult because two (2) land uses which might otherwise be compatible in a specific zoning category may each be affected differently by airport noise. For example, general commercial zoning may be compatible with airport noise. However, theaters (a commercial use) would need special protection at least to the extent that they were notified of potential incompatible noise characteristics on a proposed site prior to their construction. Supplementary regulations contained in the AP Protective Areas section of the Ordinance would facilitate notification of potential incompatible uses (as a result of aircraft noise) without undue restriction of the establishment of retail uses lists the criteria for evaluating and regulating development around the airport. Sensitive areas surrounding Greenville Downtown Airport and Donaldson Center are divided into Zones I through III. Zone I being the most restrictive. The Official Zoning Map of Greenville County, located at the Greenville County Planning Commission, delineates the location and area of each of the zones around the airport. 
Greenville-Spartanburg International Airport is surrounded by an Airport Environs Area, which prohibits certain future land uses. This area is delineated on the Official Zoning Map of Greenville County. The land uses allowed within the Environs Area are stated in the Greenville-Spartanburg Airport Environs Area Zoning Ordinance, which is on file with the Greenville County Planning Commission, the City of Mauldin, and the Greenville-Spartanburg Airport Commission. 
5:14.11 Airport Zoning Related to Sanitary Landfill Location. 
Various studies and observations have resulted in the conclusion that sanitary landfills attract birds, and that birds in the vicinity of airports create potential hazards to aircraft operations (see FAA order SO 5200.5). Aircraft accidents have resulted when aircraft collided with low-flying birds, particularly during takeoff and landing. In order to prevent such an occurrence in Greenville, the following regulations shall apply with regard to location of landfills: 
A.  No landfill shall be located within ten thousand (10,000) feet from a runway of any airport. 
B.  Landfills located further than ten thousand (10,000) feet, but within five (5) miles of a runway of any airport will be reviewed on a case by case basis by the respective airport Commission staff, who may in turn contact the Bird Hazard Group and the Federal Aviation Administration. If in the opinion of the airport Commission staff, the landfill poses a threat to safe aircraft operations, then the landfill shall be considered an incompatible land use. 
5:14.12 Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the Building Standards Department upon a form published for that purpose. Applications required by this Ordinance to be submitted to the Zoning Administrator shall be promptly considered and granted or denied. Application for action by the Board of Appeals shall be forthwith transmitted by the secretary. 
Editor's note- Former § 5:13, AP, Airport Protective Areas, has been redesignated as § 5:14, by the discretion of the editor in order to avoid duplication. 
Sec. 5:15 - UVD, Urban Village District. 
5:15.1 Purpose and Findings. 
The Urban Village District is designed to permit the development of land in a manner consistent with the historic and timeless principles of placemaking. An Urban Village combines commercial, civic and residential uses in a compact, walkable setting. Urban Villages feature a highly interconnected street network and massing appropriate to create a public realm built on a human scale. The intent of this district is to guide the development of Urban Villages in a manner that accomplishes the following purposes: 
A.  Promote a diverse mix of business, commercial, office, residential, institutional, educational, cultural, and entertainment activities for workers, visitors, and residents. 
B.  Emphasize safe and convenient access to shopping, restaurants, employment centers, entertainment venues, and other essential services to pedestrians, bicyclists, transit riders, motorists, and people with disabilities. 
C.  Promote the health and well-being of residents by encouraging physical activity, alternative transportation, and greater social interaction. 
D.  Create a sense of place that represents a unique, attractive, and memorable destination for visitors and residents. 
E.  Enhance the community's character through the promotion of high-quality urban design. 
F.  Create a feeling of vitality in order to attract private investment, invigorate civic pride, and enhance the tax base for the City. 
Generally, an Urban Village District is intended to be established over a contiguous area of at least ten (10) acres. However, an Urban Village District may be established at a smaller site where the context of the site is compatible and appropriate for accomplishing the expressed purposes of the Urban Village District. Nothing herein shall prevent a project from being phased in increments of less than ten (10) acres. 
5:15.2 Procedures. 
A.  Application. The application for a designation of an Urban Village District shall follow the same procedures as a rezoning application with formal reviews by the Planning Commission and the City Council. In addition to the completed rezoning application, the applicant shall also submit a conceptual plan for the entire parcel or assemblage of parcels that conveys the approximate layout of streets and alleys, civic spaces, and buildings. Nothing in the conceptual plan shall be considered binding on the prospective development; rather, the conceptual plan will be used to surmise the applicant's intent to adhere to the guidelines of this district. 
Generally, the City of Mauldin finds that the proximity of jobs and shopping activities to housing in an Urban Village can achieve significant trip reductions produced by the internal capture of home-work, home-shopping, and work-shopping trips. The City of Mauldin further finds and determines that there is compelling public interest to encourage new development to occur in accordance with the criteria set forth in this district. Accordingly, an application to establish an Urban Village District classification does not necessarily need to be accompanied by a traffic impact analysis and/or parking analysis. However, City staff or the City Council may request the submission of a traffic impact analysis and/or parking analysis when it has reasonable ground to believe that conditions may exist that would preclude the development from achieving the desired trip reductions noted above. 
Applications which consist of property owners of separate tracts of land shall be accompanied by legally binding agreements which establish cross-access, cross-parking, and similar agreements which affect joint planning of the development. 
B.  Development Plans. Following approval of the Urban Village District classification, the applicant shall be authorized to submit development plans for review and approval and to obtain any applicable permits. City staff shall have authority to approve development plans and issue the appropriate permits. Development plans shall include the technical requirements, standards and specifications outlined in the City's preliminary plat and site plan checklists, façade elevation checklist and any other materials or information requested by the Business and Development Services Director, or their appointee, where necessary to determine compliance of the proposed development. 
C.  Conformance to Zoning and Land Development Regulations. Generally, the appropriate regulations and standards contained in the Zoning Ordinance and the Land Development Regulations shall apply to the Urban Village District. Where the standards specified for this district conflict with other standards contained in the Zoning Ordinance or the Land Development Regulations, the standards for this district shall generally prevail. In order to accomplish the intent of this district, the standards contained in the Zoning Ordinance and the Land Development Regulations may be relaxed at the discretion of the Business and Development Services Director where necessary to advance the purpose of the Urban Village District. 
D.  Urban Village District Standards. The design and arrangement of thoroughfares, civic spaces, and building types is critical to accomplishing the intent described for the Urban Village District. Therefore, the standards of this district have been organized by (1) thoroughfare design, (2) civic space design, (3) frontage design and (4) building design. Applicants should give careful attention to the details in how these various elements interact to form the fabric of a successful Urban Village project. 
5:15.3 Thoroughfare Standards. 
A.  Intent. Good streets form the backbone of healthy communities. Not only do they perform a dual role as vehicular and pedestrian corridors, but they also serve as the community's primary public spaces. The impact of their design on communities cannot be underestimated. 
For communities to be walkable, thoroughfares must be designed with pedestrian comfort and safety as critical goals along with the safe and efficient flow of traffic and other considerations, such as the accommodation of emergency vehicles, parking, utilities, and storm water. To elevate the importance of pedestrian safety and comfort, the focus for thoroughfare design should be on design speed rather than the volume of traffic and the level of service. In addition, thoroughfares should typically be narrower than conventional thoroughfares and arranged in an interconnected, gridded network; careful design of intersections should include tighter curb radii. 
B.  General Standards. 
1.  Connectivity. The most important aspect of any Urban Village is that it be a walkable place with an interconnected system of streets. A well-connected street network spreads traffic efficiently, provides greater opportunities for access by service and emergency vehicles, and furthers pedestrian mobility by increasing the number of destinations that can be reached by walking. 
The street network of an Urban Village development shall be designed to form a grid pattern with streets interlinked at numerous points, intersections closely spaced and little to no dead-ends. Generally, thoroughfares within the development shall terminate at other internal thoroughfares and should also connect wherever possible to those on adjacent sites. 
2.  Culs-de-Sac. The City of Mauldin finds that the use of culs-de-sac and dead-end streets is inconsistent with the public policy of preserving an interconnected street system. Culs-de-sac and dead-end streets do not promote street connectivity and create inefficiencies in the distribution of traffic and water as well as inefficiencies and increased municipal expenses in the delivery of public services. 
In limited situations, culs-de-sac can be used in areas of topographical constraints and/or to avoid disturbing sensitive environmental features. The use of culs-de-sac shall be restricted to appropriate situations; where used, culs-de-sac shall be of the minimum length necessary per the situation. Loop streets, eyebrow configurations, and similar alternatives are encouraged in place of culs-de-sac. 

3.  Corner Radius Clear Zone. To allow for emergency vehicles (e.g., fire trucks) to safely turn corners, a twenty-five-foot radius clear zone shall be established free of all vertical obstructions including, but not limited to, telephone poles, sign poles, fire hydrants, and electrical boxes. 

4.  Bike Lanes. Where required, bike lanes may be included as individual bike lanes reserved for bicyclists, combined with trails, or striped as part of the street system. Bike lanes shall maintain a minimum overhead clearance of eight (8) feet. 
5.  Private Streets. Private streets are permitted herein. The design standards and construction specifications of private streets shall be the same as for public streets, notwithstanding alternative pavement layer materials may be accepted for private streets. 
6.  Sidewalk Continuity. Sidewalks shall align vertically and horizontally with abutting sidewalks. Sidewalks shall not be installed in such a manner that they conflict with or are obstructed by power lines, telephone poles, fire hydrants, traffic/street signs, mailboxes, trees, buildings, barriers, light poles, or any other structure. When there is an existing or anticipated obstruction, the sidewalk shall be installed around the object and shall provide the required sidewalk width. 
7.  ADA Standards. The City of Mauldin is committed to ensuring that all public and private facilities, including accessible routes, sidewalks and other public walkways, are designed to meet the mobility needs of all users. All new streets, sidewalks and other public walkways shall be constructed in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) for Accessible Design. 
8.  Street Lights. Street light fixtures shall typically be made of metal and shall be consistent in color and style along both sides of the street; however, nothing herein shall prevent street light fixtures from being incorporated with a thematic public art project. Only column-design street lighting shall be acceptable. Street lighting shall incorporate hoods, cut-off lenses, or similar devices that prevent glare or spillover into the sky or into building stories above the ground floor. Cobra-head street lights or street lights of a similar design are prohibited. 
9.  Placement of Utilities. All new utility lines shall be placed underground. 
C.  Thoroughfare Types. The streets within this district are intended to balance the needs of all types of traffic-auto, bicycle, and pedestrian-to maximize the mobility and convenience for all the citizens and users. While all streets will appropriately balance pedestrian and automobile needs, their character will vary by specific location. Some streets will carry a large volume of both automobile and pedestrian traffic and provide a more intense urban experience while others will provide more intimately scaled street-space. A variety of acceptable thoroughfare types can be calibrated and used in creating a walkable community, including alleys, lanes, roads, streets, commercial/main streets, avenues, and boulevards. 
The following thoroughfare types are generally inappropriate in the Urban Village district: 
a)  Highway (HW) - A rural and suburban thoroughfare of high vehicular speed and capacity. 
b)  Rural Street (RS). 
The following thoroughfare types are generally acceptable in the Urban Village district: 
a)  Boulevard (BV). 
b)  Main Street (MS). 
c)  Avenue (AV). 
d)  Local Street (LS). 
e)  Alley (AL). 
1.  Boulevard (BV). 

Definition. A thoroughfare designed for high vehicular capacity and moderate speed, traversing an urbanized area. 
Guidelines. The following are not regulations, but entail general descriptions to help designers, developers, and engineers better understand the thoroughfare type in order to apply it appropriately. 
Movement Type Free* Design Speed 35 mph Pedestrian Crossing Time Up to 12 seconds  
* Drivers will move unimpeded at higher speeds 
Features. 
Right-of-Way Width • Min. width 96 feet Pavement Width 
(curb face to curb face) • Min. width 68 feet Traffic Lanes • 4 travel lanes • Min. width 11 feet Bicycle Lanes • Bike lane both sides • Min. width 5 feet Parking Lanes • Optional • Parallel parking only • Min. width 8 feet Landscaped Median • Avg. width 14 feet • 1 tree 1 per 50 feet (on average) Curb Type • Curb and gutter Curb (Corner) Radius • Min. radius 25 feet Landscape Type • Continuous planting strip on both sides • Avg. width 8 feet • 1 tree per 30 feet (on average) Walkway Type • Sidewalk both sides • Min. width 6 feet Lighting • Within 6 feet of curb • Max. spacing 75 feet • Max. height 18 feet Grade • Max. slope 8% • Cross-slope 2-4% Distance between Intersections • Max. 1,000 feet  
1 Large to medium trees should be used; plantings and other materials within the median shall not obscure the visibility of cars entering a cross street for a distance of twenty (20) feet back from the curb face of the cross street. 
2.  Main Street (MS). 

Definition. A thoroughfare lined with mixed-use shopfront buildings that are positioned at the front of each lot. 
Guidelines. The following are not regulations, but entail general descriptions to help designers, developers, and engineers better understand the thoroughfare type in order to apply it appropriately. 
Movement Type Slow* Design Speed 25 mph Pedestrian Crossing Time Up to 8 seconds  
* Drivers will move slowly based on their perception of the environment and activity in the area, such as the presence of pedestrians. 
Features. 
Right-of-Way Width • Min. width 56 feet Pavement Width 
(curb face to curb face) • Min. width 38 feet Traffic Lanes • 2-4 travel lanes • Min. width 10 feet Bicycle Lanes • Does not apply Parking Lanes • Both sides of street • Parallel or diagonal parking • Min. width 8 feet Landscaped Median • Does not apply Curb Type • Curb and gutter Curb (Corner) Radius • Min. radius 15 feet Landscape Type • Grated tree wells • 1 tree per 35 feet (on average) Walkway Type 1 • Sidewalk both sides • Min. width 10 feet Lighting • Column design • Within 3 feet of curb • Max. spacing 60 feet • Max. height 14 feet Grade • Max. slope 8% • Cross-slope 2-4% Distance between Intersections • Min. 250 feet • Max. 660 feet  
1  Walkways shall incorporate street furniture, including benches, trash receptacles, street signs, and traffic lights. Benches and trash receptacles shall be provided at intervals no greater than two hundred (200) feet. Street furniture shall be located so as to maintain a clear pedestrian path and shall be placed within six (6) feet of the curb. Benches may also be placed at the rear of the sidewalk within three (3) feet of the right-of-way line. Benches with backs shall be oriented to face the street. Street furniture shall be made of metal painted with a black or dark green matte finish and/or wood or stone with a natural finish. Street furniture shall be consistent in color and style along both sides of any street. 
3.  Avenue (AV). 

Definition. A thoroughfare of medium vehicular capacity and low to moderate speed, acting as a short distance connector between Urban Villages. 
Guidelines. The following are not regulations, but entail general descriptions to help designers, developers, and engineers better understand the thoroughfare type in order to apply it appropriately. 
Movement Type Slow* Design Speed 30 mph Pedestrian Crossing Time Up to 8 seconds  
* Drivers will move slowly based on their perception of the environment and activity in the area, such as the presence of pedestrians. 
Features. 
Right-of-Way Width • Min. width 60 feet Pavement Width 
(curb face to curb face) • Min. width 32 feet Traffic Lanes • 2 travel lanes • Min. width 11 feet Bicycle Lanes • Bike lanes both sides • Min. width 5 feet Parking Lanes • Optional • Parallel or diagonal parking • Min. width 8 feet Landscaped Median • Does not apply Curb Type • Curb and gutter Curb (Corner) Radius • Min. radius 15 feet Landscape Type • Intermittent planting strip on both sides • Avg. width 6 feet • 1 tree per 40 feet (on average) Walkway Type • Sidewalk both sides • Min. width 8 feet Lighting • Column design • Within 3 feet of curb • Max. spacing 60 feet • Max. height 14 feet Grade • Max. slope 8% • Cross-slope 2-4% Distance between Intersections • Min. 250 feet • Max. 660 feet  
4.  Local Street (LS). 

Definition. A local urban thoroughfare of low speed and capacity that primarily provides access to residential development. 
Guidelines. The following are not regulations, but entail general descriptions to help designers, developers, and engineers better understand the thoroughfare type in order to apply it appropriately. 
Movement Type Yield* Design Speed 20 mph Pedestrian Crossing Time Up to 6 seconds  
* Drivers will move slowly based on their perception of the environment and will slow down or pull to the side to pass in opposite directions 
Features. 
Right-of-Way Width • Min. width 50 feet Pavement Width 
(curb face to curb face) • Min. width 26 feet Traffic Lanes • 2 travel lanes • Min. width 10 feet Bicycle Lanes • Does not apply Parking Lanes • At least one side • Parallel only • Min. width 8 feet Landscaped Median • Does not apply Curb Type • Curb and gutter Curb (Corner) Radius • Min. radius 10 feet Landscape Type • Continuous planting strip on both sides • Avg. width 6 feet • 1 tree per 40 feet (on average) Walkway Type • Sidewalk both sides • Min. width 6 feet Lighting • Column design • Within 3 feet of curb • Max. spacing 50 feet • Max. height 14 feet Grade • Max. slope 12% • Cross-slope 2-4% Distance between Intersections • Min. 250 feet • Max. 660 feet  
5.  Alley (AL). 
Definition. A vehicular way located to the rear of lots providing access to service areas, parking, and outbuildings and containing utility easements. 
Note: Alleys help minimize curb cuts and provide access to parking and service areas behind buildings. Alleys may be incorporated into parking lots as drive aisles and fire lanes. Alleys and drive aisles are permitted to be incorporated through and between buildings. 
Guidelines. The following are not regulations, but entail general descriptions to help designers, developers, and engineers better understand the thoroughfare type in order to apply it appropriately. 
Movement Type Yield* Design Speed 10 mph Pedestrian Crossing Time Up to 5 seconds  
* Drivers will move slowly based on their perception of the environment and will slow down or pull to the side to pass in opposite directions. 
Features. 
Right-of-Way Width • Min. width 10 feet Pavement Width 
(curb face to curb face) • Min. width 10 feet Traffic Lanes • 1-2 travel lanes • Min. width 9 feet 
 (10 feet if only 1 lane) Bicycle Lanes • Does not apply Parking Lanes • Does not apply Landscaped Median • Does not apply Curb Type • Optional 1 Curb (Corner) Radius • Min. radius 10 feet Landscape Type • Does not apply Walkway Type • Does not apply Lighting • Within 3 feet of curb • Max. spacing 50 feet • Max. height 14 feet Grade • Max. slope 10% • Cross-slope 2-4% Distance between Intersections • Min. 125 feet • Max. 660 feet  
1  Drainage shall be addressed through an inverted crown at the center or with roll curbs at the edges. 
5:15.4 Civic Space Standards. 
A.  Intent. Well-designed and well-located civic spaces, such as parks and plazas, are critical for healthy and vibrant communities. They provide access to outdoors, they act as organizing elements within the structure of communities and downtowns, and they serve as public gathering places for all members of the community. Civic spaces should not be made up of residual space left after buildings are placed on a site (i.e., along sound walls, tucked into corners, or the like). 
In order for civic spaces to be accessible and usable, they should be located within walking distance of residences and workplaces, typically one (1) every one-fourth (1/4) to one-half (1/2) mile. They should be designed and sized appropriately. For instance, hardscaped plazas work beautifully in the Urban Village district. Landscape design should be carefully considered such that landscape materials do not inadvertently obstruct the casual surveillance of a public space and thereby compromise safety. 
B.  General Standards. 
1.  Visibility. A clear view through the public space (from two (2) to seven (7) [feet] in height) is required and is important for safety and urban design purposes. 
2.  Unstructured Recreation. Civic greens, squares, and plazas should not include active recreation structures such as ball fields and courts. 
3.  Slopes. At least fifty (50) percent of the civic space shall have slopes less than seven (7) percent. Exempt: Stormwater management facilities/areas which also function as active or passive recreation areas. 
C.  Civic Space Types. The following civic space types are generally acceptable in the Urban Village district: 
1.  Civic Green. 

Definition. An open space available for unstructured recreation. While it is often surrounded by buildings, a civic green may be spatially defined by landscaping rather than building forms. 
Note: Greenbelts, which often run along the perimeter of a development, are an acceptable form of a civic green. Typically these features are designed to buffer a development from surrounding incompatible uses or features, such as a highway corridor or industrial district. 
Guidelines. The following are not regulations, but entail general descriptions to help designers, developers, and engineers better understand the civic space type in order to apply it appropriately. 
Location Any Size Any Activity Type Passive Landscape Character* Lawn and trees, naturally disposed  
* Civic greens are often landscaped with trees at the edges and open lawns at the center. Civic greens typically contain no structures other than benches, pavilions, and memorials. Trails or pedestrian pathways are optional. 
2.  Square. 

Definition. An open space available for unstructured recreation and civic purposes. It is generally intended to be an active pedestrian center. A square is typically spatially defined by streets but may also be surrounded by buildings. Squares are generally located at the intersection of important streets. 
Guidelines. The following are not regulations, but entail general descriptions to help designers, developers, and engineers better understand the civic space type in order to apply it appropriately. 
Location Intersection of prominent streets Size Min. 1/2 acre Max. 10 acres Activity Type Passive Landscape Character Paths, paved surface areas, lawn and trees, formally disposed  
3.  Plaza. 

Definition. An open space available for civic purposes and commercial activities. A plaza is typically spatially defined by building frontages but may also be bounded by streets. Plazas are generally used to emphasize important places, intersections, or centers. 
Guidelines. The following are not regulations, but entail general descriptions to help designers, developers, and engineers better understand the civic space type in order to apply it appropriately. 
Location Prominent places, intersections or centers Size Min. 400 square feet Max. 2 acres Activity Type Passive Landscape Character* Heavily features paved surface areas  
* Trees are optional 
4.  Playground. 

Definition. An open space designed and equipped for the recreation of children. A playground is generally fenced and may include an open shelter. Playgrounds are also generally interspersed within residential areas and may be placed within a block. Playgrounds may be included within greens. 
Guidelines. The following are not regulations, but entail general descriptions to help designers, developers, and engineers better understand the civic space type in order to apply it appropriately. 
Location Within walking distance of residential uses Size Min. 1,600 square feet Max. 20,000 square feet Activity Type Active Landscape Character Playing surfaces (e.g., sand, wood chips, etc.), paths, and walkways  
5:15.5 Frontage Standards. 
A.  Intent. The frontage is the way a building engages the public realm. The ultimate intent of regulating frontage is to ensure, after a building is located appropriately, that its interface with the public realm and the transition between the two (2) are detailed appropriately. 
B.  General Standards. 
1.  Fencing. Where fencing is expressly permitted as a feature of a frontage type, only fences of an ornamental nature (e.g., wrought iron or picket fences) shall be permitted. Chain link fences are strictly prohibited. Where permitted, no fence shall exceed a height of six (6) feet. 
2.  Outdoor Dining. Outdoor dining is permitted within the public right-of-way when accompanying a restaurant located in an adjacent building. At least four (4) feet of continual clearance between dining furnishings and any curbline or street furnishings shall be maintained to provide for adequate pedestrian circulation and to maintain accessibility. Dining furnishings shall also stay clear of display windows and entryways of other adjacent businesses. 
Tables and chairs used in outdoor dining areas shall be constructed of heavyweight, high-quality materials like metal or wood. Lightweight materials such as plastic and vinyl which may be blown astray by moderate winds are prohibited. The outdoor dining area shall be maintained in a clean and safe condition at all times, including promptly and properly disposing of all trash generated by the operation. 
No additional parking spaces shall be required for outdoor dining areas. 
3.  Outdoor Display/Sales. The outdoor display of goods is permitted within the public right-of-way when accompanying a shop or store located in an adjacent building. At least six (6) feet of continual clearance between the display and any curbline or street furnishings shall be maintained to provide for adequate pedestrian circulation. Outdoor displays shall also stay clear of display windows and entryways of other adjacent businesses. 
C.  Frontage Types. The following frontage types are generally inappropriate the Urban Village district: 
a)  Common Yard-A planted frontage wherein the façade is set back substantially from the frontage line. The front yard created typically remains unfenced and is visually continuous with adjacent yards, supporting a common landscape. 

b)  Porch and Fence-A planted frontage wherein the façade is set back from the frontage line with an attached porch permitted to encroach. A fence at the frontage line maintains street spatial definition. 

The following frontage types are generally acceptable in the Urban Village district: 
a)  Stoop. 
b)  Terrace or Lightwell. 
c)  Dooryard. 
d)  Forecourt. 
e)  Common Lawn. 
f)  Shopfront. 
g)  Gallery. 
h)  Arcade. 
1.  Stoop. 

Definition. A frontage wherein the façade is aligned close to the frontage line and an elevated stoop engages the sidewalk. The first story should be elevated above the sidewalk to secure privacy for the windows. The entrance is usually an exterior stair and landing. This type is recommended for ground-floor residential uses with small setbacks. 
Features. 
a)  The stoop at the door shall be at least four (4) feet deep and at least three (3) feet wide. 
b)  The first story should be elevated a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches above the sidewalk but no more than five (5) feet above the sidewalk. 
c)  Stoops must correspond directly to the building entry(s). 
d)  The stairs from the stoop may lead directly to the sidewalk or may be side loaded. 
e)  Fences, walls or handrails defining the stoop may not exceed a height of thirty (30) inches. 
2.  Terrace or Lightwell. 

Definition. A frontage where in the façade is set back from the frontage line by an elevated terrace or a sunken lightwell. This type buffers residential use from urban sidewalks and removes the private yard from public encroachment. 
Features. 
a)  Sub-basements accessed by a lightwell may not be more than six (6) feet below the adjacent sidewalk. 
b)  Terraces are suitable for conversion to outdoor dining. 
3.  Dooryard. 

Definition. A frontage wherein the façade is set back from the frontage line by an at-grade courtyard. This type buffers residential use from urban sidewalks and removes the private yard from public encroachment. 
Features. 
a)  The dooryard should not be more than twenty (20) feet deep. 
b)  A one-story wall should be used to define the dooryard. 
c)  Large trees within the dooryard may overhang the sidewalk. 
d)  The dooryard is suitable for conversion to outdoor dining. 
e)  This frontage type should be used sparingly and should not be repeated within a block. 
4.  Forecourt. 

Definition. A frontage wherein a portion of the façade is close to the frontage line and a small percentage of it is set back, creating a small court space. The space could be used as an entry court, additional shopping or restaurant seating area, or in some cases as a vehicular drop-off. 
Features. 
a)  The forecourt should be at least fifteen (15) feet wide by ten (10) feet deep. 
b)  The proportions and orientation of these spaces should be carefully considered for solar orientation and user comfort. 
c)  Forecourts with a depth between ten (10) feet and fifteen (15) feet should be substantially paved and enhanced with landscaping. Forecourts larger than this should be designed with a balance of paving and landscaping. 
d)  A one-story fence or wall at the property line may be used to define the private space of the yard. 
e)  Large trees within the forecourt may overhang the sidewalk. 
f)  This frontage type should be used sparingly and should not be repeated within a block. 
5.  Common Lawn. 

Definition. A frontage wherein a group of buildings share a common lawn on a single lot. The frontage has a visual relation to the street and the buildings across the lawn. 
Features. 
a)  The common lawn should feature a common landscape with a minimum width of thirty (30) feet. 
b)  The front buildings should be arranged close to the street. 
c)  The common lawn, or courtyard, should be connected to the public way by a prominent feature such as a zaguan or paseo. The entry may entail a garden or landscape wall. 
d)  This frontage type should be used sparingly and should not be repeated within a block. 
6.  Shopfront. 

Definition. A frontage wherein the façade is aligned close to the frontage line with the building entrance at sidewalk grade. This type is conventional for retail use. 
Features. 
a)  The building frontage should have substantial glazing on the sidewalk level, including large transparent display windows and transom windows. 
b)  The entry may be recessed from the frontage line by up to five (5) feet. 
c)  Awnings may overlap the sidewalk to within two (2) feet of the curb. 
7.  Gallery. 

Definition. A frontage wherein the façade is aligned close to the frontage line with an attached cantilevered shed or a lightweight colonnade overlapping the sidewalk. This type can be one (1) or two (2) stories and is intended for retail uses. The gallery should encroach into or overlap the sidewalk close to the curb so that a pedestrian cannot bypass it. 
Features. 
a)  The entry should be at the same grade as the sidewalk. 
b)  The gallery shall be no less than ten (10) feet wide and should overlap the sidewalk. 
c)  The gallery shall clear the adjacent sidewalk by a minimum height of ten (10) feet. 
d)  The maximum height of the gallery shall be two (2) stories. 
e)  The face of the gallery shall be set back at least one (1) foot but no more than three (3) feet from the curb (except at curb extensions for intersections). 
f)  Columns and arches at the right-of-way should be spaced at least eight (8) feet apart. 
g)  The height and the proportions of the gallery may correspond to the façade consistent with the architectural style of the building. 
h)  The building frontage should have substantial glazing on the sidewalk level, including large transparent display windows and transom windows. 
8.  Arcade. 

Definition. A colonnade supporting habitable space that overlaps the sidewalk, while the façade at sidewalk level remains at or behind the frontage line. This type is intended for retail uses. The arcade should encroach into or overlap the sidewalk close to the curb so that a pedestrian cannot bypass it. 
Features. 
a)  The entry should be at the same grade as the sidewalk. 
b)  The arcade shall be no less than ten (10) feet wide and should overlap the sidewalk. 
c)  The arcade shall clear the adjacent sidewalk by a minimum height of ten (10) feet. 
d)  The face of the arcade shall be set back no more than two (2) feet from the curb (except at curb extensions for intersections). 
e)  Columns and arches at the right-of-way should be spaced at least eight (8) feet apart. 
f)  The height and the proportions of the arcade may correspond to the façade consistent with the architectural style of the building. 
g)  The building frontage should have substantial glazing on the sidewalk level, including large transparent display windows and transom windows. 
5:15.6 Building Type Standards. 
A.  Intent. Building types as used herein are driven primarily by the physical form of the building and secondarily by its use or function. The intent of using building types as a primary means of regulation is to prescribe a fine-grain mix of building types that is necessary to create a great urban form and high-quality place that is not easily accomplished with traditional regulations of floor-area ratio (FAR) and density. 
Consider a high-quality historic neighborhood or town. Inevitably, it will include a fine-grained integration of a variety of building types, often within the same block, that creates the fabric of the community that is so cherished. 
B.  General Standards. 
1.  Architectural Expression. Building walls and facades should have perceivable thickness, visual interest, and character. A selection of architectural details such as vertical and horizontal recesses and projections, changes in height, floor levels, roof forms, parapets, cornice treatments, belt courses, pilasters, window reveals, and forms, and color as appropriate to each site can create shadows and texture and add to the character of the building. 
2.  Exterior Finish Materials. Plain concrete block, plain concrete, corrugated metal, plywood, and sheet pressboard are not allowed as exterior finish materials. 
3.  Horizontal Massing. Buildings are encouraged to incorporate varied massing and design across long facades. Building walls shall be articulated at a minimum of every fifty (50) feet. Articulation may include storefront bays with modulating building elements such as recesses, projections, expressed entries, building form, columns, pilasters, colonnades, arcades, and/or other clearly expressed architectural details. No horizontal section of the building façade shall exceed fifty (50) feet without incorporating visible changes in the façade elevation. 

4.  Vertical Massing. Multi-story buildings shall generally include a base, middle, and cap. The base generally consists of the entryway(s) and large transparent windows. The middle is generally described as the upper stories of a building and typically features windows and/or balconies. The cap includes the area from the top floor to the roof of the building. 
In order to modulate their scale, multi-story buildings shall articulate the base, middle, and cap through the use of expression lines, cornices, string cornices, step-backs, or similar articulating features as follows: 
a)  A horizontal expression line between the base and the middle is vital for reinforcing the pedestrian scale at the adjacent sidewalk. The expression line may entail a molding or reveal placed between the first and second stories or over the second story. The molding or reveal shall have a depth of at least two (2) inches and a height of at least four (4) inches. 
b)  The middle may also utilize expression lines to articulate long vertical sections of the building. 
c)  The cap shall include an expression line consisting of a cornice or a roof overhang. 
Expression lines, including moldings, cornices, and windowsills, shall generally align with those of adjoining buildings. 

5.  Ground Floor Windows and Entryways. The ground floors of all buildings shall be designed to encourage and to complement pedestrian-scale activity by the use of windows and doors arranged so that the uses are visible from and/or accessible to the street. Buildings shall maintain a regular rhythm of storefronts along a block with entrances at least every fifty (50) feet on average. 
All buildings shall have their principal entrance opening to a street, square, plaza, or public sidewalk. Building entrances should be prominent and easy to identify. The principal entrance shall not open onto a parking lot. Pedestrian access from the public sidewalk, street right-of-way, or driveway to the principal structure shall be provided through an improved surface. 
Doors may be recessed into the face of the building to provide a sense of entry and to add variety to the streetscape. Recommended treatments for recessed entries include special paving materials such as ceramic tile, ornamental ceilings such as coffering, and decorative light fixtures. 
At the ground level, at least sixty (60) percent, but not more than ninety (90) percent, of the total surface area of the front elevation shall be in public entrances and windows (including retail display windows). Where windows are used on storefronts, transparent glass shall be used to allow maximum visual interaction between pedestrians and the interior of the building. Ground floor windows on storefronts shall not appear false or applied. 
Windows shall incorporate decorative architectural features such as sills, trim, and lintels. 
The bottom of windows used on storefronts shall be at least twelve (12) inches but not more than thirty-six (36) inches above the grade of the adjacent sidewalk and shall be separated from the ground by a bulkhead. Bulkheads might be a panel of tile or other material that is heavier than the wall materials. 
6.  Upper Story Windows and Doors. For multi-story buildings, upper-story windows, doors and other openings shall make up at least thirty (30) percent, but not more than sixty (60) percent, of the wall surface of the upper stories. 
All windows shall incorporate decorative architectural features such as sills, trim, and lintels. Windows should be inset a minimum of three (3) inches from the exterior wall surface to add visual relief to the wall. 
7.  Awnings and Canopies. Awnings, canopies, and other features that provide shade for pedestrians are strongly encouraged and should be integrally designed with the building. Awnings should fit within enframed storefronts, primarily covering openings such as windows and doors and not extending along the entire façade. 
Awning shape, size, color, and material should be consistent with the architectural style and character of the building. Awnings should be compatible with adjacent awnings. The shape, size, and height of each awning should be proportional to the façade. Awnings shall be made of fabric, metal, glass, or similar durable material. 
Awnings shall clear the adjacent sidewalk by a minimum height of eight (8) feet. 
8.  Height Exceptions. The height limits prescribed herein do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, or domes not used for human habitation, nor to chimneys, ventilators, skylights, parapet walls, cornices, solar energy systems, or necessary mechanical appurtenances usually located on the roof level. 
9.  Roofs. Roof lines should vary and be expressed in a visually interesting manner that complements the composition of the building and the surrounding area. Flat roofs shall incorporate a strong, attractively detailed cornice or parapet. To create a varied roof line, different types of cornices and varied cornice lines are encouraged. Sculpted roof forms shall employ high quality roofing materials. 

10.  Building Lighting. Lighting should be integral to the design of the building. Building lighting should highlight significant architectural features, signs, entrances, walkways, or display windows. Lighting should specifically be provided at building entrances for security purposes. Building lighting is not allowed to flash or blink repeatedly; notwithstanding animation that will not distract motorists in a hazardous manner may be permissible. Acceptable animation may include animation on upper stories or animation not larger than four (4) square feet on the ground story. 
Lighting elements shall exclude those that cast a clearly/perceptively unnatural spectrum of light, such as low pressure sodium. Metal halide or halogen light sources shall be preferred. Fluorescent lights (except compact fluorescent bulbs that screw into standard sockets) shall not be used on the exterior of buildings. 
At the front of the building, exterior lights shall be mounted on the building between seven (7) feet and fourteen (14) feet above the adjacent grade. 
11.  Mechanical Equipment. Mechanical equipment, electrical meter and service components, and similar utility devices, whether ground level, wall-mounted, or roof-mounted, should be located so as to minimize visibility from all streets and public gathering areas. Mechanical equipment and other like appurtenances shall be screened from view at the front property line and any active street side. Exterior screening materials shall be the same as the predominant exterior materials of the principal building. 
12.  Screening. Off-street loading areas, refuse and outdoor storage areas, satellite dishes, and mechanical equipment shall be screened from view at the front property line along blocks that contain buildings that front the public street. The screening shall be a minimum height sufficient to obscure the area or equipment requiring the screening. The screening may be provided by plants, a solid fence or wall, or a combination of walls and plants. 
13.  Surface Parking Lot Design. Surface parking lots shall generally conform to the parking area design requirements, including the size of off-street parking spaces, as prescribed in Section 6:1 of the Mauldin Zoning Ordinance. All parking areas shall be surfaced with asphalt, bituminous, brick, turf block, or concrete material. 
Off-site parking at satellite locations shall be permitted to meet parking requirements herein provided that such parking is no further than one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet from the facility that it serves. 
Surface parking lots shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements of Section 6:2 of the Mauldin Zoning Ordinance. 
14.  Drive-Through Windows. Drive-through services are generally not considered compatible within a mixed-use environment where design is focused on providing a safe and walkable community. Drive-through service windows shall only be permitted when it is deemed that the use will not substantially disrupt pedestrian activity nor interfere with surrounding uses. No drive-through service window, bay, or queuing lane shall be located between the front façade and the right-of-way on the front side of the building. 
C.  Building Types. The following building types are generally inappropriate in the Urban Village district: 
a)  Paired house (duplex) - A structure with two (2) dwelling units placed one (1) beside the other, sharing a common wall. 
b)  Tandem house - Two (2) single-family detached structures that share one (1) platted lot. One (1) unit is typically towards the front of the lot, while the other unit is typically located to the rear of the lot. 
c)  Single-family detached house - One (1) dwelling unit on its own lot, detached from other adjoining lots. 
The following building types are generally acceptable in the Urban Village district: 
a)  Activity-Center Building. 
b)  Prominent Civic Building. 
c)  Small Civic Building. 
d)  Small Commercial Building. 
e)  Stacked Dwelling (Apartment Building). 
f)  Rowhouse. 
g)  Courtyard Housing. 
h)  Parking Structure. 
1.  Activity-Center Building. 

Definition. A structure which may contain a concentration of land uses mixed vertically. It is common for such structures to feature retail on the ground floor with office and/or residential uses on upper floors; however, any mix and arrangement may be considered which promotes appropriate urban activity. 
Features. 
General Lot Size • No min. lot size Setbacks • Front: Max. 0 feet 1 • Side: Max. 10 feet • Rear: Min. 5 feet 2 Height • Min. 2 stories • Max. 10 stories 3 Allowable Frontages • Forecourt • Shopfront • Gallery • Arcade Parking Requirement • 1 space per dwelling unit or lodging bedroom • 2 spaces per 1,000 SF of office or retail 4 Parking Placement • Underground or behind the building 5 Parking Access • Accessed through an alley or a driveway oriented to the rear Location of Services • Along an alley or at least 10 ft. behind the façade and screened from view at the front Ground
Floor Finished Floor Height (Ground) • Max. 6 inches above sidewalk Ceiling Height (Ground Floor) • Min. 12 feet • Max. 20 feet Allowable Land Uses (Ground) • Commercial, office or lodging Main Entrance • Oriented to and facing the street 6 Upper
Stories Ceiling Height (Upper Stories) • Min. 10 feet Allowable Land Uses (Upper) • Commercial, office, residential, lodging or storage  
1  Buildings may be set back further in accordance with frontage types allowed for this building type. Buildings may also be set back further to accommodate wider sidewalks, a plaza or similar courtyard space. 
2  When abutting an alley, the minimum rear setback is zero (0) feet. On all corner lots, the building should be built to the rear property line. 
3  The Board of Appeals may allow additional stories when they determine that the increased building height will not create any adverse effects on adjacent properties. 
4  Where the building fronts on-street parking, parking is only required for office or commercial uses that are in excess of six thousand (6,000) square feet and only for the portion in excess of six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
5  At-grade or above-ground parking is encouraged to be wrapped in active uses. 
6  Entrance to the upper stories above the ground floor shall be through a street level lobby or through a podium lobby accessible from the street. 
2.  Prominent Civic Building. 

Definition. A civic structure located on a prominent community site. Prominent civic structures are allowed more design flexibility, due to their role in the community. 
Features. 
General Lot Size • No min. lot size Setbacks • NA Height • Min. 2 stories • Max. 8 stories Allowable Frontages • NA 1 Parking Requirement • NA Parking Placement • Underground or behind the building Parking Access • Accessed through an alley or a driveway oriented to the rear Location of Services • Along an alley or at least 10 ft. behind the façade and completely screened Ground
Floor Finished Floor Height (Ground) • NA Ceiling Height (Ground Floor) • Min. 15 feet Allowable Land Uses (Ground) • Civic, commercial or office Main Entrance • Oriented to and facing the street 2 Upper
Stories Ceiling Height (Upper Stories) • Min. 10 feet Allowable Land Uses (Upper) • Civic or office  
1  Prominent civic buildings do not have constraints regarding frontage design. 
2  Entrance to the upper stories above the ground floor shall be through a street level lobby or through a podium lobby accessible from the street. 
3.  Small Civic Building 

Definition. A building specifically designed for a civic function. Civic functions are not-for-profit organizations dedicated to religious, cultural, governmental, educational, or recreational objectives. 
Features. 
General Lot Size • Max. lot width 75 feet Setbacks • Front: Max. 0 feet 1 • Side: Max. 10 feet • Rear: Min. 5 feet 2 Height • Min. 2 stories • Max. 5 stories Allowable Frontages • Terrace or lightwell • Dooryard • Forecourt • Stoop • Shopfront • Gallery • Arcade Parking Requirement • 1 space per 1,000 SF of floor area 3 Parking Placement • Underground or behind the building Parking Access • Accessed through an alley or a driveway oriented to the rear Location of Services • Along an alley or at least 10 ft. behind the façade and completely screened Ground
Floor Finished Floor Height (Ground) • Max. 12 inches above sidewalk Ceiling Height (Ground Floor) • Min. 12 feet Allowable Land Uses (Ground) • Civic or office Main Entrance • Oriented to and facing the street 4 Upper
Stories Ceiling Height (Upper Stories) • Min. 10 feet Allowable Land Uses (Upper) • Civic, office or storage  
1  Except as may be permitted at allowable frontage types. 
2  When abutting an alley, the minimum rear setback is zero (0) feet. 
3  Where the building fronts on-street parking, parking is only required for civic uses that are in excess of six thousand (6,000) square feet and only for the portion in excess of six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
4  Entrance to the upper stories above the ground floor shall be through a street level lobby or through a podium lobby accessible from the street. 
4.  Small Commercial Building. 

Definition. A single-use structure with either office or commercial use. The small commercial building is generally one (1) story and has a limited application in the Urban Village district. 
Features. 
General Lot Size • Max. lot width 75 feet Setbacks • Front: Max. 0 feet 1 • Side: Max. 10 feet • Rear: Min. 5 feet 2 Height • Min. 1 stories 3 • Max. 3 stories Allowable Frontages • Dooryard • Shopfront • Gallery • Arcade Parking Requirement • 2 spaces per 1,000 SF of floor area 4 Parking Placement • Underground or behind the building Parking Access • Accessed through an alley or a driveway oriented to the rear Location of Services • Along an alley or at least 10 ft. behind the façade and completely screened Ground
Floor Finished Floor Height (Ground) • Max. 6 inches above sidewalk Ceiling Height (Ground Floor) • Min. 15 feet Allowable Land Uses (Ground) • Commercial or office Main Entrance • Oriented to and facing the street 5 Upper
Stories Ceiling Height (Upper Stories) • Min. 10 feet Allowable Land Uses (Upper) • Commercial, office or storage  
1  Except as may be permitted at allowable frontage types. 
2  When abutting an alley, the minimum rear setback is zero (0) feet. On all corner lots, the building should be built to the rear property line. 
3  Small commercial buildings which only consist of one (1) story shall incorporate clerestory windows along the length of any façade visible from any public right-of-way. 
4  Where the building fronts on-street parking, parking is only required for commercial uses that are in excess of six thousand (6,000) square feet and only for the portion in excess of six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
5  Entrance to the upper stories above the ground floor shall be through a street level lobby or through a podium lobby accessible from the street. 
5.  Stacked Dwelling (Apartment Building). 

Definition. An exclusively residential building comprised of flats and/or dwelling units above or below. This building type may also be used for lodging purposes. 
Features. 
General Lot Size • No min. lot size Setbacks • Front: Max. 0 feet 1 • Side: Max. 10 feet • Rear: Min. 5 feet 2 Height • Min. 2 stories 3 • Max. 8 stories 3 Allowable Frontages • Terrace or lightwell • Dooryard • Forecourt • Shopfront • Arcade Parking Requirement • 1 space per dwelling unit or lodging bedroom Parking Placement • Underground or behind the building 4 Parking Access • Accessed through an alley or a driveway oriented to the rear Location of Services • Along an alley or at least 10 ft. behind the façade and completely screened Ground
Floor Finished Floor Height (Ground) • Max. 3 feet above sidewalk Ceiling Height (Ground Floor) • Min. 12 feet Allowable Land Uses (Ground) • Residential, lodging or office Main Entrance • Oriented to and facing the street 5 Upper
Stories Ceiling Height (Upper Stories) • Min. 8 feet Allowable Land Uses (Upper) • Residential, lodging or storage  
1  Except as may be permitted at allowable frontage types. 
2  When abutting an alley, the minimum rear setback is zero (0) feet. On all corner lots, the building should be built to the rear property line. 
3  The Board of Appeals may allow additional stories when they determine that the increased building height will not create any adverse effects on adjacent properties. 
4  At-grade or above-ground parking is encouraged to be wrapped in active uses. 
5  Entrance to the upper stories above the ground floor shall be through a street level lobby or through a podium lobby accessible from the street. 
6.  Rowhouse. 

Definition. A dwelling unit attached by a common wall to another dwelling unit. A rowhouse is generally a fee-simple unit, from ground to roof, with no units above or below it. These dwellings are typically two- or three-story buildings with zero (0) side yard setbacks. 
Features. 
General Lot Size • Max. unit width 60 feet Setbacks • Front: Max. 0 feet 1 • Side: Max. 10 feet • Rear: Min. 5 feet 2 Height • Min. 2 stories • Max. 5 stories Allowable Frontages 3 • Terrace or lightwell • Dooryard • Stoop Parking Requirement • 1 space per dwelling unit or lodging bedroom Parking Placement • Underground or behind the building Parking Access • Accessed through an alley or a driveway oriented to the rear Location of Services • Along an alley or at least 10 ft. behind the façade and completely screened Ground
Floor Finished Floor Height (Ground) • Max. 5 feet above sidewalk Ceiling Height (Ground Floor) • Min. 10 feet Allowable Land Uses (Ground) • Residential or lodging Main Entrance • Oriented to and facing the street Upper
Stories Ceiling Height (Upper Stories) • Min. 8 feet Allowable Land Uses (Upper) • Residential or lodging  
1  Except as may be permitted at allowable frontage types. 
2  When abutting an alley, the minimum rear setback is zero (0) feet. On all corner lots, the building should be built to the rear property line. 
3  Landscape should not be used to separate a front yard from front yards of adjacent units. 
7.  Courtyard Housing. 

Definition. A group of dwelling units arranged to share one (1) or more common courtyards upon a lot. Dwellings take access from the street or the courtyard(s). The courtyard is intended to be a semi-public space that is an extension of the public realm. 
Features. 
General Lot Size • No min. lot size Setbacks • Front: Max. 10 feet 2 • Side: Max. 10 feet • Rear: Min. 5 feet 3 Height • Min. 2 stories • Max. 5 stories Allowable Frontages 3 • Common lawn Parking Requirement • 1 space per dwelling unit or lodging bedroom Parking Placement • Underground or behind the building Parking Access • Accessed through an alley or a driveway oriented to the rear Location of Services • Along an alley or at least 10 ft. behind the façade and completely screened Ground
Floor Finished Floor Height (Ground) • Max. 4 feet above sidewalk Ceiling Height (Ground Floor) • Min. 10 feet Allowable Land Uses (Ground) • Residential or lodging Main Entrance • Entries oriented toward the courtyard or the street Upper
Stories Ceiling Height (Upper Stories) • Min. 8 feet Allowable Land Uses (Upper) • Residential or lodging  
1  Private patios may be provided in side and rear yards, and in courtyards. 
2  Except as may be permitted at allowable frontage types. 
3  When abutting an alley, the minimum rear setback is zero (0) feet. On all corner lots, the building should be built to the rear property line. 
4  Structures that front the street may incorporate terrace or stoop frontage types. Landscape should not be used to separate a front yard from front yards of adjacent units. 
5  Corner lots shall not have garages that face the side street. 
8.  Parking Structure. 

Definition. Parking spaces and adjacent access drives, aisles, and ramps that are located in a structure. This building type does not include private one-story garages for single-, two-, or multifamily dwellings. 
Features. 
General Lot Size • No min. lot size Setbacks • Front: Max. 10 feet 1 • Side: Max. 10 feet • Rear: Min. 5 feet 2 Height • Min. 2 stories • Max. 6 stories Allowable Frontages 3 • Shopfront • Arcade Parking Requirement • 1 space per dwelling unit or lodging bedroom • 2 spaces per 1,000 SF of office or commercial 3 Parking Placement • Parking structures should be located underground or behind buildings where feasible 4 Parking Access • Accessed through an alley or a driveway oriented to the rear 5 Location of Services • Along an alley or at least 10 ft. behind the façade and completely screened Ground
Floor Finished Floor Height (Ground) • Max. 6 inches above sidewalk Ceiling Height (Ground Floor) • Min. 12 feet • Max. 20 feet Allowable Land Uses (Ground) • Commercial, office, lodging, residential or parking Main Entrance • Oriented to and facing the street 6 Upper
Stories Ceiling Height (Upper Stories) • Min. 10 feet Allowable Land Uses (Upper) • Office, residential, lodging, storage or parking  
1  Buildings may be set back further in accordance with frontage types allowed for this building type. Buildings may also be set back further to accommodate wider sidewalks, landscaping for the purpose of appropriate screening, a plaza or similar courtyard space. 
2  When abutting an alley, the minimum rear setback is zero (0) feet. On all corner lots, the building should be built to the rear property line. 
3  Where the building fronts on-street parking, parking is only required for office or commercial uses that are in excess of six thousand (6,000) square feet and only for the portion in excess of six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
4  At-grade or above-ground parking is encouraged to be wrapped in active uses. Structures should be designed such that views of vehicles inside the structure are concealed from public streets and public spaces. Signage and light sources internal to the parking structure should not be visible from outside the parking structure. 
5  Access should be designed so that conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians are minimized. 
6  Entrance to the upper stories above the ground floor shall be through a street level lobby or through a podium lobby accessible from the street. 
  
Design Standards. 
a)  Parking structures shall conform to commercial building standards and guidelines pertaining to architectural scaling elements and building materials. 
b)  Such structures shall be designed to conceal the view of all parked vehicles and internal light sources from adjacent public right-of-way or public open space for the full height of the structure. 
c)  Façade openings (i.e. doors and windows) which face any public right-of-way or open space shall be horizontally aligned and the floor fronting on such facades shall be level. 
d)  Parking structures should utilize materials and architectural detailing found in the development. 
e)  Parking structures with exposed street frontage in otherwise primarily residential blocks should set back the parking structure façade at least eight (8) feet to accommodate greater landscape screening and to allow greater exposure of residential building corners. 
f)  Exposed parking structures shall provide landscape screening at an average rate of one (1) tree and two (2) shrubs per thirty (30) linear feet of the parking structure's perimeter. 
5:15.7 Signage Standards. 
A.  Intent. Signage is desirable for advertising shops and offices, and as decoration. Signs should be clear, informative to the public, and should weather well. Signs should be scaled to the nature of the location and surrounding architecture. Signage that is glaring or too large creates distraction, intrudes into and lessens the experience within the district, and creates visual clutter. 
B.  Permitted Signs. Signage allowances and requirements in the Urban Village district shall be in accordance with Section 6:4 Signs, in the Mauldin Zoning Ordinance. 
The following signs are permitted within the Urban Village district: 
a)  Wall signs, crown signs, hanging signs, projecting signs, and permanent banner signs. 
b)  Awning and canopy signs. 
c)  Window signs. 
d)  Restaurant menu signs. 
e)  Temporary A-frame signs. 
f)  Directional signs. 
g)  Light pole banner signs. 
Other signs that may be permitted and shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis include: 
a)  Marquee signs. 
b)  Freestanding monument signs. 
c)  Tenant directory signs. 
d)  Wayfinding pedestrian kiosks. 
e)  Murals. 
Where an applicant desires greater creativity in signage beyond the types of signage permitted herein, the applicant may submit a Signage Plan in accordance with Section 6:4.1.16 of the Mauldin Zoning Ordinance. A Signage Plan allows for creativity in the placement and design of signs and may include signs of different sizes, types, location, placement and height from those otherwise enumerated in the sign ordinance. 
1.  Walls Signs, Crown Signs, Hanging Signs, and Projecting Signs. Wall signs, hanging signs, projecting signs, and permanent banner signs should generally be installed above display windows and/or at entryways. The combined size of wall signs, hanging signs, projecting signs, and permanent banner signs shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the surface area of the façade (including windows and doors) that corresponds to the floor or story on which they are installed. The bottom of a hanging sign or a projecting sign shall be located at least eight (8) feet above the adjacent grade. 
a)  Wall Signs. 
i.  Wall signs are to be mounted flush and fixed securely to a building wall, projecting no more than twelve (12) inches from the face of a building wall, and not extending beyond the side of the building face or above the highest line of the building to which it is attached. 
ii.  Wall signs should be located on the upper portion of the ground level storefront, just above the storefront opening, when possible. 
iii.  Upper story tenants with no ground floor presence shall be allowed window signs not exceeding twenty-five (25) percent of each window opening. 
iv.  Neon signs are permitted as wall signs on ground floors. 
b)  Top Story "Crown" Signs. 
i.  As used herein, a "crown" sign is a sign erected parallel to and attached to the exterior façade of the topmost story of a multi-story building. Crown signs are generally, but not always, used to announce the name of the building or the business that occupies the upper floors of the building. 
ii.  Crown signs shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the façade measured from the floor of the uppermost story to the top of the building. No more than one (1) crown sign shall be permitted on each building façade. 
iii.  Crown signs may project above the roofline of the building provided not more than fifty (50) percent of the crown sign shall project above the roofline. 
c)  Hanging Signs and Projecting Signs. 
i.  Hanging signs and projecting signs are affixed to the face of a building or structure and project perpendicular from the wall surface. Decorative metal brackets that support projecting signs are encouraged where feasible. 
ii.  Hanging signs and projecting signs are permitted to encroach into to the right-of-way but shall not project more than four (4) feet from the building. 
iii.  To promote legibility by pedestrians, it is generally better to mount projecting signs and hanging signs below the second floor window sill on multi-storied buildings. 
d)  Permanent Banner Signs. 
i.  Permanent banner signs often help to add interest and color to blank facades and special buildings that front a sidewalk. These signs are a great way to create vibrancy, promote the brand of the store, or add seasonal interest. Banners with unique shapes are encouraged to provide visual interest to a business. These signs are typically permanent in the sense that the brackets to which they are attached are more or less permanent. The banners themselves may be exchanged at various intervals. 
ii.  Permanent banners should be oriented vertically and be mounted perpendicular to the façade. These signs are allowed on building facades built to the property line provided such banners do not adversely impact pedestrian or vehicular access. 
iii.  Banners installed more than eight (8) feet above the sidewalk shall be secured to brackets installed at the top and bottom of the banner. Such banners are permitted to encroach into the right-of-way but shall not project more than four (4) feet from the building. 
iv.  Banners installed less than eight (8) feet above the sidewalk shall be secured to a bracket installed at the top of the banner. Such banners shall be weighted at the bottom. Such banners are permitted to encroach into the right-of-way but shall not project more than eighteen (18) inches from the building. 
e)  Flags. 
i.  Flags which bear the official design or insignia of a government, educational institution, church, fraternal, or corporate organization are permissible herein. Flags which are ornamental in nature are also permissible. Flags which are erected for commercial purposes shall be prohibited. 
2.  Awning and Canopy Signs. 
a)  Awning and canopy signs are signs that are printed on, or attached to, an awning or canopy above a business door or window. They generally serve to bring color and shade to a pedestrian environment. 
b)  For better legibility, it is recommended that the lettering color should contract with the background color. 
c)  Awnings should be designed with individual awnings for each window and door opening rather than a single awning extending over multiple window openings or masonry piers or arches. Notwithstanding, a single awning may be permitted to extend over fully operable storefront sections and/or café areas. 
3.  Window Signs. 
a)  Window signs are signs that are painted, posted, displayed, affixed, or etched on an interior translucent or transparent surface, including windows or doors. 
b)  Signs on the interior of window glass shall not cover more than twenty-five (25) percent of the window. 
4.  Restaurant Menu Signs. 
a)  Restaurant menu signs are signs that are typically associated with the incorporation of a menu containing a listing of products and/or prices offered by the business. Such signs are not required, but are generally permissible and encouraged. 
b)  Restaurant menu signs may be appropriately illuminated. They should be located in a permanently mounted display box on the surface of the building adjacent to the entry. 
5.  Temporary A-Frame Signs. 
a)  A-frame/sandwich board signs are portable signs that usually consist of two (2) boards hinged together at the top. When displayed, this type of sign generally forms a shape similar to an "A" and is able to stand by itself. The hinge at the top of the sign enables to the sign to fold/collapse into a flat object that can be more easily transported. 
b)  A-frame signs are permitted immediately in front of the applicable business, along its store front. Generally, these signs should be placed within or adjacent to the entry area without obstructing the accessible route. Such signs shall not be placed at street corners or in front of other businesses. 
c)  A-frame sign bases shall be properly weighted with weight elements incorporated into the overall design of the sign to ensure stability in windy conditions. Use of improvised measures (e.g., concrete blocks, sand bags, etc.) to secure or stabilize signs are prohibited. 
d)  A-frame signs shall not be permanently affixed to any structure or sidewalk and must be removed from the public right-of-way at the end of each business day. 
e)  The maximum signage area on any A-frame sign is six (6) square feet. The maximum height of the frame of any A-frame sign is four (4) feet. The maximum width of the frame of any A-frame sign is two (2) feet. 
6.  Directional Signs. 
a)  Directional signs, to direct traffic flow and mark entrances and exits, shall be permitted on private property. Directional signs may be mounted on posts affixed to the ground. 
b)  The sign face area of directional signs shall not exceed a size of four (4) square feet. Directional signs shall not exceed a height of three (3) feet above the ground. 
7.  Light Pole Banners. 
a)  Light pole banner signs are banners attached to brackets mounted to freestanding light poles. The mount structure or hardware shall support both the top and the bottom of each banner. The mounting structure or hardware shall be similar color as the light pole and shall be positioned below the light arm or light fixture. 
b)  Each light pole banner shall not exceed a size of twelve (12) square feet. Not more than one (1) light pole banner sign shall be attached to a single light pole; notwithstanding, two (2) light pole banner signs of identical size may be mounted at the same height on the same light pole. 
c)  Light pole banners that are erected along the same street or in the same vicinity shall generally be consistent with one (1) another in terms of banner size and the mounting height of each banner. 
8.  Marquee Signs. 
a)  Marquee signs are wall or projecting signs attached to or supported by a permanent canopy often made of metal or glass. Marquee signs are to be installed only on buildings occupied by theaters, cinemas, performing arts, athletic, or similar recreational or cultural facilities and shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. 
b)  Marquee signs shall be appropriate in size, location, and design to the scale and character of the building. 
9.  Freestanding Monument Signs. 
a)  Monument signs are freestanding signs with a lower profile. Such signs are typically used for buildings that are separated from adjacent streets by substantial setbacks. Monument signs shall generally have a limited application in the Urban Village district and should only be used when other alternative types of signage would not provide adequate identification. Requests for installation of a monument sign shall be on a case-by-case basis. 
b)  When a freestanding monument sign is deemed warranted, it shall only be permitted on private property and shall not overhang or encroach onto public property or a dedicated street right-of-way. 
c)  Monument signs shall entail a solid base on the ground constructed of brick, stone, or other comparable material. The length of the base of the monument sign shall encompass the entire length of the sign. 
d)  Monument signs shall generally not exceed a size one hundred fifty (150) square feet nor a height of sixteen (16) feet. However, monument signs oriented to an interstate highway may be permitted to exceed these limits in accordance with Section 6:4.1.13 of the Mauldin Zoning Ordinance. 
10.  Tenant Directory Signs. 
a)  Tenant directory signs are used to identify multi-tenant buildings and businesses that do not have direct frontage on a public street. Tenant directory signs shall be constructed and oriented to the pedestrian. Such signs shall be mounted flat against a wall, project from the wall, or be incorporated into a monument sign. Freestanding directory signs shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. 
11.  Wayfinding Pedestrian Kiosks. 
a)  Wayfinding pedestrian kiosks are freestanding structures upon which wayfinding information for pedestrians is depicted. The theme, style, and placement for such signage and structures is typically planned and coordinated throughout a given district. 
12.  Murals. 
a)  A mural is a large picture painted directly on the side of a building whose content, generally, should reflect a cultural, historic or environmental event or subject matter related to the development. Murals are valuable additions to Urban Villages that can enhance architecturally stark building facades and provide visual interest. Murals will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. 
b)  The material a mural is placed on shall be durable and resistant to weather. 
c)  Murals using advertising content, containing logos, or commercial messages are regulated as wall signs and are subject to the same standards as wall signs. 
C.  Sign Illumination. Signs may be externally illuminated (e.g., spot lighting) provided that the light source is shielded so as to prevent glare and overspill. The source of the light shall be located and directed in such a manner that the light is not directly visible from any public street or private residence. 
Cabinet signs illuminated through internal lighting shall be prohibited. Notwithstanding, internal lighting shall be permitted for reverse channel letter signage or where back-lighting is used to create reverse-lighting or halo-lighting. 
D.  Prohibited Signs. Unless specifically permitted herein, signs listed as prohibited in Section 6:4.1.6 of the Mauldin Zoning Ordinance shall also be prohibited in the Urban Village district. Additionally, signs not specifically identified among the permitted signs for the Urban Village district shall generally be prohibited unless included in an approved Signage Plan in accordance with Section 6:4.1.16 of the Mauldin Zoning Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 845 , amd. 1, 4-16-2018) 
Sec. 5:16 - Residential-Office (R-O) District. 
5:16.1 Purpose and Findings. 
The Residential-Office (R-O) District is established to promote and accommodate residential uses and offices, including live/work units, in areas that are not exclusively residential or nonresidential by nature. Although nonresidential uses may be permitted, the intent of this district is preserve the residential character of the area through careful attention to the scale and form of development. Furthermore, it is the intent of this district to discourage uses that generate excessive traffic or other activity that would be largely incompatible with the residential nature of the district. 
5:16.2 Uses Permitted. 
Detached, Single-Family 
Temporary Uses and Structures (as defined in accordance with Article 9) 
Offices or similar establishments for the following types of services: 
Accounting, tax, bookkeeping, and payroll services 
Advertising, marketing, and media services 
Architectural, engineering, and related services 
Business support services 
Catering services 
Counseling and similar social assistance services 
Design services including graphic, fashion, and interior design 
Employment services 
Financial investment management or advisement services 
Information technology, computer software, and similar services 
Insurance-related services 
Investigation and security services 
Legal services 
Management services 
Office and administrative services 
Personal care services including hair, nail, and skin care 
Photographers, artists, and artisans 
Publishing, broadcasting, and recording services 
Real estate services 
Research and development services 
Translation and interpretation services 
Travel arrangement and reservation services 
Wedding and party planning services 
Uses and structures which are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted principal uses and structures 
In addition to the permitted uses above, the Business and Development Services Director may approve similar uses not otherwise listed herein or elsewhere in this Ordinance. 
5:16.3 Uses Permitted by Special Exception. 
The following uses are permitted upon review by the Building and Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the procedures established in Article 4 and the Special Exception standards outlined in Article 7 of this Ordinance: 
Assisted Living Facilities 
Golf Course (including a Clubhouse and other associated accessory uses) 
Group/Family Care Home 
Library 
Private Recreation Area 
Public Administration Building 
Public Parks Playgrounds, Recreational Facilities and Uses 
Public Safety Facility 
Schools: Public, Parochial, and Private 
5:16.4 Conditional Uses. 
The following uses are permitted by Conditional Use in accordance with the provisions of Article 10 of this Ordinance: 
Accessory Apartment 
Accessory Structure 
Adult Day Care Center 
Adult Day Care Home 
Child Day Care Center 
Child Day Care Home 
Dwelling, Attached Single-Family 
Dwelling, Two-Family (Duplex) 
Home Occupation 
Places of Worship 
5:16.5 Development Standards Table. 
Table 5.4.4 Table of Dimensional Standards for Residential Zone:
Residential-Office (R-O) District District
and Use Min. Lot
Area
(sq. ft.)
[1] Min. Lot Width (ft.)
[2] Minimum Required Setbacks [3] Max. Height (ft.) Front
(ft.) Side
(ft.) Rear
(ft.) Side/rear
(ft.)
Accessory Structures Corner
side Dwelling, Detached Single-Family 6,000 40 20 8 15 5 1/2 of 
front setback 35 Dwelling, Two-family (Duplex) 7,500 40 20 8 15 5 1/2 
of front setback 35 Non-residential uses 8,000 40 20 15 20 10 15 35 [1] Areas within a designated public right-of-way shall not be used to calculate compliance with the minimum lot size requirements. [2] Minimum lot width shall be measured at the setback line, not the public right-of-way or edge of pavement for private drives. In cases where a lot is bound by two (2) or more streets, the minimum lot width is only required at the setback line for the front yard. [3] Conditional Uses: When more than one (1) setback or other design standard applies, the most restrictive standard shall be met as provided for in Article 10.  
  
5:16.6 Front Setback Reduction. 
In areas where buildings have been built closer to the road than the current setback requirement, the minimum front yard setback requirement may be reduced to the average front building line along the street. 
This calculation shall typically just use the adjoining lot on each side of the subject property. However, where there is no building on the adjoining lot or when the Business and Development Services Director determines that the front building line on an adjoining lot is inconsistent with the pattern of the surrounding neighborhood, the average front building line of the lots on the same side of the street as the subject property for the entire length of the block may be used as the minimum front yard setback requirement for the purpose of considering a reduction. 
5:16.7 Live/work Arrangements. 
Properties or buildings shall be permitted to be used jointly for residential and nonresidential purposes in a live/work arrangement provided the following standards are followed: 
A.  The nonresidential use or activity is a permitted use within the zoning district; 
B.  The residential occupant is the owner of the on-site business, or an employee of the on-site business, and that person's household; 
C.  No portion of the live/work unit may be rented or sold separately; and 
D.  The building and site shall meet the standards of the nonresidential design requirements of this zoning district. 
Nonresidential uses or activities that are permitted within this zoning district shall not be subject to the home occupation standards of Article 10. 
5:16.8 Nonresidential and Live/Work Unit Design Requirements. 
A.  Roof Design. Any new roof shall reflect the traditional character of the neighborhood. The roof shall be a type that is commonly found in the surrounding district as determined by the Business and Development Services Director. 
B.  Open Space. In order to protect the residential form of this district, open space shall be provided at a rate of 20 percent of the total area of the subject property. 
Land used for open space shall be landscaped and permanently maintained with trees, shrubs, indigenous plants and ground cover. Acceptable open space may include natural areas, greenways, playgrounds, plazas, courtyards, greens, and community gardens. 
C.  Driveway Design. In order to create a safe environment for both vehicles and pedestrians, the width of the driveway on a nonresidential property within this district shall not exceed 27 feet throughout the right-of-way and the required streetscape buffer, except for driveways at facilities for emergency response vehicles. 
D.  Parking Location. In order to protect the residential character of this district, parking is encouraged to be located behind the building. Any parking area that contains more than five (5) parking spaces and is not located behind the building shall be screened from the view of any public or private right(s)-of-way and from any adjacent residential use. Such screening shall be accomplished through the use of evergreen plant materials, fences, walls, or a combination thereof. The height of such screening shall be at least five (5) feet above the grade of the parking area. 
E.  Parking Area Surface Material. Parking areas shall generally be surfaced with asphalt, bituminous, brick, turf block, or concrete material to minimize nuisance from dust. 
Parking areas that do not contain more than ten (10) parking spaces may be surfaced with stone or pebble aggregate where geosynthetics, or similar stabilizers, are utilized to reinforce the aggregate and provide stabilization, separation, and confinement of the parking area. The type and the size of the aggregate shall be acceptable to the Fire Marshal and shall not give rise to dust and debris. Each parking space shall be clearly marked with a concrete wheel stop or similar means. 
Handicap accessible parking spaces and associated accessible routes shall be surfaced with a smooth, hard material such as asphalt, bituminous, brick, turf block, or concrete. 
F.  Building Orientation. In order to protect the residential character of this district, the main entrance of each principal building shall face the adjacent street. On corner lots, the main entrance may face either of the streets or be oriented to the corner. For buildings that have more than one main entrance, only one entrance must meet this requirement. 
G.  Outdoor Storage and Display. The outdoor display or storage of goods and products shall be strictly prohibited. 
H.  Prohibited Activities. The retail sale of food and/or beverages to customer arriving on-site is strictly prohibited. This does not include online (Internet) sales, mail order, or catering preparation. 
( Ord. No. 882 , amd. 1, 1-22-2019) 
ARTICLE 6. - DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 6:1 - Off-Street Parking Requirements. 
The intent of this section is to allow flexible methods of providing an adequate number of parking and loading spaces, while creating a more pedestrian-oriented community, meeting parking demands for certain types of developments, and reducing excessive paved surfaces which lead to unnecessary heat buildup and stormwater runoff. 
Off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of this section shall apply to the following: Any new building constructed, changes of use, or at the time any principal building is enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, additional tenant spaces, adding seats, or floor area; or before conversion of one (1) type of use of occupancy to another. In addition, accessible parking for disabled persons shall be verified on all re-striping and re-surfacing projects. 
6:1.1.1 Parking Compliance Review Requirements. 
A Zoning Permit and site plan shall be submitted in accordance with subsection 6:1.1.3 showing the parking lot design layout including: ingress and egress to the site, the required number of off-street parking and accessible parking spaces and accessible routes for disabled persons, and parking lot aisle widths. This information shall be sufficient to enable the Business and Development Services Director (and their appointed designee) to determine whether or not the requirements of this section are met. 
6:1.1.2 Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirement. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated in this chapter, off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with Table 6:1.1.2(A). Uses that reference "Director Approved Parking" (DAP) are considered to have widely varying parking and loading demand characteristics, making it difficult to specify a single off-street parking or loading standards. Parking for these uses shall be determined by the Business and Development Services Director in accordance with [subsection] 6:1.1.2(B). 
A.  Off-street Parking Requirements. 
Table 6:1.1.2(A) : Off-street Parking Requirements [1]Use Category Use Type Minimum Spaces Required Maximum Spaces Allowed Square footage refers to total gross floor area RESIDENTIAL USES Multiple-family dwelling 1.5 per dwelling unit See DAP Household living uses specifically for elderly or handicapped residents 0.5 per dwelling unit See DAP All other household living uses 2 per dwelling unit See DAP Group living Boarding house 2 plus 1 for each bedroom rented See DAP All other group living uses 1 per each 2 beds 1 per each bed Live/work All live/work arrangements 2 per unit plus 1 accessible parking space See DAP PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USES Community service Library, museum 1 per 1,000 square feet See DAP All other community service uses 1 per 500 square feet 1 per 250 square feet Day care Day care center 1 per 375 square feet 1 per 250 square feet Group day care home 2 plus requirement for principal use See DAP Preschool, Child Care Centers 1 per 375 square feet 1 per 250 square feet Educational facilities Business school 1 per 200 square feet 1 per 150 square feet College or university 1 per 200 square feet See DAP School, public or private .5 per classroom plus 1 per 5 students for high schools See DAP Trade school 1 per 200 square feet 1 per 150 square feet Government facilities Emergency response facility See DAP See DAP Maintenance, storage, and distribution facility 1 per 1,000 square feet See DAP Post office 1 per 300 square feet See DAP Health care facilities [3] Hospital 1 per 400 square feet See DAP Medical facility, other than hospital 1 per 600 square feet 1 per 150 square feet Institutions Places of Worship and other Religious Institutions [1] 1 per 6 permanent seats in the main sanctuary 1 per 3 seats in the main sanctuary All other institutions 0.3 per bed plus 1 per employee See DAP Parks and open areas All uses See DAP See DAP Utilities Communication tower None See DAP Utility, major utility, minor 1 per 1,500 square feet See DAP COMMERCIAL USES Eating establishments Restaurant, with drive-through 1 per 150 square feet of customer service area plus vehicle stacking spaces 
(See subsection 6:1.1.5) 1 per 100 square feet of customer service area plus vehicle stacking spaces 
  
(See subsection 6:1.1.5) Restaurant with no seating 1 per 200 square feet 1 per 100 square feet All other eating establishment uses 1 per 100 square feet [2] 1 per 100 square feet Offices Radio or TV broadcasting studio 1 per 400 square feet See DAP Other offices 1 per 600 square feet 1 per 150 square feet Outdoor entertainment All uses 1 per 5,000 square feet of land area, or one per three persons capacity (maximum), whichever is greater See DAP Retail sales 
and services Bank, financial institution, or ATM 1 per 500 square feet plus vehicle stacking spaces for automated banking 
(See subsection 6:1.1.5) 1 per 200 square feet plus vehicle stacking spaces 
(See subsection 6:1.1.5) Convention and exhibition hall See DAP See DAP Civic club 1 per 300 square feet See DAP Convenience store 1 per 200 square feet plus vehicle stacking spaces for gasoline service 
(See subsection 6:1.1.5) 1 per 100 square feet plus vehicle stacking spaces for gasoline service 
(See subsection 6:1.1.5) Department or discount store, exceeding 25,000 gross square feet 1 per 650 square feet 1 per 250 square feet Event venue See DAP See DAP Grocery store 1 per 650 square feet 1 per 250 square feet Health club or spa 1 per 250 square feet See DAP Indoor entertainment facility 1 per 3 fixed seats, or one per 300 square feet, whichever is greater See DAP Kennel or veterinary clinic 1 per 600 square feet See DAP Landscape nursery See DAP See DAP Nightclub or bar 1 per 100 square feet [2] See DAP Funeral home, mortuary 1 per 4 seats in main assembly room See DAP Photography, art, dance studio or gallery 1 per 400 square feet 1 per 200 square feet Personal services, all other uses 1 per 500 square feet 1 per 250 square feet Prefabricated building display and sales See DAP See DAP Retail sales and services, all other uses 1 per 500 square feet 1 per 250 square feet Shopping center 1 per 650 square feet [2] 1 per 250 square feet Self-service storage All uses 1 per 20 storage units 1 per 10 storage units Vehicle sales and service Automobile sales and rental 1 per each 7,000 square feet of outdoor display sales area, plus 1 per 250 square feet of interior display and office areas 1 per each 5,000 square feet of outdoor display sales area, plus 1 per 250 square feet of interior display and office areas Automobile repair and service 1 per 300 square feet See DAP Automobile wash and detailing 1 per 500 square feet of sales, office, or lounge area, plus vehicle stacking spaces 
(See subsection 6:1.1.5) See DAP Recreational vehicle rental and sales See DAP See DAP Towing service 1 per 500 square feet plus 1 space per 4,000 square feet of outdoor storage area See DAP Truck or trailer rental See DAP See DAP Visitor accommodations Bed and breakfast inn 0.5 per guest room plus two for permanent residence 1 per guest room plus two for permanent residence Hotel or motel 0.75 per guest room, plus 1 per 800 square feet of conference and restaurant space 1 per guest room, plus 1 per 400 square feet of conference and restaurant space SERVICE AND INDUSTRIAL USES Industrial services All uses See DAP See DAP Manufacturing and production All uses 1 per 2 employees on shift of greatest employment See DAP Warehouse, distribution and freight movement All uses 1 per 2 employees on shift of greatest employment See DAP Waste-related services All uses See DAP See DAP Wholesale sales All uses 1 per 1,500 square feet See DAP [1] The more restrictive parking standard shall apply for Special Exception uses. 
  
[2] Shopping centers located on land contiguous to residentially-zoned land: When the gross floor area of eating establishments and/or nightclubs/bars exceeds 25 percent of the gross floor area of the shopping center, the minimum parking requirement shall be prorated and adjusted upward based on the area of eating establishments and/or nightclubs/bars in the shopping center. 
  
[3] Medical Facilities: Certain Medical Facilities require additional accessible parking spaces. Refer to subsection 6:1.1.2(E). Accessible parking for disabled persons.  
B.  Director Approved Parking Requirements. Uses that reference "DAP" have widely varying parking and loading demand characteristics, making it difficult to specify a single off-street parking or loading standard. Upon receiving a development application for a use subject to alternate parking standards, the Business and Development Services Director shall apply the off-street parking and loading standard specified for the listed use that is deemed most similar to the proposed use or may establish minimum off-street parking requirements on the basis of: 1) Parking Standard Practices provided for in the American Planning Association Planning Advisory Guide for, "Parking Standards"; or 2) a parking and loading study prepared by the applicant. This study shall include estimates of parking demand based on recommendations of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), or other acceptable estimates as approved by the Director, and should include other reliable data collected from uses or combinations of uses that are the same as or comparable with the proposed use. Comparability will be determined by density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity, and location. The study shall document the source of data used to develop the recommendations. 
C.  Other Parking Alternatives. The Director may approve alternatives to providing the number of off-street parking spaces required by subsection 6:1.1.2(A), in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Shared parking. The Director may approve shared parking facilities for developments or uses with different operating hours or different peak business periods if the shared parking complies with all of the following standards: 
a)  Location. If located off-site, the shared parking spaces must be located within 500 feet of the primary entrance of all uses served, unless remote parking shuttle bus service is provided. 
b)  Shared parking study. A shared parking study that clearly demonstrates the feasibility of shared parking shall be submitted to the Director. The study must address, at a minimum, the size and type of the proposed development, the composition of tenants, the anticipated rate of parking turnover, and the anticipated peak parking and traffic loads for all uses that will be sharing off-street parking spaces. 
c)  Overlap in hours of operation. Based on the review of the Shared Parking Study the Director shall be authorized to grant approval of shared parking amounts. 
d)  Agreement for shared parking. A shared parking plan (where the minimum required parking spaces are provided off-site) will be enforced through written agreement among all owners of record and submitted to the Director for review. The agreement must be recorded with the country register of deeds before issuance of a building and/or zoning permit for any use to be served by the shared parking area. 
2.  Remote off-site parking. The Director may approve the location of required off-street parking spaces on a separate lot from the lot on which the principal use is located if the off-site parking complies with all of the following standards: 
a)  Ineligible activities. Remote off-site parking may not be used to satisfy the required off-street parking standards for residential uses (except for guest parking), convenience stores, or other convenience-oriented uses. Required parking spaces for persons with disabilities shall not be located off-site. 
b)  Location. No off-site parking space may be located more than five hundred (500) feet from the primary entrance of the use served unless remote parking shuttle bus service is provided. Remote off-site parking spaces may not be separated from the use served by a street wider than three (3) lanes, unless a grade-separated pedestrian walkway, or other traffic control or remote parking shuttle bus service, is provided. 
c)  Agreement for Remote off-site parking. In the event that an off-site parking area is not under the same ownership as the principal use served, a written agreement between the record owners will be required. The agreement must guarantee the use of the off-site parking area for at least ten (10) years. An attested copy of the agreement between the owners of record must be submitted to the Director for review and approval. Recordation of the agreement must take place before issuance of a building and/or zoning permit or certificate of occupancy for any use to be served by the off-site parking area. No use shall be continued if the parking is removed unless substitute parking facilities are provided, and the Director shall be notified at least (sixty) 60 days prior to the termination of a lease for off-site parking. 
3.  Other eligible alternatives. The Director may approve other alternatives to providing off-street parking spaces on the site of the subject development if the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the administrator that the proposed plan will protect surrounding neighborhoods, preserve historic or heritage trees, maintain traffic circulation patterns, and promote quality urban design to at least the same extent as would strict compliance with otherwise applicable off-street parking standards. 
D.  Computation of Parking Requirements. 
1.  Fractions. When measurements of the number of required spaces result in a fractional number, any fraction of less than one-half (1/2) shall be rounded down to the next lower whole number and any fraction of one-half (1/2) or more shall be rounded up to the next higher whole number. 
2.  Multiple uses. Except as provided in subsection 6:1.1.2(E), Accessible Parking, lots containing more than one (1) use must provide parking and loading in an amount equal to the total of the requirements for all uses. 
3.  Gross floor area. With regard to the parking standards in this section, square footage refers to the gross floor area of a building, excluding designated mechanical rooms, and warehouse and storage space which is accessory to the primary use. 
4.  Parking for unlisted uses. Parking requirements for uses not specifically listed in Table 6:1.1.2(A) shall be determined by the Director based on the provisions of Director Approved Parking Requirements in subsection 6:1.1.2(B). 
E.  Accessible parking for disabled persons. A portion of the total number of provided off-street parking spaces in each off-street parking area or facility shall be specifically designated, located, and reserved for the use by persons with physical disabilities. Accessible parking required by this section shall count towards the fulfillment of the general off-street parking requirements of Table 6:1.1.2(A). 
1.  Number of required accessible spaces. One (1) of every six (6) accessible parking spaces, or fraction thereof, must be "van-accessible." For example: A parking lot with four hundred (400) total spaces needs eight (8) accessible spaces, and two (2) of those eight (8) spaces must be van-accessible. The number and type of accessible parking spaces shall be as follows: 
Total Number of Parking Spaces Provided in Parking Facility
(per facility) (Column A)
 
Minimum Number of Accessible Parking Spaces
(car and van) Minimum Number of Van-Accessible Parking Spaces
(1 of six accessible spaces) 1 to 25 1 1 26 to 50 2 1 51 to 75 3 1 76 to 100 4 1 101 to 150 5 1 151 to 200 6 1 201 to 300 7 2 301 to 400 8 2 401 to 500 9 2 500 to 1000 2% of total parking provided in each lot or structure 1/6 of Column A* 1001 and over 20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1000 1/6 of Column A* *one out of every 6 accessible spaces 
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN MEDICAL FACILITIES: 
Hospital outpatient facilities: 10% of patient/visitor spaces to be accessible 
Rehabilitation and outpatient Physical Therapy Facilities: 20% of patient/visitor spaces to be accessible  
2.  Location of accessible parking spaces. Accessible parking spaces must be located on the shortest accessible route of travel to an accessible facility entrance. Where buildings have multiple accessible entrances with adjacent parking, the accessible parking spaces must be dispersed and located closest to the accessible entrances. 
3.  Space Identification and Marking. Parking space identification shall include: pavement marking with the International Symbol of Accessibility, striping of the accessible aisle and installation of ADA compliant signage mounted so that the lower edge of the sign is at least five (5) feet (sixty (60) inches) above the ground. 
4.  Surface. The surface of accessible spaces and access aisles must be smooth, stable, and comply with slope and cross slope requirements to ensure safe use for people with disabilities, including those who must load, unload, and use wheeled mobility devices. 
5.  Van-accessible spaces, their associated access aisles, and the vehicular routes serving them must provide vertical clearance of at least ninety-eight (98) inches to allow for the height of typical wheelchair lift-equipped vehicles. 

6:1.1.3 Parking Design and Location Standards. 
The following design standards shall apply to all parking lots: 
A.  Surfacing and maintenance. All required parking and vehicular driving surfaces shall be graded for drainage in accordance with the Land Development Regulations. All parking and vehicular driving surfaces required pursuant to minimum spaces required in Table 6:1.1.2(A) shall be surfaced with concrete or asphalt concrete pavement except as required or allowed in subsections 6:1.1.3(B) and (C) of this section. All surfaces shall be maintained in sound condition free of weeds, dust, trash, and debris. 
B.  Overflow parking. All parking areas above the maximum number of spaces required in Table 6:1.1.2(A) are considered as overflow parking and shall be turf or an approved pervious paving system. Turf may be used for parking areas and vehicular driving surfaces only for parking areas which are designed not to be used more than ten (10) times per year or for storage lots which generate less than thirty (30) average daily trips. Overflow parking areas shall also be subject to the parking lot landscape requirements of subsection 6:2.2(E), Landscape Requirements. 
C.  Paving exemption for assembly uses. The Director may waive the paving requirement for up to fifty (50) percent of the required parking spaces and vehicular driving surfaces for assembly uses (religious institutions, sports facilities, and the like). The waiver may be granted only if evidence is presented to the administrator that these parking spaces and vehicular driving surfaces will be used less than five (5) times per week and are not required for access by emergency vehicles. Parking areas for which paving is waived shall maintain a turf surface and be constructed with proper drainage. 
D.  Markings. All paved parking spaces shall be identified by surface markings and shall be maintained in a manner so as to be readily visible at all times. Such markings shall be arranged to provide for orderly and safe loading, unloading, parking, and storage of vehicles. All striping shall be marked with four-inch lines. 
E.  Backing movements prohibited. All off-street parking spaces and driveways, with the exception of parking areas for one-family and two-family detached dwellings, shall be arranged to require ingress and egress from the lot to a public street by forward motion of the vehicle. For single-family and two-family residences only, driveways may be used to satisfy minimum off-street parking requirements, provided that sufficient space is available to satisfy the minimum design standards. 
F.  Overhang protection. Wheel or bumper guards or curbing shall be provided, located and arranged so that no part of any parked vehicle will extend beyond the boundaries of the parking space and into a pedestrian area, landscape area or beyond the property line of the site. 
G.  Dimensions of parking stalls and driveways. All required parking spaces shall be designed to comply with the following minimum standards of Table 6:1.1.3(G): 
Table 6:1.1.3(G): Standards for Parking Stalls

 
ALL DIMENSIONS REFERENCED ARE IN FEETParking Width of Stall Minimum Depth of Stall Driveway Width 45 degree 9 20 12 feet-one way 60 degree 9 20 15 feet for one-way 90 degree 9 18 12 feet for one-way 
  
24 feet for two-way Parallel 8 20 12 feet for one-way  

6:1.1.4 Off-Street Loading Requirements. 
Unless otherwise approved by the Director, an area shall be provided for loading and unloading delivery vehicles for all institutions, businesses or industries. The spaces shall be arranged so that no vehicle will be required to back onto a public street or way and so that vehicles may maneuver for loading and unloading entirely within the property lines of the premises. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided in the following numbers: 
A.  Commercial uses. Each use shall provide one (1) loading space, measuring ten (10) feet by twenty-five (25) feet with overhead clearance of fourteen (14) feet, for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof. 
B.  Service and industrial uses. Each use shall provide loading spaces that measure ten (10) feet by fifty (50) feet with overhead clearance of fourteen (14) feet, based on the gross floor area as shown below: 
Square Feet of Gross Floor Area in Structure Number of Berths 0-25,000 1 25,000-50,000 2 50,001-100,000 3 100,001-150,000 4 150,001-200,000 5 Each 100,000 above 200,000 1 additional  
C.  Computation of Loading Requirements. 
1.  Fractions. When measurements of the number of required spaces result in a fractional number, any fraction of less than one-half (1/2) shall be rounded down to the next lower whole number and any fraction of one-half (1/2) or more shall be rounded up to the next higher whole number. 
2.  Multiple uses. Lots containing more than one (1) use must provide loading in an amount equal to the total of the requirements for all uses. 
6:1.1.5 Vehicle queuing and stacking spaces. 
The vehicle queuing and stacking standards of this section shall apply unless otherwise expressly approved by the Director. 
A.  Minimum number of spaces. Off-street queuing spaces shall be provided as follows: 
Table 6:1.1.5(A): Vehicle Queuing Areas for Drive-thru FacilitiesActivity Type Minimum Queuing Spaces Measured From Bank teller lane, Pharmacy Drive-thru 4 Teller or window Automated teller machine (ATM) 3 Teller machine Restaurant drive-through 4 Order box Car wash stall, automatic 6 Entrance Car wash stall, self-service 3 Entrance Gasoline Service Stations 4 To Pump Other Uses As Determined by Director as needed  

B.  Design and layout. Required queuing spaces are subject to the following design and layout standards: 
1.  Size. Queuing spaces shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet by twenty (20) feet in size. 
2.  Location. Queuing spaces may not impede on-site or off-site traffic movements or movements into or out of off-street parking spaces. 
3.  Design. Queuing spaces shall be separated from other internal driveways by raised medians if deemed necessary by the Director for traffic movement and safety. 
6:1.1.6 Channelized automobile storage. 
Channelization designs for parking structures are exempt from these standards. Unless otherwise provided for by SCDOT, all other parking lot entrances from public rights-of-way shall provide the minimum channelized automobile storage space as follows: 
Table 6:1.1.6(A): Channelized Automobile StorageParking Lot Size in Spaces Channelized Storage Less than 50 spaces 20 feet 50-250 45 feet More than 250 75 feet  

( Ord. No. 833 , amd. 1, 9-18-2017; Ord. No. 882 , amd. 2, 1-22-2019) 
Sec. 6:2. - Landscape and Design Standards. 
6:2.1 Purpose and Intent. Recognizing that trees and landscaping contribute to the public health, safety and welfare, the City of Mauldin has set standards for landscaping in the city. Among the benefits of trees, shrubs, and other plant materials are: improved air quality, beneficial climate modification, reduction of glare, noise, odors and dust; improved water quality and reduction of stormwater runoff and flooding, screening of undesirable views, provision of buffers between incompatible land uses; and providing an aesthetically pleasing environment for property owners, residents, visitors and the general public. 
It is the intent of this section to provide appropriate landscape treatments to all development and redevelopment in the City. Recognizing the diverse nature of properties in the City, standards have been created to not only encourage good practice in design, but to also include provisions that allow creativity and flexibility through alternative methods of compliance to promote orderly development and redevelopment of properties. 
6:2.2. Applicability. The standards contained in this section shall apply to all new development and redevelopment of parcels within the City of Mauldin's zoning jurisdiction, with exception to those uses listed as exempt in subsection 6:2.2(C) below. The following types of development shall bring the entire site into full compliance with the requirements set forth in this section. 
A.  New Development. 
1.  Public and Private Non-residential Development (e.g. Commercial, retail, office, restaurant, service uses, institutional uses, etc.). 
2.  Group Residential Developments (e.g. Multi-family, Townhomes, Condominium). 
3.  New Residential Subdivisions (also subject to the requirements outlined in the Land Development Ordinance). 
4.  Planned Developments and Planned Office Developments (also subject to the requirements outlined in the Land Development Ordinance). 
5.  Parking lots and other vehicular use areas including: 
a.  New stand-alone parking lots and/or other vehicular use areas. 
b.  Existing unpaved parking lots or vehicular use areas that are undergoing paving. 
B.  Renovations and/or Improvements that exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the Taxable Market Value as determined by the Greenville County Tax Collector's office. The value of any expansion, addition, enlargement, or reconstruction of such structures or sites over a three-year period occurring under the same ownership and/or developed by the same developer shall be used when calculating the twenty-five (25) percent threshold. 
1.  Building expansions or additions exceeding fifty (50) percent of the pre-expansion floor area. 
2.  Existing unpaved vehicular use areas of which fifty (50) percent or more is paved or existing paved vehicular use areas of which fifty (50) percent or more is demolished and repaved. 
C.  Exemptions. These requirements of this section shall not apply to: 
1.  The construction or renovation of a single-family detached dwelling unit or duplex on an existing lot of record, unless otherwise noted. 
2.  Public and private utilities, except when a zoning permit or subdivision approval is required. Such utilities may include but are not limited to: storm drainage installation, street construction, water and sewer construction; and electric, gas, communications and other similar service installations. 
D.  Reference made to the Business and Development Services Director is also intended to include an assigned appointee. 
STANDARDS OF ORDINANCE 
6:2.3. General Requirements for submittal of a Landscaping Plan. 
A.  Review for Compliance. Review for compliance with the standards of this section shall occur at the time of submittal of a building, zoning or other applicable permit and/or land development application. 
B.  Landscape Plan Submittal. Applicants are advised to meet with the Business and Development Services Department staff prior to submitting a site and landscape plan to discuss applicable landscape requirements, other ordinance requirements, and coordination of plantings with utility plans. A landscape plan drawn using an Engineering Scale at a measurement of no less than one (1) inch being equal to fifty (50) feet (1" = 50') must be submitted with the site plan and prepared in accordance with the checklist requirements established by the department. 
C.  Planting Standards Table. Plantings shall comply with the minimum planting size, and height requirements in Table A below: 
Section 6:2.3(C)-TABLE A: MINIMUM PLANTING STANDARDS TYPE OF PLANTING
MATERIALS MINIMUM

HEIGHT AT

MATURITYMINIMUM SIZE, AND HEIGHT

AT TIME OF PLANTINGLarge Maturing Deciduous Canopy Trees Greater than 35 feet 2" caliper, 12-14 feet in height at time of planting or as determined in the American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1-2004 as amended. Large Deciduous Multi-Stemmed Trees Greater than 35 feet 3 canes minimum, 10 feet in height above ground at the time of planting. Small Maturing Deciduous or Understory trees Smaller than 35 feet at maturity 11/2" caliper, 8-10 feet in height at time of planting or as determined in the American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1-2004 as amended. Evergreen Trees 6 feet in height at the time of planting. Deciduous Shrub Minimum five-gallon container or ten-inch root ball with a height of 24 inches at time of planting. Evergreen Shrub Minimum three gallon container or eight-inch root ball with a height of 18 inches at time of planting. Additional Screening Requirements 48" in height at time of planting, Evergreen, 5 feet on center.  
D.  Calculations. In cases where the calculation used to determine the amount of vegetation needed for compliance results in a fraction, the minimum number shall be rounded upwards to the next highest whole number. Each standard requirement outlines in subsection 6:2.4, Landscape Requirements shall be considered cumulative unless otherwise noted. 
E.  Species Variety. To prevent the spread of disease or insect infestation in a plant species, new plantings shall be in the form of genus diversity, as required below: 
CUMULATIVE NUMBER OF
REQUIRED TREES MINIMUM NUMBER OF SPECIES 1-5 1 6-10 2 11-20 3 21+ 4  
All new vegetation to be located within a Riparian Buffer zone of designated Special Flood Hazard Area shall be of an appropriate native species as recommended by a Certified Landscape Architect and as approved by the Business and Development Services Director. 
6.2.4 Landscape Requirements. 
A.  Tree Inventory. Prior to beginning any tree clearing, development work, or land disturbance, the owner of land subject to this section shall prepare and submit an inventory of trees on the parcel, subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The inventory shall be prepared at the same scale as the Site and/or Landscape Plan and shall identify any canopy tree two (2) inches or larger in diameter at breast height (DBH). 
2.  The survey should depict any individual trees and areas of existing tree canopy that are to be saved in accordance with this section. Known dead or diseased trees shall be identified, where practical. Groups of trees in close proximity (i.e., those within five (5) feet of each other) may be designated as a clump of trees, with the predominant species, estimated number, and average diameter or circumference indicated. 
B.  Minimum Tree Density Canopy Coverage.All sites within the City shall provide or maintain a tree density canopy as indicated in subsection 6:2.4(B) Table A, below. The tree density coverage for non-residential developments may be achieved by counting existing trees to be preserved, planting new trees in accordance with the minimum standards or some combination of the two (2). Residential developments shall be required to preserve existing trees or plant new vegetation to meet the Tree Canopy Density requirement. 
Section 6:2.4(B)
TABLE A: TREE CANOPY DENSITY COVERAGE
 
MINIMUM REQUIRED TREE CANOPY BY RETENTION OR CREATION BY PROPOSED USE CLASSIFICATION
Note: Compliance with the minimum tree density requirement shall base its density calculations on the gross site area. Credits [in Table 6:24(C)-A] RESIDENTIAL USES (other than existing single-family residential lots) PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL, COMMERCIAL, LOW-MODERATE IMPACT SERVICE USES AND MIXED-USE USES LIGHT INDUSTRIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND HIGH IMPACT SERVICE USES 15 tree credit units per acre 10 tree credit units per acre 5 tree credits per acre  
B1.  Priority Retention Areas. Priority areas for retention of existing trees and vegetation shall include the following (listed in priority order): 
a.  Areas containing Heritage Trees, and their associated critical root zones. 
b.  Riparian buffers, wetlands, or wellhead protection areas. 
c.  Wildlife habitat and other sensitive natural areas. 
d.  Designated open space areas. 
e.  Areas needed to meet required landscaping (i.e. Transition Buffers, Parking Lot and Vehicular use areas, and Streetscape Landscaping). 
6:2.5 Streetscape Landscaping: Street Trees. The street tree requirement is designated to create an attractive streetscape and provide for a pedestrian friendly environment. It also assists in reducing impervious surface areas to improve storm water run-off and provides shade that reduces heat generated from paved surfaces. 
A.  Requirement. Street trees are required along all public and private street frontages and shall include only those trees listed in the approved list of tree species unless use of an alternative species is approved by the Business and Development Services Director. 
B.  Location. Street trees shall be located in an area no further than ten (10) feet from the existing or proposed street right-of-way line. 
C.  Calculation. One (1) large maturing deciduous tree (greater than thirty-five (35) feet in height at maturity) shall be planted for every forty (40) linear feet of property abutting a street. 
D.  Exception: If overhead utilities are present than One (1) small maturing deciduous tree (less than thirty-five (35) feet in height at maturity) shall be planted for every thirty (30) linear feet of property abutting a street. 
E.  At the discretion of the Business and Development Services Director, street trees may be clustered, rather than set at regular intervals, to accommodate access drives, and improve building visibility. In no circumstance, however, shall large maturing deciduous trees be located closer than thirty-five (35) feet of another large maturing deciduous tree. 
F.  Planting Strip. Trees shall be planted in a planting strip the width of which may vary but shall maintain a minimum of not less than seven (7) feet and an average width of ten (10) feet. 
G.  The planting area must be stabilized with ground cover materials, mulch or other approved material to prevent weeds, soil erosion and to allow rainwater infiltration (no soil shall be exposed). Stone mulch shall not be permitted in a street tree-planting strip. 
H.  Existing preserved trees located along a street frontage and having a three-inch DBH or greater may be used to satisfy the street tree requirements as long as the vegetation is located within ten (10) feet of the right-of-way. A single existing tree, regardless of its circumference shall not count for more than two (2) tree credits. Preserved trees shall meet all the requirements outlined in subsection 6:2.5, Tree Protection, and be of an acceptable species, alive and healthy at the time of final inspection. 
I.  Trees used to comply with the street tree requirement shall not count toward the minimum number of trees required to meet the parking lot landscaping standard. 
J.  Residential Subdivision and Townhome Developments. Street trees shall be provided along all existing street frontages and on both sides of any new public or private street serving the development. 
a.  Street Tree Calculation: Calculation. One (1) large maturing deciduous tree (greater than thirty-five (35) feet in height at maturity) shall be required for every forty (40) linear feet of street frontage. 
b.  Street Tree Placement. Street trees shall be located on private property and in an area located no further than ten (10) feet from the existing or proposed street right-of-way line. 
c.  The Business and Development Service Director may consider alternative placement and location of required street trees for Cluster and Open Space Developments and Townhome Developments. 
6:2.6 Streetscape Landscaping: Street Buffer (shrubs). 
Street buffers are designed to enhance the City's streetscape, provide a separation between vehicular use areas and the street; and to create a more comfortable pedestrian environment. Street buffer shrubs are required in addition to the street tree requirements of subsection 6:2.5(A), and are to be located within the street tree-planting strip. 
A.  Requirement. All parking and vehicular use areas shall be buffered from the street. 
B.  Calculation. One (1) evergreen shrub shall be planted for every five (5) linear feet of buffer required. Shrub species selected to meet this requirement shall achieve a minimum of three (3) feet in height at maturity. 
C.  Exemption. This requirement may be waived if a natural grade change or manmade berm exists and creates a minimum three-foot vertical separation and is completely covered with an approved groundcover. 

6:2.7 Parking Lot and Vehicular Use Areas. 
A vehicular use area means all driving surfaces including: parking, drive aisles, loading areas and maneuvering areas that are paved and unpaved. Trees and shrubs are required in and around parking lots in order to provide to provide shade to reduce the heat generated by impervious surfaces, provide attractive views from roads and adjacent properties; reduce stormwater run-off and improve water quality, reduce glare from parking lots, and to help filter exhaust from vehicles. Parking lot planting areas shall be designed within parking fields in the following manner: as islands located at the end of parking bays, islands located between parallel rows of cars; and located to visually separate parking areas into rows, and driveway medians. 
A.  Applicability. Parking lots with ten (10) or more spaces shall require parking lot landscaping. 
B.  Calculating the requirement. One (1) deciduous tree and three (3) shrubs are required for every two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of vehicular use area (VUA). At least fifty (50) percent of the required deciduous parking lot trees must be large-maturing canopy trees; and fifty (50) percent of the shrubs shall be evergreen. 
C.  Location. Trees and shrubs must be planted within fifteen (15) feet of the vehicular use area to count as parking lot landscaping. 
D.  Perimeter parking spaces. All continuous runs of fifteen (15) or more parking spaces shall be interrupted by a tree island. 
E.  Interior rows of parking. When more than four (4) parking lot trees are required in a parking field with interior rows, a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the trees and shrubs must be planted in islands or medians located within the parking field. 
F.  Canopy coverage. Each parking space shall be located within sixty (60) feet of a tree as measured from the trunk of the tree to the closest point of the parking space. 
G.  Minimum island size. The minimum island size shall be one hundred eighty (180) square feet of pervious planting surface per tree. Islands must maintain an average width of ten (10) feet and have a minimum width of five (5) feet. 
H.  Protection of trees. Curbing, bollards, or parking barriers shall protect trees and shrubs within five (5) feet of the edge of the pavement. Trees and shrubs in islands should be set back at least three (3) feet from the curb so as not to interfere with car doors opening. 
I.  Multiple parking bays. When more than four (4) bays of parking are proposed, an interior island with an average width of twenty (20) feet and a length equivalent to the length of the average parking bay is required. This island must be planted and include a pedestrian walkway no less than five (5) feet wide and placed in a location that enhances pedestrian circulation, preferably leading directly to a building entrance or sidewalk. 
J.  Heritage Trees. The Business and Development Services Director may modify the landscaping requirements and/or the parking requirements through the Alternative Landscape Compliance process (subsection 6:2.4) in order to preserve an affected Heritage tree. 
6:2.8 Transition Buffers between incompatible uses. 
Some land uses may create an adverse impact when developed adjacent to other less intensive land uses commonly found in certain zoning districts. Bufferyards shall be required for proposed developments adjacent to parcels of dissimilar zoning designations to provide a transition between districts of varying intensities. The bufferyard width and number of plantings required will vary depending on the degree of difference between the zoning designations and shall be the responsibility of the property owner developing or changing the land use. 
Material should generally be planted in a free form manner to simulate a more natural appearance, while maintaining consistent coverage for visual screening at all plant heights. Plant variety is encouraged, particularly in larger buffers, to reduce the impact of species specific disease or pest problems. 
Sample Transition Buffer: 

A.  Bufferyard types. The amount of plant material required in a bufferyard area is measured per one-hundred (100) linear feet and is based on the following table. 
TABLE: 6.2.8

  
DETERMINATION OF TRANSITION BUFFER YARD TYPE

  
NOTE: * 50 percent of all shrubs must be evergreen.
Bufferyard
Type Evergreen
Trees Deciduous Trees
(Large) Deciduous Trees
(Small) Shrubs (Large) Shrubs
(Small) A-20' wide 4 3 3 10* 10* B-30' wide 6 5 5 15* 15*  
B.  Buffer determination. The type of buffer required is based on the following table. The table is to be read in one (1) direction only starting from the proposed development site zoning column. 
Note:

 
RL = Residential Low: R-20, R-15, R-12

 
RH = Residential High:

 
R-10, R-8, R-6
TABLE: 6:2.8(b)

 
TABLE TRANSITION BUFFER DETERMINATION

 
Adjacent Zoning and Required Transition Buffer Proposed Development
Site Zoning RL RH RM-1, RM, R-O RL * N/A N/A N/A RH* A N/A N/A RM-1, RM, R-O A N/A N/A CRD, C-2, OD B A A S-1, I-1 B B B (*) Unless otherwise required by the Land Development Ordinance or other standards set forth in this ordinance.  
C.  Transition Buffer location. Buffers shall extend along the entire property line that is adjacent to the property of dissimilar zoning designation. Buffers are to be located on the property that is being developed or changing in land use, and between the property line and any vehicular use areas, buildings, storage, service areas, or other area of activity. 
D.  Placement of Transition Buffer plantings. The exact placement of the required plants shall be the decision of the developer or designer but shall be approved by the Business and Development Services Director. Plants should be placed in a manner to serve as an effective and attractive screen year-round when viewed from any area accessible to the public or from adjacent properties. Trees or shrubs should be planted at least five (5) feet away from the property line to ensure maintenance access and to avoid encroaching upon neighboring property. 
1.  Setbacks. Where a setback and bufferyard are required along the same property line the requirement with the greatest dimensional width shall be applicable. If the setback is greater than the bufferyard, the total number of required plant material shall be distributed throughout the wider setback. 
2.  Corner lots and through lots. No buffer will be required along the front property line of any lot. However, a lot with more than one (1) street frontage will require a transition buffer along the secondary street face when it is adjacent to a dissimilar zoning district where a buffer is required. Buffer requirements can be waived in lieu of street trees and street buffers, provided that the development and building façade along the secondary street frontage is pedestrian oriented with functioning pedestrian entrances that open onto public sidewalks. 
3.  Encroachments. The following site features may penetrate or encroach into a required buffer area provided that the total number of required plantings is still met: approved driveway openings, pedestrian or bicycle paths, designated greenways or walking trails, utilities (providing that conflicts with vegetation is considered) and walls/fences. 
4.  Prohibitions in Transition Buffer. The following are specifically prohibited from encroaching into required buffer areas: loading areas, storage areas, parking areas and drive aisles (unless cross access and/or shared parking with adjacent properties are provided); dumpsters and stormwater retention/detention structures. 
5.  Credit for overlapping requirements. Fifty (50) percent of transition buffer plants that are within fifteen (15) feet of a vehicular use area may be counted towards the parking lot landscaping. 
6.  Alternative Compliance for existing constrained sites is offered through subsection 6:2.3, Alternative Landscape Compliance. 
6:2.9 Additional Screening Requirements: 
Outdoor Storage Areas, Utility Structures, and Dumpsters. 
A.  All dumpsters, loading docks, utility structures and outside storage yards visible from a public street or adjacent property line shall be screened in accordance with this section unless already screened by an intervening building or an existing vegetated buffer yard that currently provides effective year-round screening. 
B.  Acceptable screening materials shall include a fence and/ or wall constructed of solid material made up of wood, vinyl, brick masonry, stone masonry, or architectural masonry finish with no more than a one-half inch gap and with a minimum height of six (6) feet, including, gates that are equal in height with the same characteristics. (Neither fabric, mesh, wind, plastic slat and/or other forms of like material(s), without of without chain link fencing, shall be allowed as a form of screening that is required in this section). 
1.  Screening shall be installed with the finished side of the fence and/or wall facing the abutting property and/or the street. 
2.  Screening areas that exceed twenty-five (25) linear feet in length shall be required to install a combination of acceptable screening materials and landscaping to soften the appearance of the fence and/or wall. Evergreen trees and/or shrubs shall be planted in a five-foot planting area (except around access areas), and spaced no farther than eight (8) feet apart in order to screen at least fifty (50) percent of the fence and/or wall at maturity. 
C.  All cooling towers, air conditioning condensers, and other equipment (whether mounted on the roof of a structure or located on the ground) shall be enclosed inside a wall, fence, or a combination of a fence and evergreen hedge, which hides the equipment from view. Ground units that are less than twenty-five (25) linear feet in length and not visible from the street may shield the equipment from view with evergreen vegetation. 
D.  All outdoor storage areas shall be screened by solid fencing, walls, or buildings, or a combination thereof, not less than six (6) feet in height. No merchandise, material, or equipment shall exceed the height of the screening fence, wall, and/or building. If screening of the merchandise, material, or equipment requires a screening height greater than six (6) feet, the storage area and the screening, fencing, walls, and/or building(s) shall be located in the rear yard, and away from any public right-of-way. 
E.  The Director of Business and Development Services shall have the authority to consider alternative methods and materials for achieving screening during active building construction, and/or other unique forms of development activity. 
6:2.10 Alternative Landscape Compliance. 
A.  Applicability. The landscape requirements are intended to set minimum standards for quality development and environmental protection. Conditions associated with individual sites may, under certain circumstances, warrant approval of alternative methods of compliance where normal compliance is impractical or impossible, or where maximum achievement of the purpose and intent of this article can only be obtained through alternative compliance. It is not the intent of this section to allow alternative compliance on the basis of economic hardship. In the event that such conditions are present, the Business and Development Services Director shall have authority to adjust the requirements of this chapter as provided in subsection (C) below. 
Alternative plants, materials, location, or installation methods may be justified due to natural conditions, such as streams, wetlands, natural rock formations, topography, easements, lot configuration, and other physical conditions related to the site. A landscape architect or landscape designer may also propose an Alternative Landscape Plan as a method to provide a less traditional plan while still providing an appropriate level of landscape quality that meets the intent of the various requirements of this Ordinance. 
B.  Submittal Requirements. The applicant shall submit to the Business and Development Services Director a written explanation as to the need for an Alternative Compliance approval and explain how the proposed landscape plan meets or exceeds the landscape requirements outlined in this section. The proposed landscape plan shall clearly indicate any and all areas for which Alternative Compliance is requested. The plan shall also show all existing site features and any newly proposed features, if applicable. 
C.  Allowable Deviations. The Business and Development Services Director is authorized to approve an Alternative Landscape Plan if it meets the purpose and intent of the landscaping standards as outlined in this section. Unless otherwise specifically permitted by this ordinance, the landscape requirements of a specific standard shall not be reduced by more than twenty-five (25) percent. Requests to reduce standards beyond what is authorized under this section will require a variance from the Board of Appeals. 
D.  Considerations and Hardships. The Business and Development Services Director may consider Alternative Compliance for the following reasons: 
1.  The topography, soil, vegetation, or other site conditions are such that full compliance is impossible or impractical. 
2.  The existing site has space limitations or is unusually shaped and full landscape compliance would affect adherence to required off-street parking, loading, or accessibility requirements. 
3.  Additional environmental quality improvements would result from the alternative compliance. 
4.  Safety considerations make alternative compliance desirable. 
5.  An alternative compliance proposal meets the intent and purpose of the Landscape Ordinance in a manner that is equal to or better than compliance with the regulation contained in code. 
E.  [Special Consideration.] Special Consideration for Alternative Compliance related to Infill, Change of Use or Adaptive re-use of an existing site where no exterior improvements are required for occupancy of an existing building and the site in its present state is ninety (90) percent or more impervious. 
1.  Transition Buffers. Buffer widths may be reduced by fifty (50) percent with the installation of a six-foot tall, opaque privacy fence or wall with the finished face of the fence or wall facing towards the adjacent property. The finished fence or wall shall be planted with evergreen trees and/or large evergreen shrub species spaced every eight (8) feet on center. These plantings shall be located within a seven-foot wide planting area along the exterior of the fence facing the adjacent property. This alternative may not be used when the existing parking area exceeds the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for the development. 
2.  Parking lot and Vehicular Use Landscaping. The requirement for plantings in interior islands may be reduced up to thirty (30) percent. 
3.  Alternative Street Tree requirements, Planting Strip Width. The required ten-foot wide planting strip for street trees may be reduced if one (1) or more of the following objective standards apply: 
a.  An existing sidewalk, building(s) and/or other permanent infrastructure prevents its installation. In no case shall the planting strip be less than five (5) feet wide or the planting area be less than two hundred (200) square feet per large maturing tree, or one hundred fifty (150) square feet per small maturing tree. 
b.  A subsurface structure is used to allow for an aerated area of two hundred (200) square feet per tree. Construction detail must be provided. 
c.  An adopted streetscape plan, corridor plan, and/or neighborhood plan calls for a different standard and the development complies with this standard. 
F.  Decision. The Business and Development Services Director shall review the performance of the Alternate Compliance plan. The purpose of this review shall be to determine if the alternate plan meets the intent and purpose of this section. This determination shall take into account the land use of adjacent property, the amount and species of plant material, its arrangement and coverage of the lot; the level of screening and the mature height, spread and canopy of the plantings. Upon justification of these findings, a decision of approval or denial shall be rendered. 
G.  Appeals. Appeals to a denial of an Alternative Compliance Landscape Plan by the Business and Development Services Director shall be submitted and reviewed by the Building and Zoning Board of Appeals through the Variance procedures outlined in subsection 4:1.3.4, Board Actions to a Variance Required. 
6:2.11. Tree Protection and Credits. 
A.  Purpose. Protection of existing tree cover is intended to preserve the visual and aesthetic qualities of Mauldin to encourage site design techniques that preserve the natural environment and enhance the developed environment: to control erosion, slippage, and sediment runoff into streams and waterways; to increase slope stability; and, to protect wildlife habitat and migration corridors. Preservation or provision of trees near structures also serves to conserve energy by reducing heating and cooling costs. 
B.  Applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply to all existing and new development, except that the following developments and activities shall be exempt from this section: 
1.  The removal of trees located on individual lots containing single-family detached dwellings. 
2.  The removal of dead or naturally fallen trees, or trees that are found by the Business and Development Services Director to be a threat to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
3.  The selective and limited removal of trees or vegetation necessary to obtain clear visibility at driveways or intersections, or for the purpose of performing authorized field survey work. 
4.  The selective and limited clearing of utility easements to maintain their intended function. 
5.  The removal of trees or vegetation on land zoned or lawfully used for: Agricultural and forestry activities, including tree farms and approved forestry management practices, except that if a site is substantially cleared of trees pursuant to legitimate forestry activities (no development applications shall be accepted for thirty-six (36) months from the date the clearing is completed); or commercial garden centers, greenhouses, or nurseries. 
C.  Credits and other incentives to preserve vegetation. Developments intending to preserve existing vegetation in order to receive credit for required landscaping must graphically show the location of each tree In order to receive credit, preserved vegetation must be in good health and condition and must meet the spacing requirements of the standards it is intended to satisfy. 
Protective barriers must also be shown on the landscape and grading plans in accordance with the requirements of this section. If a preserved tree dies within twenty-four (24) months of completion of the project, it must be replaced with the total number of trees that were credited to the existing tree. No credit will be given to invasive-exotic species. 
Any development that proposes to preserve existing vegetation will receive credit for that vegetation at the rate assigned as follows in Table 6:2.11(C)-A: 
TABLE 6:2.11(C)-A

 
TREE PRESERVATION CREDIT RATES

 
Diameter at Breast Height

 
(Partial dimensions shall be rounded to the nearest whole number)
# of Tree Credits 
2"-6" 1 7"-12" 2 13"-18" 3 19"-24" 4 25"-29" 5 30" + 7 Shrubs will be credited at a rate of 1:1  
D.  Tree Protection during Construction. 
1.  Protective fencing. Before grading begins fencing shall be required around the critical root zone and drip line of all trees that are to be preserved. Additional fencing shall be required around the critical root zone of trees on adjacent properties or located in a right-of-way. 
2.  Type of fencing. All fencing required by this section shall be a minimum of four (4) feet high and of durable construction; such as wood or metal fencing. 
3.  Signs. Signs shall be installed on the protective fence visible on all sides of the fenced-in area (minimum one (1) on each side and/or every three hundred (300) linear feet). The size of each sign must be a minimum of one (1) foot by one and one-half (1.5) feet and shall contain the following: "TREE PROTECTION ZONE: KEEP OUT." 
4.  Activity within a fenced tree protection zone. No construction, grading, parking, equipment, or material storage, or any other activity, shall be allowed within the fenced area. 
5.  Maintenance of fencing. For existing trees to be counted toward required tree credits, they must be protected during the entire development period, beginning prior to the commencement of site work. Encroachment within the tree protection zone is only permitted to allow the Landscape Contractor access to complete site work. 
6.  Encroachments. Encroachments within the critical root zones of any tree being preserved to comply with required tree credits, or within designated tree protection zones, shall occur only in rare instances. If such an encroachment is anticipated, a written request must be made to the Business and Development Services Director for allowance of encroachment. Request must detail preventative measures taken. If approved the following preventative measures shall be employed: 
a.  Clearing activities. The removal of trees adjacent to a tree protection zone can cause inadvertent damage to the protected trees. Wherever possible, it is advisable to cut minimum two-foot trenches along the limits of land-disturbance, so as to cut, rather than tear, roots. Trenching is required for the protection Heritage trees. 
b.  Soil compaction. Where compaction might occur due to traffic or materials through the tree protection zone, the area must first be mulched with a minimum four-inch layer of processed pine bark or wood chips or a six-inch layer of pine straw. Equipment or materials storage shall not be allowed within tree protection areas. 
E.  Protection and removal of Heritage trees. 
1.  In order to protect significant trees, the city has established a Heritage tree designation. A Heritage tree is any tree greater than thirty (30) inches in diameter. A Heritage tree shall be further defined as one (1) that is free of major damage, and exhibits the growth habit and superior qualities to be considered a specimen of its species. Heritage trees shall be protected on a development site in accordance with the tree protection standards outlined in subsection 6:2.11(D), Tree Protection during construction. 
2.  Heritage trees shall not be cut, removed, pushed over, harmed, trimmed, sprayed, or destroyed without written approval by the Business and Development Services Director. 
3.  Removal of a Heritage Tree. Except on lots containing existing single-family detached dwellings, a healthy heritage tree may only be removed if the landowner demonstrates to the Business and Development Director that one (1) of the applicable following standards are met: 
a.  The Heritage tree is certified by an arborist or other qualified professional as being severely diseased, high risk, or dying. A severely diseased, high risk or dying heritage tree shall be exempt from replacement. 
b.  The required site grading will have an adverse impact on the tree most likely resulting in decline and death of the tree in the near future. 
c.  The Heritage tree is not located within a Riparian Buffer Zone. 
d.  After significant attempts to design around a Heritage tree, it is determined that the Heritage Tree is located such that preservation significantly affects the ability to develop the site for its approved uses, and hinders compliance with other required site and landscape developments. 
e.  Except on lots containing single-family detached dwellings, each healthy Heritage tree removed or destroyed shall be replaced with three (3) replacement trees, measuring at least six (6) inches in diameter by American Nurseryman Standards, and shall be replanted within twelve (12) months of the removal or destruction of the tree; and/or prior to the close-out of a development under construction. 
f.  New trees used to comply with Heritage Tree replacement requirements shall not count toward the street tree requirements or parking lot landscaping requirements. 
g.  No construction, grading, equipment, or material storage, or any other activity, shall be allowed within the critical root zone of a heritage tree unless steps taken to adequately ensure the health of the tree are submitted to the Business and Development Services Director in writing. 
6:2.12 Compliance. 
A.  Time for Installation of Required Landscaping. All landscaping, including mulching and seeding or sodding, shall be completed in accordance with the approved Site and Landscape Plan prior to issuance of a Final Certificate of Occupancy. The Business and Development Services Director may grant an exception to this requirement through the issuance of a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy when all Life Safety, Accessibility, and Land Development standards have been satisfied. Temporary Certificates of Occupancy shall be permitted in thirty-day increments, not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) calendar days. 
1.  The Business and Development Services Director may grant an extension for a period beyond one hundred twenty (120) calendar days when the applicant provides an acceptable form of Guarantee that ensures that all landscaping standards will be met at a predetermined date. Refer to subsection 6:2.12(B), Performance Guarantees for Landscaping, for what is acceptable. 
2.  Exceptions may be granted due to unusual environmental conditions, such as drought, ice, over-saturated soil (deep mud), or inappropriate planting seasons for the plant species. 
3.  Exceptions may be granted due to the substitution or unavailability of plant species or acceptable plant size as specified on the Landscape Plan or Alternative Compliance Landscape Plan in cases where such materials are not commercially available within a reasonable time. 
4.  Exceptions may be granted due to circumstances beyond the developer's or landowner's control, such as incomplete road construction or utility work to occur in a proposed landscaped area within one hundred eighty (180) days after expected site completion, provided the developer or land owner submits a letter from the responsible party or utility company stating the estimated installation date. 
B.  Performance Guarantees for Landscaping. The Business and Development Services Director may allow issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy to allow a developer/owner to delay the installation of required landscaping materials through the provision of a performance guarantee in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  Types of Performance Guarantees for Landscaping. The owner or developer shall furnish a itemized cost estimate prepared by a professional landscape architect or designer and shall also submit a performance guarantee in any of the following acceptable forms: 
a.  Cash deposit made to the City of Mauldin; 
b.  Irrevocable letter of credit or Surety Bond from a South Carolina banking institution in a form acceptable to the City; or 
c.  Any other financial security found acceptable by the City Attorney. 
2.  Performance Guarantee Amount. A cost estimate shall be prepared by a professional landscape architect or designer to include landscaping materials, irrigation and installation labor for all improvements. The improvements shall be guaranteed at one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the cost estimate provided. An additional non-refundable fee may be assessed to cover the cost of additional administration and inspections to accommodate this process. 
3.  Time Limit for Installation. The performance guarantee shall include a statement indicating when all required landscaping installation will be completed. In no event shall the installation of all required landscaping be delayed by more than two (2) growing seasons or one (1) year. 
4.  Release of Performance Guarantees. Upon the owner or developer's completion of the installation of the required landscaping, the owner/developer shall provide written notice to the Business and Development Services Director requesting an inspection. Upon verification of achieving full compliance the Business and Development Services Director shall release the full amount of the security. 
5.  Forfeiture of Security. 
a.  Failure to Install Landscaping. If an owner or developer fails to properly install all required landscaping within the time-frames established in accordance with this subsection, the Business and Development Services Director shall give written notice to the owner/developer (if different) by certified mail, after which time the City may draw on the security and use funds to complete the required improvements. 
b.  Report of Expenditures. After completing the required landscaping, the City shall provide a complete accounting of the expenditures, including administration and inspection, to the owner/developer (as appropriate) and, as applicable, refund all unused security deposited, without interest, to the party posting the guarantee. If the costs to complete the required landscaping are greater than the amount of the security, the City may assess the additional costs to the affected property owner(s) or responsible association. 
6:2.13 Maintenance of Landscaping Materials. 
A.  Responsible Party for Maintenance of Landscaping Materials. The owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of all landscape areas located outside of the public or private street right-of-way. Such areas shall be maintained in accordance with the approved Landscape Plan or Alternative Compliance Landscape Plan and shall present a healthy and orderly appearance free from refuse and debris. All plant life shown on an approved Landscape Plan or Alternative Compliance Landscape Plan shall be replaced if it dies, is seriously damaged, or removed. 
B.  Damage Due to Natural Occurrence. In the event that any vegetation is severely damaged due to an unusual weather occurrence or natural catastrophe, or other natural occurrence such as damage by wild or domestic animals, the owner or developer will be required to replant if the landscaping standards are not being met. The owner shall have two (2) growing seasons to replace or replant. The Business and Development Services Director shall consider the type and location of the landscape buffer or required vegetation area as well as the propensity for natural re-vegetation in making a determination on the extent of replanting requirements. 
C.  Protection during Operations. The owner or developer should take actions to protect trees and landscaping from unnecessary damage during all facility and site maintenance operations. Plants must be maintained in a way that does not obstruct sight distances at roadway and drive intersections, obstruct traffic signs or devices, and/or interfere with the use of sidewalks or pedestrian trails. 
D.  Maintain Shape. All required trees (whether canopy, understory, or otherwise) and shrubs shall be maintained in their characteristic natural shape, and shall not be severely pruned, sheared, topped, or shaped as shrubs. 
Trees (including but not limited to Crape Myrtles) that have been severely pruned, sheared, topped, or shaped as shrubs and no longer serve the intended landscape requirement function shall be considered a violation as damaged vegetation in need of replacement and shall be replaced during the current or next available growing season. 
E.  Natural Death. The natural death of existing vegetation within any required landscape area does not necessarily constitute a violation and would not require re-vegetation to replace the plant material unless the required landscape area no longer achieves the required standards of this section. In no instance shall this provision be construed to prevent re-planting if, in the opinion of the Business and Development Services Director, the required performance standard of the landscaping is not being met. 
6:2.14 Monitoring for Compliance with Landscaping Standards. 
A.  Inspections Prior to Certificate of Occupancy. The Business and Development Services Director shall inspect the site prior to the issuance of a Final Certificate of Occupancy for the development. The Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued if a performance guarantee has not been approved, the landscaping is not living or healthy, or is not installed in accordance with the approved Site and Landscape Plan or Alternative Compliance Landscape Plan, and/or other requirement of this ordinance. 
B.  Violations. Failure to maintain required landscape areas (trees and shrubs) in accordance with the standards of this section shall constitute a violation and is subject to enforcement in accordance with Article 12 of the Mauldin Zoning Ordinance. 
6:2.15 Acceptable Plant Materials. 
The Business and Development Services Director reserves the right to accept additional species that are not listed below. 
*Denotes Native Species-Native species are preferred because they are best for our soils and climate, attract a variety of wildlife, provide food and shelter for many species, require less care and watering, and thrive with less fertilizer and disease control. 
TABLE A: LARGE MATURING DECIDUOUS SHADE TREES

 
(Transitional Buffer, Street Trees, Parking Lot Landscaping)
Common Name Botanical Name American Beech Fagus grandifolia American persimmon Diospyros virginiana Ash, Green * Fraxinus pennsylvanica Ash, Green Georgia Gem * Fraxinus pennsylvanica 'Oconee' Ash, Green Patmore * Fraxinus pennsylvanica 'Patmore' Ash, Green Urbanite * Fraxinus pennsylvanica 'Urbanite' Ash, White * Fraxinus americana Blackgum * Nyssa sylvatica Chinese Chesnut Castanea mollissima Chinese Pistachio Pistacia chinensis Elm, Allee Ulmus parvifolia 'Emer II' Elm, Athena Ulmus parvifolia 'Emer I' Elm, Bosque Ulmus parvifolia 'UPMTF' Elm, Drake Ulmus parvifolia 'Drake Chinese Elm' Elm, Princeton * Ulmus Americana 'Princeton' Elm, Slippery * Ulmus rubra Elm, Winged Ulmus alata Fort McNair Red Horse Chesnut Aesculus x carnea 'Fort Mcnair' Ginko, Male only Ginko biloba Hackberry * Celtis occidentalis Kentucky Coffeetree Gymnociadus dioicus Linden, Littleleaf Greenspire Tilia cordata Maple, Autumn Blaze Acer x freemanii 'Jeffers Red' Maple, Red Autumn Flame * Acer rubrum Autumn Flame Maple, Red October Glory * Acer rubrum October Glory Maple, Red Sunset * Acer rubrun 'Franksred' Maple, Sugar Acer saccharum 'Northern Sugar Maple' Maple, Sugar Green Mountain Acer saccharum 'Green Mountain' Maple, Sugar Legacy Acer saccharum 'Legacy' Oak, Swamp White Quercus bicolor Oak, Darlington Laurel Quercus hemisphaeica 'Darlington' Oak, Live * Quercus virginiana Oak, Northern Red * Quercus rubra Oak, Nuttall Quercus nuttalli Oak, Overcup * Quercus lyrata Oak, Pin Quercus palustris Oak, Sawtooth Quercus acutissima Oak, Scarlett * Quercus coccinea Oak, Shumard * Quercus shumardii Oak, White * Quercus alba Oak, Willow * Quercus phellos Oak, Willow Hightower * Quercus phellos 'QPSTA' Oak, Willow Wynstar * Quercus phellos 'QPMTF' Planetree, London Bloodgood Platanus x acerifoloa 'Bloodgood' Planetree, London Yarwood Platanus x acerifoloa 'Yarwood' River Birch * Betula Nigra Sourwood * Oxydendrum arboreum Sycamore * Platanus occidentalis Tulip Poplar * Liriodendron tulipifera Yellowwood Cladrastis kentukea Zelkova, Green Vase Zelkova serrata 'Green Vase' Zelkova, Myrimar Zelkova serrata 'ZSFKF' Zelkova, Village Green Zelkova serrata 'Village Green'  
  
Table B Acceptable Ornamental or Understory Street Tree Species 
TABLE B: SMALL MATURING UNDERSTORY AND ORNAMENTAL TREES

 
Must be properly pruned and maintained in a tree like form. Appropriate for Transition Buffer, Street trees under power lines, Parking Lot Landscaping
Common Name Botanical Name American Hornbeam * Carpinus caroliana Cherry, Dreamcatcher Prunus 'Dream Catcher' Cherry, Okame Prunus x "Okame' Cherry, Pink Autumn Prunus subhirtella 'Autumnalis Rosea' Crape Myrtle Lagerstroemia indica Crape Myrtle, Natchez White Lagerstroemia indica 'Natchez' Dogwood, Flowering * Cornus florida Dogwood, Kousa Cornus kousa Dogwood, Pink Flowering * Cornus florida rubra European Hornbeam * Carpinus betulus Fringetree * Chionanthus virginicus Fringetree, Chinese Chionanthus retusus Fosters Holly llex x attenuate 'Fosteri' Holly, Emily Bruner, 'Tree Form' llex x 'Emily Bruner' Holly, East Palatka, 'Tree Form' llex x attenuate 'East Palatka' Holly, Foster No. 2, 'Tree Form' llex x attenuate 'Foster No. 2' Holly, 'Mary Nell' Llex x 'Mary Nell' Holly, Yaupon * llex vomitoria Magnolia Saucer Magnolia x soulangiana Magnolia, Star Magnolia stellata Magnolia, Sweetbay Magnolia virginiana Maple, Trident Acer buergeranum Oak, 'Chinese Evergreen' Quercus myrsinifolia Plum, Purpleleaf Prunus cerasifera Plum, Thundercloud Prunus cerasifera 'Thundercloud' Redbud, Eastern * Ceris canadensis Redbud, Eastern White * Cercis Canadensis var. alba Redbud, 'Forest Pansy' * Cercis Canadensis 'Forest Pansy' Redbud, 'Mexican Cercis mexicana Redbud, Oklahoma Cercis renformis 'Oklahoma' Redbud, Texas White Cercis reniformis 'Texas White' Smoketree Cotinus coggygria Snowbell, Japenese Styrax japonica Tea Olive, 'Treeform' Osmanthus x ortune/fragrans Thornless Honeylocust Gleditsia triacanthos inermis Witch Hazel * Hamamaelis virginiana Tulip Poplar Liriodendron tulipifera  
  
TABLE C: EVERGREEN TREES

 
(Transition Buffer, Screening)
Common Name Botanical Name Deodar Cedar Cedrus deodara Italian Cypress Cupressus semperirens Eastern Redcedar * Juniperus virginiana American Holly (cultivar) * Llex opaca 'Varied cultivars' Southern Magnolia (cultivar) * Magnolia grandfolia 'Varied cultivars' Loblolly Pine * Pinus Taeda Virginia Pine * Pinus virginiana Canadian hemlock Tsuga canadensis Japanese-Cedar Cryptomeria japonica American Arborvitae Thuja occidentalis Fosters Holly llex x attenuate 'Fosteri' Burford Holly llex comuta 'Burfordii' Nellie R. Stevens Holly llex x 'Nellie R. Stevens' Yaupon Holly * llex vomitoria Hollywood Juniper Juniperus chinensis Waxy leaf Ligustrum Ligustrum japonicum Chinese Fringe Flower Loropetalum chinense Sweetbay Magnolia Magnolia virginiana Wax Myrtle * Myrica cerfera Chinese Evergreen Oak Quercus myrsinifolia Spuce Pine * Pinus glabra Carolina Cherry Laurel * Prunus caroliniana Tea Olive Osmanthus fragran x fortunei White Pine Pinus Strobus English Laurel Prunus laurocerasus 'Schipka' Lusterleaf Holly Ilex latifolia Emily Bruner Holly X Emily bruner American Holly Ilex opaca Mary Nell Holly Ilex x 'Mary Nell'  
  
TABLE D: SHRUBS

 
(Transitional Buffer, Street buffer, Parking lot landscaping)
SPECIES TYPE BOTANICAL NAME Glossy Abelia Evergreen Abelia x grandiflora Azalea (Indica species-Evergreen) Evergreen Boxwood, Green Gem Evergreen Buxus sempervirens, micrpohylla Camellia Species Evergreen Camellia Olieifera Japanese Plum Yew Evergreen Cephalotaxus harringtonii Cherry Laurel Evergreen Prunus laurocerasus Japanese Euonymus Evergreen Euonymus japonicus Pieris japonica Evergreen Pieris japonica Fatsia Evergreen Fatsia japonica Heavenly Bamboo Evergreen Nandina domestica Gardenia Evergreen Gardenia jasminoides Holly Evergreen Ilex Species Anise Tree Evergreen Illicium species Chinese Fringe Evergreen Loropetalum chinense Mountain Laurel Evergreen Kalmia latifolia Osmanthus Evergreen Osmanthus Fragrans/Fortunei Cherry Laurel Evergreen Prunus laurocerasus Hawthorn Evergreen Raphiolepsis Cleyera Evergreen Ternstroemia gymnanthera Viburnum Evergreen Viburnum Species Abelia Evergreen Abelia Species Azalea, Rhododendron Either Rhododendron species Hydrangea Deciduous Hydrangea Species Virginia Sweetspire Deciduous Itea Virginica Spirea deciduous S. japonica, S. vanhouttei Viburnum Either Viburnum species Red Chokeberry Deciduous Aronia arbutifolia Callicarpa species Deciduous Beautyberry Hamamelis species Deciduous Witch Hazel Fothergilla Deciduous Fothergilla species Winter Jasmine Deciduous Jasminum nudiflorum Mapleleaf Viburnum Deciduous Viburnum acerifolium Summersweet Deciduous Clethra alnifolia  
  
TABLE E: PROHIBITED TREES
SPECIES REASON Allanthus Invasive, weak wood, littersome Black Locust Weak wood, pest Box elder Weak wood, pest Bradford pear Weak wood Chinaberry Weak wood, littersome Female ginko Littersome, smelly fruit pods Mimosa Invasive, weak wood Morus spp. Weak wood, littersome, invasive Poplar spp. Weak wood, pests Silver maple Weak wood Siberian elm Weak wood  
Prohibited Plant Lists 
Species that are listed within the following documents are prohibited from use. 
1. "Invasive Plant Pest Species of South Carolina." Clemson Extension. 
http://www.clemson.edu/psapublishing/PAGES/FORESTRY/ForLf28.pdf 
2. "Roadside Plants to Avoid." SCDOT. 
http://www.scdot.org/community/pdfs/plants_to_avoid.pdf 
3. "South Carolina EPPC List." 
http://www.clemson.edu/psapublishing/PAGES/FORESTRY/ForLf28.pdf 
4. "Prohibited Plant List for the South Carolina Upstate Region" 
http://www.greenstepschools.com/greensteps/pdf/UPSTATE%20SC%20-%20Prohibited%20Plant%20List%20-%20FINAL%20Update%207-10-9.pdf 
( Ord. No. 805 , § 3, 5-16-2016; Ord. No. 822 , amd. 1, 4-17-2017; Ord. No. 882 , amd. 2, 1-22-2019) 
Sec. 6:3 - Other Design Requirements. 
6:3.1 Lighting Standards. 
The following provisions shall apply to all newly developed properties, except for those developed with a one- or two-family dwelling, to reduce night-time glare, light pollution, and light trespass, and to encourage the use of energy efficient lighting sources. These standards shall also apply when new lighting fixtures are being placed at an existing developed property. These provisions shall not apply to street lighting erected by a governmental agency for public safety purposes. 
6:3.1.1 General Standards for Outdoor Lighting. 
The maximum light level permissible at a residential property line shall not exceed one-half (.05) foot-candles where non-residential uses abut residential uses, and shall not exceed two (2.0) foot-candles at the road right-of-way or at a non-residential property line. 
6:3.1.2 Flood Lights. 
All flood lights shall be installed with the fixture aimed downward at least forty-five (45) degrees below horizontal. Flood lights shall be oriented or shielded so that the source of the light is not visible from the road right-of-way or from any residential use. 
6:3.1.3 Wall Packs, Ground Mounted Lighting, and Sign Lighting. 
All wall packs shall be cutoff type fixtures. All external lighting fixtures on a sign or ground mounted luminaries lighting building facades, steeples, trees, billboards, monument signs, flags, and other like items shall not exceed fifteen thousand (15,000) lumens light output. Such lighting fixtures shall be oriented or shielded so that the source of the light is not visible from the road right-of-way or from any residential use. The light output from an illuminated sign shall not exceed the limits of subsection 6:3.1.1 herein. 
6:3.1.4 Parking Lots and Outdoor Merchandise on Display Areas. 
All parking lot and merchandise display area lighting fixtures, other than floodlights permitted under [subsection] 6:3.1.2 herein, shall be cutoff fixtures and shall be mounted at a height not greater than thirty (30) feet above finished grade. Lighting levels in a parking lot shall not exceed twenty (20) foot-candles. And merchandise display area lighting shall not exceed thirty (30) foot-candles. 
6:3.1.5 Vehicular Canopy Lighting. 
Lighting fixtures under a vehicular canopy shall be cutoff fixtures or fixtures fully recessed into the canopy. Lighting levels under the canopy shall not exceed thirty (30) foot-candles, and the source of the light shall not be visible from the road right-of-way or from any residential property. 
6:3.1.6 Outdoor Playing Field or Performance Area Lighting. 
All outdoor playing field or performance area lighting fixtures shall be equipped with louvers, shields, or other devices to control glare and to direct lighting at the playing field or performance area. Lighting fixtures shall be mounted at a height not greater than eighty (80) feet above the playing field or performance area. Lighting of the playing field or performance area shall be extinguished no later than one (1) hour after the event. 
6:3.1.7 Permits. 
A lighting plan shall be included with all building permit applications for new construction. Such plan shall include specifications of the lighting fixtures to be used, a detailed site plan which shows the location of all existing and proposed improvements, the location of the lighting fixtures, a point-by-point foot-candle array, and a certification by a qualified design professional that the lighting plan complies with all the requirements contained herein. The same plan requirements shall apply when new lighting fixtures are being erected on an existing developed property. 

A foot-candle is a quantitative unit measuring the amount of light cast onto any given point, measured a one (1) lumen per square foot. 
Commercial to Commercial 
The maximum light level permissable on a commercial property that does not abut residential property shall not exceed two (2.0) foot-candles at the road right-of-way or at a non-residential property line. 
Commercial to Residential 
The maximum light level permissable on a commercial property that abuts a residential property line shall not exceed one-half (0.5) foot-candles. 
All External Lighting Fixtures 
A lighting plan shall be included with all sign permit applciations. Such plans shall include specifications of the lighting fixtures to be used, a detailed site plan which shows the location of all existing and proposed improvements, the location of the lighting fixtures, a point-by-point foot-candle array, and a certification by a qualified design professional that the lighting plan complies with all of the requirements contained herein. 
6:3.2 Exterior Building Facade. 
Exterior building facades which for all structures other than a one- or two-family dwelling, including a live-work arrangement, and its accessory structures shall be made of noncombustible materials. No intense or distracting colors or color schemes shall be used on any structure, other than a single-family detached dwelling or its accessory structures, unless specifically approved in writing by the Building and Zoning Director. Appeals of the decision of the Building and Zoning Director shall be heard as provided by Section 9 herein. Allowable building materials are as follows: 
Brick-Brick veneer is acceptable 
Stone-Natural stone or manufactured stone are acceptable 
SFCB-Split-Faced Concrete Block 
Tilt up precast concrete panels 
Stucco-Synthetic material is acceptable 
CAW-Cementitious artificial wood siding 
Glass, glass block, or other glazing 
CMU-Painted concrete block 
Wood-Engineered wood siding is acceptable 
The ratios and amounts of allowed building materials for each zoning district are listed on Table 6:2.5. Non-residential uses in a residential district shall be treated as R-M, RM-1, and R-O. 
Table 6.2.8 Allowable Building Materials 
Zoning Brick Stone SFCB Tilt-up Stucco CAW Glass CMU Wood RM, RM-1, R-O Yes Yes Y < 25% No Y < 25% Yes Yes No Yes O-D, POD Yes Yes Y < 25% No Y < 25% Yes Yes No No CRD Yes Yes Y < 25% No Y < 25% Yes Yes No No C-1, C-2 Yes Yes Yes No Y < 25% Yes Yes Yes - Rear No S-1, I-1 Yes Yes Yes Yes Y < 25% No Yes Yes - Rear & Side No  
( Ord. No. 805 , § 3, 5-16-2016; Ord. No. 822 , amd. 1, 4-17-2017; Ord. No. 882 , amd. 2, 1-22-2019) 
Sec. 6:4 - Signs. 
6:4.1 Sign Regulations. 
6:4.1.1 Purpose and Intent. 
The purpose of this section is to create a comprehensive and balanced set of standards for the display of signs in the City of Mauldin that will protect the safety and orderly development of the community, preserve the right of free speech and expression, and provide signs that will enable the public to easily locate goods, services, and facilities within the City. With these purposes in mind, it is the intent of this Ordinance to allow signs that will: 
A.  Promote and aid in the economic viability of businesses located in the City of Mauldin by providing an equal and fair opportunity to advertise and promote its products and services without discrimination; 
B.  Promote traffic safety and protection of pedestrians, cyclists and motorists from injury and property damage caused by, or which may be partially attributed to cluttered, distracting, and/or illegible signage; 
C.  Protect property values, the local economy, and quality of life by ensuring signs are constructed to be structurally sound, aesthetically pleasing, of appropriate scale, and are compatible with the buildings and landscape they identify; 
D.  Promote the goals, policies, and objectives of the City of Mauldin's comprehensive plan; and preserve the public health, safety and welfare of the City. 
6:4.1.2 Definitions. 
Abandoned sign or sign structure: A sign or sign structure which was erected on a property in conjunction with a particular use, said use having been discontinued for a period of one-hundred eighty (180) calendar days or more or a sign of which the contents pertain to a time, event, or purpose which no longer applies or which has occurred. Signs on property shall be considered abandoned when there is clear evidence that a business or activity has vacated the building or grounds. 
Advertising device: Any structure or device erected or intended for the purpose of displaying advertising or for which is designed to or attracts attention to the premises, situated upon or attached to real property. For purposes of this Code Section, an advertising device is a "sign." 
A-frame Sign (also known as a Sidewalk or Sandwich Board sign): A self-supporting, portable sign with one (1) or two (2) faces that are adjoined at the top and displayed at an angle, which is not permanently anchored or secured. 
A-Frame Sign Examples:

Alteration: Any change to a sign or sign structure because of construction, repair, maintenance. 
Animated sign: A sign with action, motion, sound, or changing colors, which accomplishes such action, motion, sound, or changing colors with or without electrical energy. This includes signs with lights or other illuminating devices that blink, flash, fluctuate, or have a changing light intensity, brightness, or color. This definition does not include a time, date and temperature or electronic message signs as defined by this Code Section. 
Appurtenance: An accessory, something added to the main structure or land. 
Area of sign: The area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem, figure, or character together with any frame, other material, open space, or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such writing, representation, emblem, figure, or character from the background against which it is placed. For double-faced signs, only the largest display face shall be measured in computing the sign area, or only one (1) face shall be measured in computing sign area if the display faces are the same size. The display of street address on a ground sign, wall, or window shall not be computed in determining the maximum allowable area of a ground, wall, or window sign. 
Attached sign: Any sign attached to, applied on, or supported by any part of a building, including but not limited to, a wall, window, projecting sign, or a sign on a canopy or awning. 
Awning: An architectural projection or shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building and composed of a covering of rigid or non-rigid materials and/or fabric on a supporting framework that may be either permanent or retractable. 
Awning sign: An awning that contains letters, numbers, symbols, pictures, logos, or visual display, or other communication, attached, painted on, or made an integral part of an awning. For purposes of this Code Section, "awning signs" shall be considered "wall signs." 
Banner: A sign with or without characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentation applied to cloth, paper, plastic, or natural or synthetic fabric of any kind with only such material for a backing. For purposes of this Code Section, a "banner" is a "sign." 
Business Signs on Vehicles: Signs displaying a business name, trademark, or other identifier shall be allowed provided they are moved periodically during the normal course of business and maintain a current and valid registration. When not in use, said vehicles are to be parked in such a manner so as to minimize their visibility from the street and other public property. 
Canopy: A permanent attached structure which projects from and is supported by a building, which serves as a cover providing shelter or decoration and which extends beyond the building. 
Canopy, attached: A multi-sided structure or architectural projection supported by attachment to a building on one (1) or more sides and also supported by columns at additional points. Signs placed on attached canopies are considered "wall signs" for the purposes of this Code Section. 
Canopy, freestanding: A multi-sided structure or architectural projection supported by columns. Signs placed on freestanding canopies are considered "wall signs" for the purposes of this Code Section. 
Canopy sign: A sign on a canopy. For purposes of this Code Section, a sign on a canopy is a "wall sign" (see figure, "Types of Attached Signs"). 
Changeable Copy: Any permanently unframed sign, illuminated or not which is principally devoted to and designed for changeable copy text and graphics, but which specifically excludes time/date/temperature signs and electronic message signs as herein defined. Changeable copy signs may involve either manual or automatic changeable copy. No changeable copy sign may have its copy changed more than two (2) times in a twenty-four-hour period. Any automatic changeable copy sign which changes more than two (2) times in a twenty-four-hour period shall be defined to be an electronic message sign. Portable or moveable signs are not considered changeable copy signs. 
Civic Event: An event sponsored by government organization. 
Conforming sign: A sign that is legally installed and is in compliance with all applicable local laws and ordinances. 
Construction Sign: A sign whose message is limited to identification of architects, engineers, contractors, and other persons involved with the construction project or to the name of the building being constructed, the intended purpose of the building and the expected completion date. 
Derelict sign: A sign that is dilapidated or in such condition as to create a hazard or nuisance, or to be unsafe or fail to comply with the Building or Electrical Codes applicable in the jurisdiction. 
Development Identification Sign: A sign bearing only the name of the multiple tenant development. 
Dimensional Requirements: Those measurements that contain the area, height and spacing requirements for signs. 
Directional Sign: A sign or guide whose sole purpose is to direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the premises on which it is displayed. Examples include: "in" "out", "entrance", "exit", and "driveway". 
Directory sign for multi-tenant development: A sign, distinguished from a project entrance sign, which is allowed on a premises with more than one (1) tenant or occupants of a building. It may be freestanding or a building (wall) sign. Such signs are not usually visible from the public street right-of-way of a development that provides initial access to the property, but rather are located within the development, along a driveway, access way, or parking aisle. 
Double-faced sign: A sign which has two (2) display areas against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is sixty (60) degrees or less, where one (1) face is designed to be seen from one (1) direction and the other face from another direction. Only one (1) face shall be used in computing allowable sign area. 
Electronic Message Board (EMB's): A permanent sign consisting of text, symbolic imagery, or both, that uses an electronic display created through use of a pattern of lights in a dot matrix configuration allowing the sign face to intermittently change the image without having to physically or mechanically replace the sign face. An EMB message changes more than two (2) times in a twenty-four-hour period, and shall be visible for a minimum of three (3) seconds and shall be kept accurate. These will not be deemed to constitute changeable copy or animated signs. 
Erect: To construct, build, raise, assemble, place, affix, attach, create, paint, draw, or in any other way bring into being or establish, but it shall not include any of the foregoing activities when performed as an incident to the change of advertising message or the normal maintenance or repair of a sign structure. 
Façade: The exterior wall of a structure or building exposed to public view or that wall viewed by persons not within the building, including parapets walls. 
Façade, Primary: A primary façade is a building's principle or face elevation that typically fronts a street. On commercial buildings, the primary façade generally includes the storefront, principle entryway, prominent architectural features, a building cornice and window and door opening. Some commercial buildings may feature multiple primary façades, such as those structures located on a street corner. 
Façade, Secondary: A secondary façade has limited architectural features and generally does not have a storefront or other openings. For the purposes of signage, a secondary façade must be architecturally finished with at least one (1) opening (window or secondary entrance) and shall be constructed with similar materials and details as the primary façade. 
Flag: A sign with or without characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentation applied to cloth, paper, plastic, or natural or synthetic fabric of any kind with only such material for a backing. For purposes of this Code Section, except as otherwise provided herein, a "flag" is a "sign." 
Flashing Sign: A sign illuminated by direct or indirect artificial light that flashes on and off in regular or irregular sequences, including, but not limited to strobe light. 
Freestanding Ground Sign, see also Monument Sign. All freestanding ground signs shall be mounted on a monument structure that is equal to or greater than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) the width of a sign itself. Monument structures shall be constructed of brick, stone or stucco materials that have the appearance of brick, stone, or stucco or other durable architectural materials consistent with the design of the primary building on the site. 
Freestanding Pole Sign: A sign which is permanently affixed to the ground by a pole or other structure and which is not part of a building. Freestanding poles shall not be permitted. 
Frontage, building: The width in linear feet of the front exterior wall of a particular building in which an establishment is located. 
Frontage, road: The distance in linear feet of each lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
Ground sign: A permanently affixed sign which is wholly independent of a building for support (i.e., freestanding). A ground sign must be attached to a monument structure and may consist of more than one (1) sign panel, provided all such sign panels are attached to or integrated into one (1) sign structure. 
Handheld Signs or Devices (Also referred to as human signs, sign spinners, living signs and sign walkers:) Signs that are carried, waved, or otherwise displayed by persons either on private or public right-of-way or in a manner visible from a private or public right-of-way and are prohibited. 
Height of sign: The distance in vertical feet from the ground at normal grade to the highest point of the sign, whether that highest point is the frame of the sign face or panel or the support of the sign. 
Holiday decorations: Displays erected on a seasonal basis in observance of religious, national, or state holidays, which are not intended to be permanent. 
Home Occupation Sign: A sign used for a home occupation. 
Identification Sign: A sign used to identify, indicate or advertise the name, logo or other identifying symbol of a building, business, profession, institution, service, or entertainment conducted on a lot upon which the sign is located. 
Incidental Sign: A single face professional or announcement sign attached wholly to a building, window or door containing information relative to emergencies, store hours, credit cards honored, and other similar accessory information. 
Inflatable sign: Any sign that is or can be filled with air or gas. 
Internally illuminated sign: Any sign designed to provide artificial light either through exposed lighting on the sign face or through transparent or translucent material from a light source within the sign. 
Joint Identification Sign: A sign bearing the name of individual tenants located within a multiple-tenant (multi-tenant) development and which includes the name of the development. 
Local Government: Any county, incorporated village, town or city, or any combination of counties, incorporated villages, towns, and cities, acting through a joint program pursuant to provisions of the Act. 
Logo: A business symbol or trademark. 
Lot for sign regulations: Any number of contiguous lots or portions thereof, upon which one (1) or more main structures for a single use are to be erected. 
Marquee Sign: A sign painted in, attached to, or hung from a marquee. For purposes of this Code Section, a marquee shall be considered "wall sign". 
Menu Board: A freestanding or wall mounted sign primarily designed for the display of menu items and prices for the purpose of placing orders for such items in conjunction with a restaurant utilizing drive-through or walk up service. 
Monument sign: A free-standing ground sign that is supported by a solid base (other than poles) and having no more than twenty-four (24) inches of air space visible within or between any portion of the sign display area and sign structure. All freestanding ground signs shall be mounted on a monument base that is equal to or has a length of at least seventy-five (75) percent of the width of the sign face and supporting structures combined. Monument structures and sign supports shall not have any exposed poles and shall be constructed of durable architectural materials (i.e., brick, stucco, or stone) that are consistent with the design and features of the primary facade of the building on the site. 
Examples of a Freestanding Monument Ground Sign (monument structure):

Multiple message sign: A sign, display, or device, which changes the message or copy on the sign electronically by movement or rotation of panels or slats. 
Multiple (Multi) Tenant Development (also referred to as Group Development): A development in which there exists a number of individual and separate occupiable spaces and/or buildings and in which there are appurtenant-shared ancillary facilities (such as parking areas, driveways or pedestrian mall areas) with each space having a separate and operable public entrance opening onto or leading to the area of shared facilities. 
Nit: A unit of illuminative brightness equal to one (1) candle per square meter, measure perpendicular to the rays of the source. 
Nonconforming sign: A legally established sign that does not conform to the minimum standards and provisions of the effective date of this article and/or are made nonconforming by subsequent amendments to this Chapter. Nonconformities include but are not limited to: sign type, sign height, sign copy size and location (both on-premises and off-premises). 
Off-premises sign: Any sign used for the purpose of displaying, advertising, identifying, or directing attention to business products, operations or services sold or offered at a site other than the site where such sign is displayed. 
On-premises sign: Any sign used for the purpose of displaying, advertising, identifying, or directing attention to business products, operations or services sold or offered on the lot site where the sign is located. 
Parapet wall: That portion of a building wall that rises above the roofline. 
Pennant: A small, triangular or rectangular flag or multiples thereof, made of lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, individually supported or attached to each other by means of a string, rope, or other material and meant to be stretched across or fastened to buildings, or between poles and/or structures, and which is designed to move in the wind. For purposes of this Code Section, pennants are "signs." 
Pole or Pylon Cover: An enclosure for concealing and/or for decorating poles or other structural supports of a ground sign. 
Pole or Pylon Sign: A freestanding sign that is affixed, attached or erected on visible pole support structure(s) such that the bottom of the sign face is three (3) feet or more above grade. 
Examples of Types of Pole Signs without monument base:

Portable, Mobile and Moveable signs: Any sign that is designed or is intended to be readily relocated and is not permanently affixed to the ground or to a building. This shall include signs on wheels, trailers, truck beds, or otherwise, devices which are designed to be transported from one (1) place to another. It is characteristic of a portable sign that the space provided for advertising messages may be changed at will by the replacement of lettering or symbols (i.e., a changeable copy sign). Even if the wheels or supports of such sign are removed and the sign converted and attached, temporarily or permanently, to the ground or other structure, said sign shall remain a portable sign. In addition, signs mounted or painted upon a parked vehicle that is positioned for the primary purpose of advertising a business or business activity to the public not being used in the normal course of business shall constitute a portable, mobile and/or moveable sign. Portable, mobile and moveable signs shall also include: windblown or air blown devices, wind signs, streamers, snipe signs, animated motion signs, attention seizing devises, decorative flags, and handheld devices which are signs that are expressly prohibited. 
Principle Structure: The main or predominant structure(s) in which the primary use occurs. Parcels may support more than one (1) principal structure when said structure does not vary in gross floor area by more than twenty (20) percent. 
Principal use sign: Any notice or advertisement, which is permitted in conjunction with (but not necessarily containing copy specifically related to) a single principal use or single principal building located on the property, and which may display a noncommercial, commercial, or other message, the content of which is not regulated by this Code Section. 
Projecting sign: A sign projecting more than fourteen (14) inches from the outside wall or walls of any building, or canopy, portico, or awning, upon which it is located (see also figure, "Types of Attached Signs"). 
Public Agency: Any governmental body (including city, county and state bodies or agencies, and special purpose districts such as fire, water, and sewer districts) that has jurisdiction over property or infrastructure within the City of Mauldin. 
Public Awareness Event: An organized, systematic effort through various communications media to alert the general population of a given area to anything of significant interest or concern. Examples include: Paint the Town Teal, Cancer Awareness, Fire Prevention Month, Child Abuse Awareness. 
Replacement Cost: Cost of replacing a structure or building at current costs at the time of the loss, identical to the one (1) that was destroyed or is being replaced, without application of depreciation. 
Residential Development: A development consisting of buildings for residential uses such as attached and detached single-family dwellings, manufactured homes, apartment complexes, condominiums, townhouses, cottages, etc. and their associated outbuildings such as garages, storage buildings, gazebos, etc. 
Roof sign: A sign projecting higher than the front building wall or any sign supported by or attached to said roof. 
Examples of Types of Roof Signs:

Seasonal Outdoor Sale event: The display and sale of products outside of a building, typically located within a parking area, for a temporary period of time. The following events and similar uses shall qualify as a seasonal sales event: Christmas tree sales, garden sales, produce stands, and pumpkin sales. 
Second Tier Development: A development that is located at least one (1) lot back from a major thoroughfare with no direct street frontage and having shared access with adjacent or adjoining parcels and the development consists of more than one (1) structure on the site or within the development. For purposes of signage, this option does not increase square footage allowances or render a single tenant property as a multi-tenant development unless such conditions are met under another definition in this section. 
Sign: A lettered, numbered, symbolic, pictorial, illuminated, or colored visual display, device, or communication designed or used for the purpose of identifying, announcing, directing, informing, or bring to the attention of others the subject thereon, that is visible from the public right-of-way, a driveway or parking lot with access to a public right-of-way, or from an adjacent property, except as specifically noted otherwise in this Code Section. For purposes of this Code Section, the term "sign" includes but is not limited to "banners," "balloons," "flags," "pennants," "streamers," "windblown devices," and "advertising devices." Furthermore, the term "sign" includes the sign structure, supports, lighting system, and any attachments, ornaments, or other features used to draw the attention of the observers. This definition shall not include art or works of art provided that the art or works of art does not include logos in their traditional form or the name of the business at whose location the art or works of art are located. The art or works of art shall not be located on the sign or sign panel. 
Signable area: In the case of a wall sign, signable area shall be the building face on which the sign is proposed, excluding windows and doors. In the case of canopies, signable area shall be the area of the marquee or canopy wall on which the sign is proposed. For window signs, signable area shall be measured and calculated on the basis of the proportion of area within each individual window frame, not the total window area of all building windows visible from a street. 
Sign face: That part of a sign that is or can be used for advertising purposes. 
Sign Structure: Any structure that supports, has supported or is capable of supporting a signs, including any decorative cover for said sign structure. 
Single Tenant: A single business establishment, or activity or use, which does not share any facilities, such as driveways, parking, storage areas, entrances, etc. with another use. For the purposes of the sign code, a single tenant may also include a use or business that is located on a leased site or individual parcel within a planned development that complies with all development and design codes that are applicable to a stand-alone business located on an individual parcel. 
Site visibility triangle: An area that is measured from the curb or edge of pavement, the triangle area created by a line connecting points on the front and side for lines at a distance (as indicated below) from the intersection of said lines or the extensions of said lines. 
Example of a Site Triangle:

Snipe Sign: A temporary sign which is not permitted or authorized under any provision of this code, and which is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glazed, or otherwise affixed to a tree, pole, stake, fence, traffic control device, or another other object or the ground. 
Example of Snipe Sign:

Special Event: A non-routine activity within the City of Mauldin that brings together a number of people including, but not limited to, a performance, exhibition, festivals, concerts, carnivals, arts and craft shows, religious revivals, political rallies, marches, demonstrations, and similarly recognized temporary activities. A "special event" shall not include weddings and funeral ceremonies, elections, private yard sales, charitable fund-raising such as car washes and other similar activities that are otherwise lawfully conducted and which are in accordance with the provisions of the City's Zoning Regulations. A "special event" shall not include minor fund-raising activities of public schools, churches, or other nonprofit organizations that have a minimal impact on surrounding properties. Any organization claiming nonprofit status shall possess a letter or other documentation from the Internal Revenue Service proving nonprofit status. General and temporary retail sales events shall not constitute a "special event". 
Static: Characterized by a lack of movement, animation or progression. 
Streamers: See "Pennants." 
Street frontage: That portion of a lot that adjoins a public street right-of-way and is measured in linear feet. See example of street frontage below. 
Example of Street Frontage:

Temporary sign: A sign(s) with or without a frame, not permanently affixed to a building or frame, not permanently attached to a building or structure or the ground and is intended for advertisement of a business or service during a limited period of display. Such temporary signs shall only be permitted in conformance with the provisions set forth in subsection 6:4.1.12B, Temporary Signs. 
Examples of Temporary Signs and Temporary Signs with Support Structures:

Time, temperature and date signs: A sign containing numerals or letters, which may be alternately displayed, and which alternating portion only shows the time, date and/or temperature. This sign shall not be considered a flashing or an animated sign. 
Trademark: A name, symbol, or other device identifying a product that is officially registered and legally restricted to use by its owner. 
Visible: Capable of being seen (whether or not legible) without visual aid by a person of normal visual acuity. 
Wall sign: A sign painted or attached flat against and parallel to the exterior wall or surface of a building or other structure and/or which projects from that wall or surface. (see also figure, "Types of Attached Signs"). 
Windblown or air-blown device: Any device not otherwise specifically defined in this Code Section, that is designed to inform or attract, whether or not such device carries a message, and which all or part of the device is set in motion by wind or mechanically compressed air. For purposes of this Code Section, windblown devices are a considered "signs." 
Wind Sign: A suspended or tethered sign made of flexible material such as canvas, sail cloth, plastic or waterproof paper, including but not limited to, banners, pennants, spinners, streamers or balloons. 
Window sign: A sign installed on or within two (2) feet of an exterior window or door and intended to be visible from the exterior of the building. Displays which show products or depict services sold on the premises and which are more than two (2) feet from an exterior window or door shall not be classified as window signs (see also figure, "Types of Attached Signs"). 
6:4.1.3 Applicability. 
A.  Protection of First Amendment Rights. Any sign allowed under this ordinance may contain, in lieu of any other copy, any otherwise lawful non-commercial message that does not direct attention to a business, activity conducted, or product sold or offered at a location not on the same premises where such business sign is located. 
B.  General. Unless exempted in accordance with this ordinance, no sign allowed by this section shall be erected, repaired, altered, relocated, or displayed without first being issued a Sign Permit and complying with the relevant standards of this section. 
C.  Responsibility for Compliance. Review for compliance with the standards is initiated upon submittal of an application for a Sign Permit, Zoning Permit, site plan review, subdivision review, planned development, or formal submittal of another type of application or permit, whichever is appropriate. 
D.  License Requirements. When the cost of work for installation, repair of, or maintenance of a sign exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), a General Contractor with a valid South Carolina State license will be required for the application. For signs that involve electrical work, an electrician with a valid State license is required for the application. All licensed contractors are required to obtain a City Business License. 
6:4.1.4 Maintenance. 
A.  All signs shall be maintained in sound, structural condition at all times. Signs shall be maintained in accordance with the standards in this section and shall be kept free of weeds, grass or vegetation that obscures the view of the sign message. 
B.  The painting and refinishing of the surface of a sign face or sign structure (whether conforming or non-conforming) for the purpose of maintaining an aesthetic appearance for an existing business that is in operation shall be allowed without a sign permit. This provision is not applicable to abandoned signs described in subsection 6:4.1.5, Abandoned Signs. 
C.  No sign shall be allowed to deteriorate to a condition in which it requires repairs or renovations in an amount that exceeds fifty (50) percent of its current replacement cost as determined by a licensed sign company. Signs which are defaced, missing some or all illumination or characters, and whose finishes or facings are chipping, peeling, cracking, or broken in any way shall be deemed to be in disrepair. 
D.  Signs that are in disrepair or deteriorate to such a condition that they are in violation of this ordinance shall be either removed or replaced within thirty (30) calendar days of receiving notice from the City of Mauldin. If a sign is replaced, the new sign shall comply with the sign standards that are in effect when the sign is removed. 
E.  All nonfunctioning bulbs or damaged panels associated with an illumination system shall be replaced or repaired within thirty (30) calendar days of receiving notice from the City. 
F.  It shall be the responsibility of the sign owner to maintain the sign and ensure compliance with the provisions of this section. In the event a sign is no longer in use or is considered abandoned, the property owner shall be responsible for maintenance and/or removal of the sign as required in subsection 6:4.1.5, Abandoned Signs. 
6:4.1.5 Abandoned Signs. 
A.  Nonconforming Signs. When a business vacates a site or a use is discontinued on a site for a period of more than one-hundred eighty (180) calendar days, all existing non-conforming sign(s) and/or off-premise sign(s) associated with the discontinued use shall be considered abandoned and such signs shall be fully removed (including nonconforming support structures) from the property within thirty (30) calendar days from when the site was vacated or upon receiving notification from the City. 
B  Conforming Signs. When a business vacates or discontinues the use of a site and the existing sign(s) are deemed to be conforming to the provisions of this section, all sign face(s) and messages used by the previous business shall be considered abandoned and shall be fully removed within thirty (30) calendar days from when the site was vacated or upon receiving notification from the City. The existing freestanding ground (monument) sign may be used to display general information such as "For Lease" or "For Sale" and may reference contact information to assist in leasing or selling the site. 
C.  Abandoned signs shall not be leased, rented or sold for any off-site advertising. 
D.  The property owner shall be responsible for maintenance and/or removal of an abandoned sign. 
6:4.1.6 Prohibited Signs. 
The following signs shall not be erected or maintained in any zoning district within the City of Mauldin. The Board of Appeals shall not have the authority or jurisdiction to grant variances so as to allow a prohibited sign to be installed or maintained. 
A.  Abandoned or Dilapidated signs. Signs that are abandoned, dilapidated or deteriorated and not maintained in accordance with subsection 6:4.1.4, Maintenance are prohibited. 
B.  Animated or Motion Signs. Signs which employs motion in such a manner as to obstruct or interfere with a driver's view of approaching, merging, or intersecting traffic, or traffic signs, device signs or a sign, which would otherwise interfere with a driver's operation of a motor vehicle are prohibited. 
C.  Attention-seizing devices. Costumes, characters, mascots, statues, or signs which emit sound, odor, or visible matter and which are displayed in a public or private right-of-way or in a manner visible from the public or private right-of-way, whose purpose is to draw attention to a business, or person for commercial purposes whether holding a sign or not are prohibited. 
D.  Decorative Flags (also known as Swooper Flags). Flags that are decorative or otherwise, may not be used in conjunction with a commercial promotion or used as an advertising or attention-getting device for a commercial purpose, or as an integral part of a sign regulated under this section, except as provided for in subsection 6:4.1.12B, Grand Opening Events. 
E.  Handheld Signs or Devices (also referred to as human signs, sign spinners, living signs and sign walkers). Signs that are carried, waved, or otherwise displayed by persons either on private or public right-of-way or in a manner visible from a private or public right-of-way are prohibited. This provision is directed towards such displays intended to draw attention for a commercial purpose. It is not intended to limit the display of placards, banners, flags or other signage by persons participating in non-commercial demonstrations, political rallies and other similar non-profit fundraisers or events. 
F.  Obscene Materials. Any sign that exhibits statements, words, or pictures of obscene, pornographic or immoral subjects is prohibited. 
G.  Off-premises signs. All off-premises signs are prohibited, except as provided for in subsections 6:4.1.7L and M, Temporary Real Estate Signs and subsection 6:4.1.17, Nonconforming Signs, Billboards. 
H.  Portable, Mobile and Moveable signs. Any sign that is portable or not securely attached to a building or to the ground is prohibited as defined, except for such signs that are permitted under the provisions of subsection 6:4.1.12B, Temporary Signs. 
I.  Pylon and Pole Signs. Pylon or pole-mounted on-premises or off-premises freestanding signs are prohibited. (Only freestanding monument signs are permitted.) 
J.  Roof signs. Signs that are not an integral part of the building design but fastened to and supported by (or on) the roof of a building, or projecting over or above the roofline or parapet wall of a building is prohibited. 
K.  Signs or Advertisements on Vehicles not Used in the Normal Course of Business. Signs or advertisements placed on vehicles or trailers that are parked or located for the primary purpose of displaying a sign or advertisement of a business or business activity are prohibited. This shall not include permitted overnight or weekend parking of regularly used marked company vehicles in parking lots. 
L.  Signs or devices Employing Confusing, Distracting or Intense Illumination. No sign shall be permitted which utilizes intense flashing or strobe-type lights, spot lights, flood lights, flashing or blinking lights, or any types of pulsating or moving lights which may impair the vision, causes glare, or otherwise interfere with any drivers' operation of a motor vehicle. 
M.  Signs located in or projecting over a public right-of-way. Signs, whether temporary or permanent, within or projecting over any public right-of-way are expressly prohibited. 
N.  Signs Resembling Traffic Signals, and Emergency Lights. No sign shall be permitted which imitates an official traffic sign or signal, or which displays intermittent lights customarily used in traffic signals or on emergency vehicles or on law enforcement vehicles. Nor shall any sign use the word "stop", "danger", or any other words or phrase, or symbol, or character in a manner, which might be misconstrued as a public safety warning or traffic sign. 
O.  Signs on roadside appurtenances. On-premises or off-premises signs located on roadside appurtenances, including but not limited to benches, roadside benches, bus stop shelters, planters, utility poles, street signs, trees, parking meter poles, and refuse containers, are prohibited. 
P.  Snipe Signs. Snipe signs, bandit signs or other temporary signs that are attached to posts, trees, utility poles, fences or similar support structures for the purpose of advertising an event or product that is not located on the property for which it is advertising or is located within a public or private right-of-way or located in a manner that is visible to a public or private right-of-way are prohibited. This provision shall exclude such signs that are permitted in accordance with subsection 6:4.1.12B, Temporary Signs. 
Q.  Wind Signs. Including but not limited to circulars, handbills, banners, inflatable signs and balloons, dirigibles, flags, streamers, spinners, placards, pennants or similar attention seizing, wind-activated devices that are used for a commercial purpose are expressly prohibited, except as provided for in subsection 6:4.1.12B.1) Grand Opening Events. 
6:4.1.7 Signs Exempt from Regulations. 
Unless otherwise prohibited in this chapter, the following signs are exempt from regulation under this article. Such signs shall not be considered in determining the allowable number of signs on a parcel or determining the maximum square footage allowance; provided, however, that said signs shall comply with all other applicable sections of this ordinance: 
A.  American flags flown in accordance with federal guidelines set forth in Title 4, Chapter 1 of the United States Code and not used for commercial purposes. 
B.  Merchandise, pictures or models of products or services that are incorporated as an integral part of a window display. 
C.  Official flags of a nation, state, county or city, displayed in a dignified manner and not for commercial purposes. 
D.  Official governmental notices and notices posted by governmental officers in the performance of their duties; governmental signs, and signs installed under governmental authority which notes the donation of buildings, structures or streetscape materials (such as, but not limited to, benches, trash cans, lampposts and park facilities). 
E.  Signs displayed on trucks, buses, trailers, or other vehicles which are being operated in the normal course of business and which are affixed or painted onto moving vans, delivery trucks, contractors' vehicles and equipment are exempt unless such signs are used in a manner prohibited under subsection 6:4.1.6.K. (Use in a normal course of business shall mean driving the vehicle on any street, parking the vehicle at the place of business, or place where business or a service is being conducted.) 
F.  Signs required for or specifically authorized for a public purpose by any law, statute or ordinance. These signs may be any law, statue or ordinance. These signs may be of any type, number, area, and height above grade, location, or illumination authorized by law, statute, or ordinance under which such signs are required or authorized. 
G.  Signs approved as part of a City adopted wayfinding program. 
H.  Temporary or permanent signs erected by government agencies, public utility companies or construction companies to warn of danger or hazardous conditions, including signs indicating the presence of underground cables, gas lines and similar devices or signs providing direction around such conditions. 
I.  Trademarks or product names which are displayed as part of vending machines, dispensing machines, and gasoline pumps. 
J.  Temporary Residential Advertising Signs used to advertise and promote events and activities within a residential neighborhood shall be exempt from the provisions of the Sign Ordinance; provided that the sign(s) are located a minimum of four (4) feet from the back of curb or street edge on publicly maintained streets; and that such sign(s) do not interfere with ingress and egress points and site lines for vehicular traffic within the neighborhood. 
( Ord. No. 777 , § 1, 9-15-2014) 
6:4.1.8 Signs Exempt from Obtaining a Permit. 
The following signs are allowed in all zoning districts and shall not require a sign permit. However, such signs shall conform to the requirements set forth below and to other applicable requirements of this article. In any case where a sign of a certain size is exempted by this section and an applicant desires to erect a larger sign than the area of sign exempted, said sign shall only be permitted upon approval of a variance heard by the Board of Appeals. 
A.  Automatic Teller Machines. Signs contained on automatic teller machines that do not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in area per machine. 
B.  Civic and Public Awareness Events. Such signs shall be allowed and are subject to the following standards: 
1.  One (1) temporary ground mounted sign shall be allowed per parcel with a maximum sign face area of thirty-two (32) square feet and not exceeding six (6) feet in height. 
2.  The duration of the event shall not exceed five (5) business days. 
3.  Signs shall be set back at least five (5) feet from the street right-of-way and shall not obstruct visibility at ingress and egress points into the site or at street intersections. 
C.  Construction Signs. The following types of temporary construction signs shall be allowed and are subject to the following standards: 
1.  Temporary Subdivision Signs: Temporary signs announcing a new residential or commercial subdivision development: One (1) temporary sign shall be permitted per principal entrance into the subdivision and must be erected on the land or premises of which is being advertised. Sign(s) shall not be illuminated, and shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet in area and eight (8) feet in height; sign shall be located outside of the street right-of-way and the site visibility triangle and shall be set back at least eight (8) feet from any property line. Sign(s) shall be removed from the premises upon ninety (90) percent completion of the development or upon erection of the permanent subdivision or development ground sign. 
2.  Combined Temporary Subdivision Sign. A sign that announces the name of the subdivision or development, and also names other multiple entities associated with the project (i.e. real estate group, contractor, architect and engineer) may be combined on one (1) sign structure per principal entrance into the subdivision and must be erected on the land or premises of which is being advertised. Sign(s) shall not be illuminated, and shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area and twelve (12) feet in height; sign shall be located outside of the street right-of-way and the site visibility triangle and shall be set back at least eight (8) feet from any property line. Sign(s) shall be removed from the premises upon ninety (90) percent completion of the development or upon erection of the permanent subdivision or development ground sign. The use of a combined sign prohibits the development from obtaining other temporary signage listed in this section. 
3.  Temporary Construction and Remodeling Signs: Contractor's signs, Craftsmen's signs and other signs pertaining to construction are limited to one (1) construction sign per road frontage. Sign(s) shall not be illuminated and must be erected on the land or premises of where construction is occurring. The following sign(s) may not be erected or displayed prior to the issuance of required construction permits and shall be removed with seven (7) calendar days of completion of the project. Signs must be located outside of the street right-of-way and the site visibility triangle and shall be set back at least eight (8) feet from any property line. 
• For attached or detached single family and two-family (duplex) homes: A maximum of four (4) square feet in area and three (3) feet in height is permitted; 
• For group residential developments including condominium, townhome and multi-family developments: sixteen (16) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height is permitted; 
• For non-residential sites located in O-D, C-1, C-2, CRD and PD-R, PD-C zoning districts: sixteen (16) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height is permitted; and 
• For non-residential sites located in S-1 and I-1 zoning districts: thirty-two (32) square feet in area and eight (8) feet in height is permitted. 
D.  Directional signs. Directional signs shall be located on the premises or development to which directions are indicated. Directional signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area; two (2) faces per sign and shall not exceed three (3) feet in height, if freestanding. These signs may only be internally illuminated. Directional signs shall not be located within the street right-of-way or located on the roof of any structure. The maximum number of directional signs per site shall be four (4). 
E.  Incidental informational signs. Information signs bearing only property numbers, post office box numbers, names of occupants of premises, or other identification of premises and not bearing any commercial connotations shall be permitted up to one (1) square feet in sign face area. 
F.  Incidental signs. Signs that are not oriented or intended to be legible from a thoroughfare, public right-of-way or private road, or beyond the boundaries of the lot shall be allowed when such sign(s) is attached to a device or structure that is located at least fifteen (15) feet from the street right-of-way and does not exceed four (4) square feet in sign face area each. Examples include but are not limited to the following: lettering, credit card stickers, vending machine signs, pump-topper signs, internal canopy column signs not directed towards the street, inspection certificates and pricing information on gasoline pumps; "flammable or hazard signs on enclosures for fuel canisters, and other similar informational and incidental signs. Signs shall not block or interfere with ADA accessibility nor restrict pedestrian movement. 
G.  Oil rack signs. Oil marketed at the pump island shall not exceed three (3) square feet in sign face area. 
H.  Outdoor Menu Board. Up to two (2) menu boards are permitted per ordering station for restaurants. The board shall be single-faced and shall not exceed forty-two (42) square feet in area. Lettering and illumination shall be designed so that such sign is not visible from a thoroughfare, street right-of-way or beyond the boundaries of the lot for which said sign is used. 
I.  Political Campaign Signs. Signs announcing candidates seeking public office or relating to any election of public referendum shall be permitted in all districts subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Signs shall be confined to placement on private property, and shall be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the back of the curb, or leading edge of the street pavement. 
2.  Such signs shall not impede site visibility at property ingress and egress points or at street intersections. 
3.  Signs shall only be posted thirty (30) calendar days prior to the election and shall be removed within seven (7) calendar days after the election or referendum for which they were prepared, is decided. The property owner and the political candidate shall be equally responsible for the removal of the signs. 
4.  The regulations of this section do not prohibit the purchase of advertising space on a permitted advertising sign, which shall also be allowed in addition to the signs permitted by this section. 
J.  Signs conveying political, ideological, religious, social or governmental messages. Signs that are not related to businesses, services or manufacturing activities or the goods connected therewith, are permitted provided such signs do not exceed four (4) square feet in sign face area and four (4) feet in height. This excludes political campaign signs that are subject to the provisions of subsection 6.4.1.8I, Political Campaign Signs. 
K.  Sign Copy changes and maintenance. No permit shall be required for copy changes made to an approved changeable copy sign or menu board, provided that the changes proposed do not change the classification or legal status of the sign under this article. 
L.  Temporary real estate signs. One (1) temporary non-illuminated sign for each street frontage, advertising real estate for sale, rental or lease of the property is allowed, provided such sign(s) complies with the following standards: 
1.  All real estate signs must be located on the property of which is being advertised. 
2.  All real estate signs shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from the street right-of-way; 
3.  Sign(s) shall not be located in a manner that obstructs visibility at intersections or main entrances into subdivisions or other types of housing developments, or established signage in a multi-tenant development; 
4.  Signs shall be removed within seven (7) calendar days after the closing of the sale, rental or lease of the property; 
5.  For attached or detached single family and two-family (duplex) homes: A maximum of six (6) square feet in sign face area and six (6) feet in height is permitted; 
6.  For group residential developments including condominium, townhome and multi-family developments: sixteen (16) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height is permitted; 
7.  For non-residential sites located in O-D, C-1, C-2, CRD and PD-R, PD-C zoning districts: sixteen (16) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height is permitted; 
8.  For non-residential sites located in S-1 and I-1 zoning districts: thirty-two (32) square feet in sign face area and eight (8) feet in height is permitted. 
M.  Temporary Weekend Real Estate Direction Sign. Provided such signs comply with the following standards: 
1.  The number of such signs shall be limited to three (3) signs total, only two (2) of which may be located off-premises and with property owner consent. 
2.  Signs shall be located on private property and shall not encroach into the street right-of-way, and shall not obstruct visibility at intersections or main entrances into subdivisions or other types of housing developments; 
3.  Signs shall not exceed three (3) feet in height and four (4) square feet in area; 
4.  Open house signs shall not be erected before 6:00 p.m. on Friday evening and shall be removed not later than 8:00 a.m. on the following Monday morning. 
N.  Temporary Yard Sale and Garage Sale Signs. Provided such signs comply with the following standards: 
1.  The number of such signs shall be limited to three (3) signs total, only two (2) of which may be located off-premises and with the property owner's consent for which the sign is placed. All signs shall bear the address and/or location for which the sale is being advertised. 
2.  Signs shall be located on private property and shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from the street right-of-way line. In no circumstance shall said sign encroach into the street right-of-way; nor shall such sign obstruct visibility at street intersections or main entrances into a subdivision or other form of housing or commercial developments. 
3.  Signs shall not exceed three (3) feet in height and four (4) square feet in sign face area (size). 
4.  Such signs shall not be erected more than one (1) day before the event and shall be removed not later than 8:00 a.m. the day following the sale date. 
O.  Temporary Signs Advertising Employment Opportunities. Provided such signs comply with the following standards: 
1.  One (1) professionally lettered sign shall be permitted per each individual business for a period not exceeding thirty (30) calendar days at any given time. Such sign shall be located on the premises or development of which is being advertised. 
2.  Such sign shall be professionally designed and lettered and shall be displayed in a neat and orderly manner at all times. Handwritten signs of any form are expressly prohibited. 
3.  Such sign shall either be a temporary ground mounted sign or temporary attached wall sign. Temporary ground mounted signs shall be securely attached to a rigid framed structure that is supported on at least two (2) sides. Temporary wall mounted signs shall be secured and held taut across the wall surface to maintain readability and to avoid sagging, tearing and/or and flapping in the wind. 
4.  Signs shall be located on private property and shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from the street right-of-way line. In no circumstance shall said sign encroach into the street right-of-way; nor shall such sign obstruct visibility at street intersections or main entrances into a subdivision or other form of housing or commercial developments; 
5.  Signs shall not exceed three (3) feet in height and four (4) square feet in sign face area (size). 
P.  Window Signs. Signs located on the interior side of the window glass advertising merchandise and services provided by the business are permitted. Signs may be hung inside the window, painted, affixed, or etched on the glass and shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Window signage shall not cover more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total window area on the side of the building on which it is displayed. Illuminated window signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area. 
2.  Tenants in structure that are located less than thirty-five (35) feet from the street right-of-way may increase the amount of window display area to thirty-five (35) percent. Illuminated window signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area. 
3.  This provision shall not include additional advertisement of the business name or logo. If advertising of the name or logo is used on these signs, it shall be computed as part of the total allowable signage for the lot. 
6:4.1.9 Signs Requiring Sign Permits. 
A permit shall be required for the erection, alteration, replacement, installation, or change of any sign intended for view from a public or private right-of-way including the following: 
A.  Wall Signs. 
B.  On-Premises Freestanding Monument Signs. 
C.  Permanent Banners (proposal to be replaced with Temporary Banner provision). 
D.  Temporary Signs. 
E.  Signs with Special Provisions. 
F.  Any other sign not specifically exempted herein. 
6:4.1.10 General Standards for all Permanent Signs. 
All permanent signs shall comply with the following general standards: 
A.  Sign Allotment. A development or business is allotted a designated amount of signage based on the standards in this section. 
B.  Construction Standards. All signs shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the structural and safety requirements of the International Building Code. Signs with electrical components shall be approved by Underwriters Laboratory (UL) as specified in the National Electrical code. An Underwriters Laboratory label is required on the outside ballast and on the cabinet that seals the sign structure. All sides of a sign must be properly finished with no exposed electrical wires or protrusions. 
C.  Responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the sign owner and/or sign contractor to construct, and maintain the sign and ensure compliance with the provisions of this section. 
D.  Materials. All signs shall be constructed of high-quality, permanent materials and shall be designed to complement the related building(s) for which they advertise. 
E.  Compatibility. No sign within a commercial district shall be erected within a twenty-five-foot radius from any residential district boundary line unless such sign would meet the sign requirements for nonresidential uses permitted within the residential district to which it is adjacent. 
F.  Location. Unless specifically stated otherwise, freestanding ground signs shall be set back a minimum of eight (8) feet from the street right-of-way line. 
G.  Visibility. Signs shall adhere to site visibility requirements in Section 3:3 so as not to obstruct visibility at intersections and ingress and egress points onto the premises. 
H.  Sign Safety. Signs shall not be placed where they pose a hazard to pedestrians or vehicular traffic. 
I.  Sign Lighting. Signs that are illuminated shall comply with standards outlined in subsection 6:4.1.14, Sign Illumination Standards. Signs utilizing external illumination shall be hooded and shielded so that the light source is not visible from any public or private right-of-way, sidewalk, adjacent premises or residence, so as to cause a traffic hazard or nuisance. 
J.  Conflict with Other Regulations. Where other regulations affect the size, placement, amount and type of signage, the more restrictive regulation shall apply. 
6:4.1.11 Calculation of Display Area for Signage. 
A.  [Advertising Display Surface.] The sign face shall be the advertising display surface area of the sign (see figure below. A × B). 
B.  Size of Sign Face Area. In the case of freestanding ground signs, the sign face area consists of the entire surface area of the sign on which copy could be placed (see figure below. A x B). 
C.  Supporting Structure Not Counted. The supporting structure or bracing of a sign shall not be counted as part of the sign face area unless such structure or bracing is made a part of the sign's message. 
D.  Two-sided Signs. Where a sign has two (2) identical display faces back to back, the area of only one (1) face shall be considered the sign face area. Where a sign has more than one (1) display face, all areas that can be viewed simultaneously shall be considered the sign face area as described in Figure 1, Two-Sided Signs: 
Figure 1: Two-Sided Signs

E.  Signs with a Background. In the case of a sign whose message is fabricated together with the background which borders or frames that message, the sign face area shall be the total area of the entire background as depicted in Figure 2, Signs with a Background: 
Figure 2: Signs with a Background:

F.  Signs with No Border or Frame. In the case of a sign whose message is applied to a background which provides no border or frame, the sign face area shall be the area of the smallest rectangle that can encompass all words, letters, figures, emblems, logo's and other elements of the sign message as depicted in Figure 3, Signs with No Border or Frame: 
Figure 3: Signs with No Border or Frame:

G.  Sign Height. Sign height shall be measured from the base of the sign at normal grade to the highest point of the sign support structure, or sign face, whichever is higher. For the purposes of this subsection, "normal grade" shall mean the newly established grade after construction, not including any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases where the normal grade is below the grade of the street to which the sign is oriented, the sign height shall be measured from the adjacent crown of that road as depicted in Figure 5, Sign Height: 
Figure 5: Sign Height

6:4.1.12 Regulations Applying to Specific Types of Signs. 
A.  On-Premises Signs Allowed in Non-Residential Zoning Districts. The following signs are allowed in all non-residential zoning districts. The maximum sign allowance for a development is subject to the amount of sign area permitted within the zoning district where the sign or signs are to be located. An illustration of the different types of attached wall signs is illustrated below in Figure 6, Types of attached signs. 
1)  Wall Signs. Wall signs are permitted on the primary building façade and architecturally finished secondary facades of the primary structure. Building sides that do not meet the architectural standards described below do not qualify for wall signs. For shopping centers and similar multi-tenant buildings with individual entrances, the wall sign area shall be calculated independently for each individual tenant space. Signs on the wall of a building (including signs attached flat against the wall and painted wall signs) shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Attachment. The maximum projection for a wall sign shall be twelve (12) inches. 
b.  Allowable Wall Sign Area: Primary Facade. The maximum sign face allowance for attached wall signs for both single-tenant and multi-tenant developments shall be one and one-half (1.5) square feet per linear foot of said building frontage. In no case shall the sign area exceed the total amount of sign area permitted within the zoning district where the sign or signs are to be located, refer to Table A-1 Walls Signs, below. 
c.  Double Frontage, Corner Lots: Secondary Facades. If a building is located on a parcel or lot with more than one (1) street and the façade facing the secondary street is architecturally finished with at least one (1) opening (window or secondary entrance) and is constructed with similar materials and details as the primary façade, an additional wall sign equivalent to the primary façade allowance is permitted. 
d.  Projecting Signs. Projecting signs shall count towards the overall sign allotment for the development and shall be permitted in lieu of a freestanding ground sign on any street frontage with a public entrance to the space. Only one (1) projecting sign per tenant shall be permitted and shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  A projecting sign may not extend more than five (5) feet above the highest point of the building façade or parapet wall upon which it is mounted; 
2.  A projecting sign shall not project more than three (3) feet from the façade of the building and shall not be located any closer than eighteen (18) inches to a vertical plane at the street curb line; 
3.  Projecting signs may not extend beyond the property lines, or encroach into a publicly maintained right-of-way unless specifically permitted in another section of this ordinance; 
4.  Projecting signs shall maintain an eight-foot clearance above grade or at sidewalk level; 
5.  The proposed extension of a projecting sign shall present no physical threat of safety to pedestrians, motor vehicle drivers and passengers; and 
6.  A detailed drawing, provided by a licensed sign company that meets the current International Building Codes specification for projecting signs; including the current adopted building code requirements for loading such as snow and wind shall be presented for review and approval prior to the installation of the sign. 
e.  Awnings and Canopies. Awnings and Canopies that contain any form of advertisement or signage for the business on which they are located shall count towards the overall sign allotment for the development and shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Awnings. The copy area of an Awning sign shall not exceed an area equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the background area of the awning or awning surface to which such a sign is affixed or applied, or the permitted sign face area for wall signs, whichever is less. Neither the background, color of an awning, nor any graphic treatment or embellishment thereto such as striping, patterns nor valances shall be included in the calculation when determining the maximum of sign face allowance; 
2.  Canopy. The permanently-affixed copy area or sign face area of a canopy sign shall not exceed an area equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the face area of the canopy upon which the sign is affixed or applied, or the permitted sign face area for wall signs, whichever is less; 
3.  Awnings and Canopies may not extend beyond the boundary of any property line or encroach into a publicly maintained right-of-way unless specifically permitted in another section of this ordinance; 
4.  Awnings and Canopies shall maintain an eight-foot clearance above grade or at sidewalk level; 
5.  The proposed extension of an awning or canopy sign shall present no physical threat of safety to pedestrians, motor vehicle drivers and passengers; and 
6.  A detailed drawing shall be provided by a licensed sign company that meets the current International Building Codes specification for awnings and canopies; including the current adopted building code requirements for loading such as snow and wind shall be presented for review and approval prior to the installation of such sign and/or structure. 
Figure 6: Types of Attached Signs

Table: A-1, Wall Signs-Commercial 
Wall Sign Allowance for Non-Residential DevelopmentZoning
District Sign Face
Area Allowed Single-Tenant
Sign Allotment Multi-Tenant Sign
Allotment Maximum Sq. Ft.
Allowance Office District (O-D) 
  
Planned Office Development (POD) 
  
Central Redevelopment District (CRD) 1.5 square foot per linear foot of building frontage, or up to the maximum whichever is less. One (1) wall sign per primary façade with an exception that signs > sixty (60) square feet may be divided into two (2) separate wall signs; 
  
Corner lot development: one (1) additional wall sign on secondary finished façade and 
  
One (1), ten (10) square foot rear building sign. One (1) wall sign per individual tenant space; 
  
Corner lot development: one (1) additional wall sign on secondary finished façade 
  
One (1), ten (10) square foot rear building sign. Single Tenant: one hundred fifty (150) square feet; 
  
Multi-tenant: two hundred (200) square feet. Commercial 1 (C-1) 
  
Commercial 2 (C-2) 1.5 square foot per linear foot of building frontage, or up to the maximum whichever is less. One (1) wall sign per primary façade with an exception that signs > sixty (60) square feet may be divided into two (2) separate wall signs; 
  
Corner lot development: one (1) additional wall sign on secondary finished façade and 
  
One (1), ten (10) square foot rear building sign. One (1) wall sign per individual tenant space; 
  
Corner lot development: one (1) additional wall sign on secondary finished façade 
  
One (1), ten (10) square foot rear building sign. Single Tenant: two hundred (200) square feet; 
  
Multi-tenant: three hundred (300) square feet. Service (S-1) 
  
Industrial (I-1) 1.5 square foot per linear foot of building frontage, or up to the maximum whichever is less. One (1) wall sign per primary façade with an exception that signs > 60 square feet may be divided into two (2) separate wall signs; 
  
Corner lot development: one (1) additional wall sign on secondary finished façade and 
  
One (1), ten (10) square foot rear building sign One (1) wall sign per individual tenant space; 
  
Corner lot development: one (1) additional wall sign on secondary finished façade 
  
One (1), ten (10) square foot rear building sign. Single Tenant: two hundred fifty (250) square feet; 
  
Multi-tenant: three hundred fifty (350) square feet.  
2)  Freestanding Ground Signs (Monument Signs). Freestanding monument ground signs are allowed in all non-residential districts for both single-tenant and multi-tenant developments with an allowable size not to exceed the maximum square footage limits set forth by the zoning district in which the sign is located. The use of freestanding Pole Signs is prohibited. Refer to Table A-2, Freestanding Ground Signs, below. 
a.  Construction and Design. All freestanding ground signs shall be mounted on a monument base that has a length equal to or of at least seventy-five (75) percent of the width of the sign face and supporting structures combined. Monument structures shall be constructed of durable architectural materials (i.e., brick, stucco, or stone) that are consistent with the design and features of the primary facade of the building on the site (refer to definition). 
b.  Landscaping. Landscape islands are required to be placed around all new ground signs within thirty (30) days of sign erection. Shrubbery and/or plantings must not exceed a height that would interfere with foot or vehicle traffic or visibility of the sign. At any time an existing sign is altered or improved, not including regular maintenance, the landscaped island must be installed in accordance with the requirements for a new sign within sixty (60) days of completion of the sign. 
c.  Location. Unless otherwise, specifically allowed in this code, freestanding ground signs shall be set back a minimum of eight (8) feet from the street right-of-way line. No freestanding ground sign shall extend over any structure or adjoining property line or extend into a public right-of-way. Freestanding ground signs shall not be located within forty (40) lineal feet of another freestanding ground sign. 
d.  Single-tenant Development Allowance. The size of the sign face for a freestanding ground sign shall be based on length of street frontage of the lot and the zoning district for which the sign(s) is proposed. Single tenant development signs shall comply with the standards referenced in Table A-2, Freestanding Ground Signs and shall also comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Number of Signs. One (1) freestanding ground sign per developed site, lot or parcel is permitted for a single-tenant development. Where a site or parcel fronts on more than one street, one (1) additional freestanding ground sign shall be permitted provided that the signs are located a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from one another; and does not exceed the maximum square footage allowance for the development. 
• Incentive: Single-tenant developments located on corner or thru-lots have the option of foregoing two (2) freestanding ground signs and installing one (1) freestanding ground sign that is ten (10) percent larger in size than the permitted freestanding ground sign allowance for the development. 
b.  Sign copy. The sign copy for single-tenant development signs shall include the business identification (name, logo) and may also include the principal use or commodity sold or offered on the site. A maximum of forty (40) percent of the sign area may be used for a changeable copy sign, or permitted electronic messaging board (EMB) or LED sign. Such sign shall comply with the standards in subsection 6:4.1.12A.3, Electronic Messaging Boards (EMB). 
c.  Height. All single-tenant freestanding ground signs shall have a maximum height of sixteen (16) feet. 
e.  Multi-Tenant Development Sign Allowance (including Group Office and Group Commercial Developments). Multi-tenant developments may erect either a freestanding ground Development Identification Sign or freestanding ground Joint Identification Sign. The size of the sign face for a freestanding ground sign shall be based on the length of street frontage of the lot or development, the number of tenants in the development and the zoning district for which the sign(s) is proposed. Multi-tenant development signs shall comply with the standards referenced in Table A-2, Freestanding Ground Signs and shall also comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Number of Signs. One (1) freestanding ground Development Identification Sign or freestanding ground Joint Identification Sign is permitted for a multi-tenant development. Where a development fronts on more than one (1) street, one (1) additional freestanding ground sign shall be permitted on that road frontage. 
• Incentive: Multi-tenant developments located on corner or thru-lots have the option of foregoing two (2) freestanding ground signs and installing one (1) freestanding ground sign that is twenty (20) percent larger in size than the permitted freestanding ground sign allowance for the development. 
b.  Sign copy. The sign copy for a multi-tenant development identifies the name of the development, shopping center, or group commercial development on which the sign is located and also provides identification for some or all individual tenants within the development. Freestanding ground signs for multi-tenant developments shall comply with the maximum size and height standards outlined in Table A-2, Freestanding Ground Signs, and shall also comply with the following requirements: 
a)  A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the sign area shall be used to identify the name and/or address of the overall development. 
b)  A maximum of forty (40) percent of the sign area may be used for a changeable copy sign, or permitted Electronic Messaging Board (EMB) or LED sign. Such sign shall comply with the standards in subsection 6:4.1.12A.3, Electronic Messaging Boards. 
c)  The sign copy shall provide a reasonable amount of area for the advertising of individual tenant spaces within the development. 
c.  Height. The height of a freestanding ground sign in a multi-tenant development shall be dependent upon the total number of individual tenant spaces in the development, refer to 
Table: A-2, Freestanding Ground Signs-Commercial 
Freestanding Monument Sign Allowance for Non-Residential Development Zoning District Sign Allotment Sign Face Area Single-Tenant Maximum Size Face and Sign Height Multi-Tenant Maximum Size and Sign Height (Based on # Tenants) Office District (O-D) 
  
Planned Office Development (POD) 
  
Central Redevelopment District (CRD) 1 sign per street front; 
  
Single Tenant development signs must be spaced minimum of 150 feet apart. .5 square foot per linear foot of road frontage or up to the maximum whichever is less. Maximum size: 150 square feet 
  
Height: 16 feet 0-4 Tenants: 
Maximum size: 150 s.f. 
Height: 16 feet 
  
5-9 Tenants: 
Maximum size: 175 s.f. 
Height: 20 feet 
  
10 + Tenants: 
Maximum size: 200 s.f. 
Height: 25 feet Commercial 1 (C-1) 
  
Commercial 2 (C-2) 
  
(Including Group 
Developments) 1 sign per street front; 
  
Single Tenant development signs must be spaced minimum of 150 feet apart. 1 square foot per linear foot of road frontage or up to the maximum whichever is less. Maximum size: 
200 square feet 
  
Height: 16 feet 0-4 Tenants: 
Maximum size: 200 s.f. 
Height: 16 feet 
  
5-9 Tenants: 
Maximum size: 225 s.f. 
Height: 20 feet 
  
10 + Tenants: 
Maximum size: 250 s.f. 
Height: 25 feet Service (S-1) 
  
Industrial (I-1) 
  
(Including Group 
Developments, and Group Industrial Developments) One (1) sign per street front; 
  
Single Tenant development signs must be spaced minimum of 150 feet apart. 1.5 square foot per linear foot of road frontage or up to the maximum whichever is less. Maximum Size: 
300 square feet 
  
Height: 16 feet 0-4 Tenants: 
Maximum size: 300 s.f. 
Height: 16 feet 
  
5-9 Tenants: 
Maximum size: 350 s.f. 
Height: 20 feet 
  
10 + Tenants: 
Maximum size: 375 s.f. 
Height: 25 feet  
3)  Changeable Copy, Electronic Messaging Boards (EMB) and Light Emitting Diode (LED). Such signs are permitted in all non-residential zoning districts and are subject the following standards: 
a.  No such sign shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet of a residential zoning district, unless specifically allowed under a separate provision of the code. 
b.  The images and messages displayed must be complete in subject matter without continuation in content to the next image or message. 
c.  The message or image must remain fixed for at least six (6) seconds. The transition to a new message or image shall not include any scrolling, animation flashing, fading or other illusions of motion that are otherwise prohibited. 
d.  Only one (1) such sign shall be permitted per developed lot whether installed as a wall sign or part of a freestanding ground sign. EMB's shall only be permitted as a wall sign if the development does not have a freestanding ground sign. EMB's located on a freestanding ground sign shall be permanently attached to and located entirely within the width of the host sign. 
e.  Off-premises advertising is prohibited. This section does not pertain to community announcements, and non-profit fundraising information. 
f.  No more than forty (40) percent of the sign face area allowed for a freestanding ground sign may be devoted towards an EMB sign. Theaters, auditoriums, stadiums, convention centers, and like public event facilities may exceed this standard to seventy-five (75) percent of the allowed sign face area. 
g.  No sign shall be brighter than is necessary for clear and adequate visibility and shall not exceed a maximum of five thousand (5,000) nits during daylight hours and five hundred (500) nits from dusk to dawn. 
h.  All signs must be equipped with both a dimmer control and a photocell that automatically adjusts the display's intensity according to natural ambient light conditions. 
i.  Prior to the issuance of a sign permit, the applicant shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer or sign contractor that the light intensity has been factory pre-set not to exceed five thousand (5,000) nits and that the intensity level is protected from end-user manipulation. 
4)  Time and Temperature Signs. Time, date and temperature signs that do not exceed ten (10) square feet in sign area shall not count against the allowable sign face area. Signs that exceed ten (10) square feet shall be counted towards the maximum sign face area permitted for the development. Such signs shall only be permitted as a wall sign if there is not an existing freestanding ground sign located on the development. 
B.  Temporary Signs. The following temporary signs are allowed in all commercial, service and industrial districts but require the issuance of a sign permit prior to display of such sign(s): 
1)  Incidental A-frame Signs. An A-frame sign shall be considered incidental and shall be permitted subject to the following standards: 
a.  Such sign must be located on a parcel where the building is set back at least thirty-five (35) feet from the street and the A-frame sign is located no farther than three (3) feet from the store front entrance in which is being advertised. 
b.  Such sign shall meet the size and design standards outlined in subsection 6:4.1.12B.4)h. below. 
c.  In no case shall an A-frame sign used under this provision be located closer than thirty (30) feet of the street right-of-way. 
d.  The use of an A-frame sign under this provision shall disqualify businesses from utilizing the temporary sign allowance provisions outlined below in subsection 6:4.1.12B.4), Temporary Advertising Display Signs for Individual Businesses. 
e.  Such signs shall be removed at the end of each business day. 
2)  Grand Opening Events. A new business upon opening, may utilize the following advertising signs for a period not to exceed fourteen (14) calendar days: 
a.  Two (2) temporary signs are permitted and may be ground mounted or attached to the wall of a structure each with a maximum size of thirty-two (32) square feet, and if ground mounted, a maximum height of six (6) feet. Ground mounted signs shall be set back at least five (5) feet from the street right-of way. 
b.  Streamers, pennants, flags, balloons, and similar exhibits that do not exceed a total of ten (10) displays shall be permitted. (Each fifty (50) feet of streamers and pennants shall count as one (1) display. Each inflatable of a non-balloon variety counts as one (1) display. Each balloon or bouquet of balloons counts as one (1) display, etc.) 
c.  For businesses that are located in a multi-tenant development, all displays except for the banner shall be displayed immediately adjacent to the business' space or in the adjacent portion of the parking lot of the parcel. 
d.  This temporary sign allotment is independent from other permitted temporary sign allowances. The business may elect to begin utilizing the temporary signage allowed under subsection 6:4.1.12B.4, Temporary Banners for Individual Businesses, immediately after terminating use of the Grand Opening banners allowed under this section. 
e.  For the purposes of this section, a change in ownership, type of ownership, or of management does not constitute a new business. 
f.  A sign permit is required for a grand opening sign package and must be obtained prior to the installation and display of such signs. A simple site plan will be required with the application illustrating the location of all sign elements and the distance from the street right-of-way and driveway locations. A sketch plan will also be required indicating the size of the banner and the method of attachment. 
3)  Temporary Banner in Lieu of Permanent Signage. A banner may be used while awaiting installation of permanent signage to temporarily cover existing signage needs in the event of a business name or logo change, or similar circumstance as follows: 
a.  The banner meets the sign area requirements of the sign it is designed to temporarily obscure or replace. 
b.  The banner is securely fastened to the wall or permanent sign structure to draw the banner material taut and to prevent flapping. 
c.  A sign permit for such use may be issued for up to sixty (60) calendar days after the City has issued a zoning permit for the business. As part of the permit application, the applicant shall describe the sign banner details (size, material type, attachment method) and the intended date of installation of the banner signage. 
4)  Temporary Advertising Display Signs for Individual Businesses. Each individual business may be issued a permit for a temporary sign for an advertising display period of not more than two (2), fourteen (14) consecutive calendar days per quarter each year. A sign permit shall be required for each advertising event. (For example: Up to two (2) separate sign permits may be issued for an advertising period of not more than fourteen (14) calendar days each during the months of January, February and March; two (2) separate permits may be issued for an advertising period of not more than fourteen (14) calendar days each during the months of April, May and June, and so forth.) A sign permit must be obtained prior to the installation of any temporary sign and all temporary signs shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  All temporary signs requiring a sign permit shall be located on the parcel or development on which the business is being advertised; off-premises advertising by use of temporary signage shall not be permitted and is strictly prohibited. 
b.  Temporary signs shall not be attached to trees, rocks, other natural features, street signs, utility poles or any other roadside appurtenances. 
c.  Temporary signs are subject to the size, height and framing requirements set forth in this section and may be in the form of a professionally designed and lettered A-frame sign, banner, or a sign constructed of corrugated material with a proper support structure. (Refer to the Temporary Sign definition for illustrations of temporary signs and support structures). 
d.  All temporary signs shall be displayed in a neat and orderly manner at all times. Handwritten signs in any form are expressly prohibited. 
e.  Temporary ground mounted signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in sign face area and six (6) feet in height. 
f.  Ground mounted signs shall be securely attached to a rigid and framed structure that is supported on at least two (2) sides. Temporary wall mounted signs shall be secured and held taut across the wall surface to maintain readability and to avoid sagging, tearing and/or and flapping in the wind. 
g.  All ground mounted temporary signs shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from the street right-of-way and shall not obstruct site visibility at ingress and egress points onto the premises. 
h.  Temporary use of an A-frame sign under this provision shall comply with the following size and design standards: 
1.  Dimensions shall not exceed a maximum of 24? × 36? in sign copy area and shall not exceed four (4) feet in height. 
2.  Materials shall consist of durable, weather resistant materials such as steel, aluminum and PVC. The use of cardboard, paper, fabric and non-rigid materials are prohibited. 
3.  A-frame signs shall be constructed to be stable and able to withstand wind and other unpredictable weather elements. 
4.  A-frame signs located along business entrances must maintain a minimum of five (5) feet of unobstructed sidewalk between the outer edge of the sign and the edge of pavement/curb. Signs shall not block or interfere with ADA accessibility nor restrict pedestrian movement. 
5.  A-frame signs shall not be placed where they interfere with any exit, loading zone, bicycle rack, sidewalk ramp, wheelchair ramp or similar public or private facility. 
i.  Single-tenant Developments. A temporary sign may be ground mounted or affixed on the face of the primary façade of a structure. Such signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in sign area and if ground mounted shall not exceed a maximum height of six (6) feet. 
j.  Multi-tenant Developments. One (1) professionally lettered temporary sign shall be permitted for each individual tenant space within the development. Such sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area and shall be affixed on the face of the primary façade of the tenant space. In lieu of a temporary attached wall sign, up to two (2) individual tenants within the development shall be permitted to advertise on a temporary ground mounted sign; not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in sign face area, and six (6) feet in height. The developer or owner of the multi-tenant development shall be responsible for governing the use of the temporary ground mounted signs. In no circumstance shall the number of temporary ground mounted signs for a multi-tenant development exceed two (2) signs at any given time; and no more than one (1) temporary sign per tenant (either affixed or located on the ground) shall be permitted at any given time. 
k.  A sign permit is required for the use of a temporary sign and shall be approved prior to the installation and display of such sign. 
l.  A one-time sign permit fee shall apply at the time the application is submitted. The application shall specify the date of each time period throughout the year for which the sign is to be displayed. The dates specified in the application may be amended without fee with written notification to the Business and Development Services Department at least two (2) weeks in advance of the proposed advertising period. 
m.  A simple site plan will be required with the application illustrating the location of the temporary sign and shall note the distance from the street right-of-way and driveway locations. A sketch plan will also be required indicating the size of the banner and the method of attachment. 
5)  Temporary Seasonal Sale Sign. A temporary seasonal sale sign shall be permitted in accordance with the design standards for "Temporary Signs" outlined in subsections 6:4.1.12B.3.a-h., and in conformance with the following standards: 
a.  One (1) temporary ground mounted sign shall be permitted per parcel upon approval of a temporary use permit for a seasonal sale event. Off-premises advertising by use of temporary signage shall not be permitted and is strictly prohibited. 
b.  A seasonal sale sign may be in the form of a professionally designed and lettered A-frame sign, banner, or a sign constructed of corrugated material with a ridged and framed support structure that is supported on at least two (2) sides. 
c.  Seasonal sale signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in sign face area and a maximum of six (6) feet in height. Signs shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from the street right-of-way and shall not obstruct site visibility at ingress and egress points onto the site, or other signs structures in the development. 
d.  Seasonal temporary signs shall only be permitted for the duration of the seasonal temporary use and shall not exceed the following time limits: Christmas tree Sales: maximum of sixty (60) days, Pumpkin Sales: maximum of forty-five (45) days, Garden Sales: maximum of sixty (60) days, twice per calendar year; Produce and Farmer's Markets: maximum of one hundred eighty (180) days, Ice-cream and Frozen Treat stands: maximum of one hundred eighty (180) days. 
e.  Such sign shall only be erected three (3) days prior to the business being opened and shall be removed immediately upon closing. 
f.  A sign permit is required for such sign and shall be approved prior to the installation and display of such sign. 
g.  A simple sketch plan shall be provided by the applicant showing the location and site layout for the temporary use, the location of the proposed sign and distances from property lines and the street right-of-way. 
6)  Temporary Signs for permitted Temporary Uses. With exception to signs permitted for Mobile Food Sales as provided for by subsection 9:1.10B(7), Temporary signs for permitted uses in Section 6:, Temporary Uses and Structures, shall be permitted as follows: 
a.  One (1) temporary ground mounted sign shall be permitted per parcel upon approval of a temporary use permit. Off-premises advertising by use of temporary signage shall not be permitted and is strictly prohibited. 
b.  A temporary use sign may be in the form of a professionally designed and lettered A-frame sign, banner or a sign constructed of corrugated material with a ridged and framed support structure that is supported on at least two (2) sides. 
c.  Temporary use signs may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in sign face area and shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. Signs must be setback a minimum of five (5) feet from the street right-of-way and shall not obstruct visibility at ingress and egress points onto the site, or other sign structures in the development. 
d.  Temporary use sign shall only be valid for the period prescribed on the temporary use permit. All temporary signs shall be removed at the end of each business day. 
C.  Signs permitted in all Residential Districts. The following signs are allowed in all residential districts and are subject to the following standards: 
a.  Wall Signs. Wall signs for uses permitted in a residential district shall be non-illuminated. Walls signs are allowed on the primary façade of the principle structure and shall not project above the roofline or parapet wall of any structure. 
b.  Home Occupation Sign. One (1) non-illuminated attached sign shall be permitted for a home occupation provided that the sign face area of such sign does not exceed two (2) square feet in area. Such sign shall be mounted flat against the surface of the wall of the building in which such home occupation is being conducted. 
c.  Multi-Family and Group residential uses (including Townhome, and Condominium developments and manufactured home parks). One (1) attached wall sign shall be allowed not to exceed forty (40) square feet in sign face area. Attached signs shall not project above the roofline or parapet wall of any structure. 
d.  Schools, Places of Worship (churches) and other Public or Institutional Use. The following standards shall apply: 
• Such uses on sites of less than three (3) acres shall be permitted one (1) attached wall sign at one-half (0.5) square feet per linear foot of building frontage with a maximum sixty (60) square feet in sign face area, whichever is less. 
• Such uses located on sites of three (3) acres or more shall be permitted one (1) attached wall sign at one-half (0.5) square feet per linear foot of building frontage with a maximum of one hundred (100) square feet in sign face are, whichever is less. 
• When such use is located on a major thoroughfare, attached signage shall be permitted at a rate of one and one-half (1.5) square feet per linear foot of building frontage, or up to a maximum of three hundred (300) square feet (whichever is less) per street front. When the calculated sign face area allowance exceeds one hundred (100) square feet, a total of two (2) attached wall signs shall be permitted on the primary façade not to exceed three hundred (300) square feet in total area. 
e.  Commercial Uses Permitted in Residential Districts. Such uses shall be allowed one (1) attached wall sign at one-half (0.5) square feet per linear foot of building frontage with a maximum forty (40) square feet in sign face area, whichever is less. Attached signs shall not project above the roofline or parapet wall of any structure. 
1)  Freestanding Ground Signs (Monument). All freestanding ground signs located in a residential district shall be subject to a maximum height of six (6) feet. Signs shall be located a minimum of eight (8) feet from the street right-of-way, be located on private property and shall adhere to the site visibility requirements in Section 3:3. 
a.  Permanent Subdivision Signs (including Townhome Developments). Subdivision signs shall be designed to be part of a permanently constructed and maintained entrance wall, fence or similar feature as required by the Land Development Ordinance. One (1) attached wall sign shall be permitted on each opposite side of the main entrance structure facing the existing roadway. The sign face area of such signs shall not exceed forty (40) square feet and shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. Such sign shall only display the name of the development. Landscape beds are required to be placed around all new ground signs. Shrubbery and/or plantings must not exceed a height that would interfere with foot or vehicle traffic or visibility of the sign. The developer or Home Owner's Association shall maintain the sign and required sign base landscaping. 
b.  Multi-family and Group Residential Uses (including Condominium developments and manufactured home parks). Such sign(s) shall be permitted at the main entrances of the development on private property and shall only display the name of the development. One (1) freestanding ground sign shall be permitted with a maximum sign face area of forty (40) square feet each; and maximum of six (6) feet in height. A maximum of two (2) signs are permitted at any one (1) street front entrance into the development. Landscape beds are required to be placed around all new ground signs. Shrubbery and/or plantings must not exceed a height that would interfere with foot or vehicle traffic or visibility of the sign. The sign and required landscaping shall be maintained by either the owner and/or the developer or legally established Home Owner's Association. 
c.  Schools, Places of Worship (churches) and other Public or Institutional Uses. Such uses shall be allowed one (1) freestanding ground sign per street front. Signs shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet in sign face area, and ten (10) feet in height. When such use is located on a major thoroughfare, signs shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in sign face area and shall not be greater than sixteen (16) feet in height. When such sign is located on a major thoroughfare, an electronic or changeable copy sign shall be permitted in accordance with the standards set forth in subsection 6:4.1.12A.3)b-i, Changeable Copy, Electronic Messaging Boards and Light Emitting Diode (LED). 
d.  Commercial Uses Permitted in Residential Districts. Such uses shall be allowed one (1) freestanding ground sign per street front. Signs shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in sign face area, and six (6) feet in height. 
e.  Lighting. Freestanding ground signs in residential district may be lit by external illumination only. External illumination shall be by a steady stream of light source, shielded and directed solely at the sign. Light fixtures shall be restricted to one (1) shielded light fixture per sign face. The intensity of the light shall not exceed twenty (20) foot-candles at any point on the sign face. Such light shall not shine or reflect on or into any nearby residential structure. 
f.  Construction and Design. Unless otherwise noted in another section of this ordinance, all freestanding ground signs shall be mounted on a monument structure that is equal to or greater than seventy-five (75) percent the width of a sign itself. Monument structures shall be constructed of brick, stone or stucco materials that have the appearance of brick, stone, or stucco or other durable architectural materials consistent with the design of the primary building on the site. 
6:4.1.13 Special Provisions for Non-Residential Signs. 
The following signs shall be permitted in accordance with the following standards but require the issuance of a sign permit prior to display of such sign(s): 
A.  Interstate Frontage Sign Bonus. The following sign standards shall apply only to properties contiguous to I-385 (or located at the I-385 interchange) and also having frontage on the following roads: 
Bridges Road, East Butler Road, Highway 417, Old Stage Road, Standing Springs Road and Woodruff Road. 
1)  One (1) additional freestanding high-rise "bonus" sign shall be permitted in addition to the standard sign allowance permitted in the current zoning for the parcel. 
2)  There shall be a maximum of one (1) freestanding high-rise bonus sign allowed per parcel or business with the exception that up to two (2) additional users may advertise on a single, freestanding high-rise bonus sign structure as long as the user(s) are part of the same development (i.e., planned developments, multi-tenant shopping centers, properties designed to share internal and common access drives, easements, or parking areas, etc.) 
3)  Freestanding high-rise bonus signs shall be located along the property closest to the interstate right-of-way and oriented towards the freeway; in addition, the sign shall be set back a minimum of eight (8) feet from the edge of the interstate right-of-way. 
4)  The maximum height of a freestanding high-rise bonus sign shall be thirty-five (35) feet as measured from the adjacent road grade. Where there is more than one (1) user advertising on a single freestanding high-rise bonus structure, an additional five (5) feet in height per user shall be allowed for a maximum height of forty-five (45) feet. 
5)  Freestanding high-rise bonus signs located on properties or developments with direct interstate frontage may have a total of two (2) sign faces per user with a maximum square footage of two hundred (200) square feet. In no circumstance shall the cumulative total of signage (for multiple users located on a single pole) exceed six hundred (600) square feet. 
6)  Illumination of freestanding high-rise bonus signs shall be by internal illumination only. No electronically animated signage and no external illumination of the sign shall be permitted. Interstate signage is also subject to the prohibitions set forth in subsection 6:4.1.6, Prohibited Signs. 
7)  All new freestanding high-rise bonus signs shall be located no closer than two hundred fifty (250) feet from the nearest residentially zoned property, as measured from the outermost perimeter of the sign. 
8)  All freestanding high-rise bonus signs must be spaced at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from other freestanding high-rise bonus signs that have been permitted on adjacent lots. 
9)  Signs existing prior to the adoption of this ordinance and meeting the intent of the freestanding high-rise bonus sign standard shall be exempt from all spacing requirements. 
10)  All framing material shall be enclosed with preformed panels; provided; if more than one (1) frame structure is utilized, all areas within the frames must be enclosed with preformed panels. 
B.  Gasoline Pricing Signs. 
1)  Gasoline pricing signs that do not utilize Electronic Messaging Boards (EMB) to display the prices of fuel shall be permitted an additional fifteen (15) square feet of sign face area for the sole purpose of advertising the price of fuel. The square footage of such sign shall be included when determining the maximum square foot allowance for a freestanding ground sign as referenced in subsection 6:4.1.12A, Table: A-2, Freestanding Ground Signs. Only one (1) such pricing sign shall be permitted per development, lot or parcel. 
2)  Gasoline pricing signs that utilize Electronic Messaging Boards (EMB) to display the price of fuel shall incorporate the EMB into the overall design of the sign. Fuel prices displayed on the EMB shall remain static. 
C.  (Gasoline) Service Station Structural Canopy and Accessory structure signs. In addition to the wall and ground signs permitted for this use, two (2) additional attached signs for the purpose of advertising on a structural canopy or accessory structure are allowed. No more than one (1) sign face per canopy length or façade of a structure shall be permitted. The maximum size of each sign shall not exceed twenty-five (25) square feet in sign face area. The square footage of such sign(s) shall be included when determining the maximum square foot allowance for the development as referenced in subsection 6:4.1.12A, Table: A-1, Wall Signs. 
D.  Second Tier Development Signs. Upon a determination by the Zoning Administrator that a development meets the criteria set forth in the definition of a second tier development, said development shall be permitted signs meeting the standards hereinafter. Following the determination that the development is a second tier development, all structures and uses in the development shall be considered a part of the second tier developments and shall be subject to the following sign standards. Owners of or tenants in structures and uses in the development shall not apply for signs not permitted as part of the second tier development sign package. 
1)  Freestanding Collocation Sign for Second Tier Developments. Individual uses within a second tier development may place their individual freestanding signage on a single sign support structure provided the sign meets the following standards: 
Figure 1: Freestanding
Collocation Sign:

a.  One (1) freestanding collocated ground sign shall be permitted for a second tier development. 
b.  The collocated ground sign must be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the closest point of the second tier development it identifies. 
c.  The combined sign face area shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet area or the maximum size permitted for freestanding ground signs in the zoning district in which the sign is located, whichever is less. 
d.  A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the sign area shall be used to identify the name and/or address of the overall development. 
e.  The use of an Electronic Messaging Board (EMB) or LED sign shall be subject to the general standards for Changeable copy, Electronic Messaging Boards (EMB), and Light Emitting Diode (LED) as outlined in subsections 6:4.1.12A.3)a-c. and g-i. 
f.  Use of EMB's and LED on collocated signs shall be limited to thirty (30) percent of the total sign face area and shall not be located within fifty (50) lineal feet of another EMB or LED sign. 
g.  The maximum height of collocated ground sign shall be sixteen (16) feet. 
h.  All signs that are illuminated shall comply with the standards set forth in subsection 6:4.1.14, Sign Illumination Standards. 
i.  All freestanding ground signs shall be mounted on a monument structure that is equal to or greater than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) the width of a sign itself. Monument structures shall be constructed of brick, stone or stucco materials that have the appearance of brick, stone, or stucco or other durable architectural materials consistent with the design of the primary building on the site. 
j.  Landscape islands are required to be placed around all new ground signs within thirty (30) days of sign erection. Shrubbery and/or plantings must not exceed a height that would interfere with foot or vehicle traffic or visibility of the sign. At any time an existing sign is altered or improved, not including regular maintenance, the landscaped island must be installed in accordance with the requirements for a new sign within sixty (60) days completion of the sign. 
k.  The freestanding ground signs shall be set back a minimum of eight (8) feet from the street right-of-way line. No freestanding ground sign shall extend over any structure or adjoining property line or extend into a public right-of-way. 
2)  Tenant Identification sign. Identification signs for businesses located in a second tier development shall be permitted for both single tenant developments and multi-tenant developments. Such signs shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Wall Sign. Walls signs for individual businesses shall comply with the single-tenant or multi-tenant allowances as outlined in subsection 6:4.1.12A.1), Wall Signs. 
b.  On-premises Freestanding Directional Sign. Each single-tenant business within a second tier development shall be permitted one (1) Directory Sign to identify the specific location of that business. Such sign shall be located on the site that is being advertised. The sign face area of the directional sign shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in sign face area and shall be limited to a maximum of ten (10) feet in height. 
6:4.1.14 Sign Illumination Standards. 
A.  Lighting fixtures illuminating signs shall be carefully located, aimed and shielded so that light is directed only onto the sign's façade and so that glare is significantly reduced. Exposed bulbs of any form are prohibited. 
B.  Signs shall not have light-reflecting backgrounds but may use light-reflecting lettering or halo lighting. 
C.  Light sources used to illuminate signs shall not be visible from any street right-of-way, nor cause glare that is hazardous to pedestrians or motorists, or creates a nuisance to adjacent properties. 
D.  External illumination shall be by a steady stream of light source, shielded and directed solely at the sign. Light fixtures shall be restricted to one (1) shielded light fixture per side for sign faces up to forty (40) square feet and not more than two (2) shielded light fixtures per side for sign faces over forty (40) square feet. 
E.  The maximum light level from sign illumination at any residential property line shall not exceed one-half (.5) foot-candle. Illumination at street rights-of-way and non-residential property lines shall not exceed two (2) foot-candles. 
6:4.1.15 Nonconforming Signs (Grandfathered Signs). 
A.  General. After the effective date of this chapter or subsequent amendment, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect any sign that does not conform to the requirements set forth in this article. This requirement shall not be construed so as to prohibit the painting, repainting or changing of the face of a sign, including changing the message, where the resulting sign is the same, size, shape, and height as the preceding sign and no other alteration and no expansion is made to the sign or sign structure. 
B.  Nonconforming signs-Permanent Signs. Subject to the conditions set forth, non-conforming signs are considered to be grandfathered and may be continued in operation and maintenance after the effective date of this Ordinance, provided that such non-conforming sign(s) shall be maintained in accordance with the provision of this chapter and shall not be: 
1)  Changed to or replaced by another nonconforming sign or sign structure; 
2)  Structurally altered; 
3)  Altered so as to increase the degree of nonconformity of the sign or sign structure; 
4)  Expanded; 
5)  Reestablished after its discontinuance for one hundred eighty (180) days; 
6)  Reestablished after damage or destruction if the estimated cost of reconstruction or repair exceeds fifty (50) percent of the appraised value as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
C.  Nonconforming-Temporary Signs. All pre-existing temporary, portable and/or moveable display signs that do not conform to the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the following removal standards: 
1)  All temporary, portable and moveable display signs (and their sign support structures) which are made nonconforming by adoption of this chapter and/or subsequent amendment to this chapter shall be removed within thirty (30) calendar days of the effective date of this chapter or upon notification by the City of Mauldin. The provisions for Temporary Advertising Display Signs in subsection 6:4.1.12B.4, shall not be permitted on sites with non-conforming temporary signs until such signs are removed. 
6:4.1.16 Sign Package. 
A.  Purpose. This section is intended to address the unique signage needs of large development projects. The purpose of which is to encourage and permit creativity in the placement and design of signs for vehicular and pedestrian way-finding purposes. An approved "Signage Plan" may include signs of different sizes, types, locations, placement and height from those otherwise enumerated in the sign ordinance. 
B.  Application. Signage plans may be submitted for the following types of development: 
1)  Commercial, Industrial, or mixed use developments containing five (5) or more acres in area. 
2)  The characteristic of the site demonstrates a need for enhanced visibility and way finding within the development. 
3)  The site development plan incorporates the use of pedestrian oriented features and/or design. 
C.  Submittal Process. Signage plan applications may be submitted for consideration at the time of the original consideration of the proposed development or separately from the original development proposal. The following information or material shall be required for a signage plan application. 
1)  Owner and contact name, address, telephone number, email and signature(s) as applicable. 
2)  A signage plan proposal illustrating the proposed signs (design, size, height), their proposed location(s) on a site plan, their proposed purpose, along with a statement as to why the existing sign code cannot or should not be followed in the subject case. 
3)  An analysis showing how the proposed signage plan differs from what could be provided under the existing city sign regulations set forth in this article. 
4)  Other similar information determined by the Zoning Administrator to be necessary for understanding the purpose and intent of the proposed signage plan. 
D.  Review Procedure. The Zoning Administrator shall review the proposed signage plan and upon determining the application is complete shall have fifteen (15) business days to review the application. In reviewing the application, the Zoning Administrator shall review the plan in accordance with the following objectives: 
1)  The extent to which the proposed signage plan deviates from the sign allowances otherwise applicable in this article. 
2)  The rationale provided by the applicant for the deviations. 
3)  The extent to which the signage plan promotes wayfinding, pedestrian-orientation, and business identification. 
4)  The degree to which the signage plan creatively and effectively addresses the unique characteristics of the site with regard to signage. 
5)  The freestanding ground signs for the development do not exceed the maximum size and height requirements of the district by more than thirty-five (35) percent. 
6)  Individual wall signs within the development do not exceed the maximum size requirement of the district by more than twenty (20) percent. 
E.  Approval or Denial of Signage Plan. The Zoning Administrator may deny or approve the proposed signage plan in part or in total and may establish conditions regarding approval. Decisions of the Zoning Administrator shall be made in writing and shall describe how each objective was or was not satisfied. 
F.  Appeal Process. Decisions by the Zoning Administrator may be appealed to the Board of Appeals by following the procedures for such appeals provided in subsection 4:1,3-8, Appeals and Hearings of the Mauldin Zoning Ordinance. 
6:4.1.17 Billboards. 
A.  General Provisions for Off-Premises Signs. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any off-premises sign which was lawfully erected prior to December 9, 1996, shall be deemed nonconforming and shall be subject to the provisions of subsection 6:4.1.17. Off-premises signs may continue in operation and maintenance after the effective date of this Ordinance, provided that such off-premises sign(s) shall be maintained in accordance with the provisions in subsection 6:4.1.4 of this chapter. 
B.  Off-Premises Signs Used in Conjunction with On-Premises Signs. Such signs shall not count towards the number of permanent signs allowed on the property on which they are located, and they shall not exceed the maximum display area set forth herein for the type of sign. Billboards and off-premises signs may be relocated in accordance with the provisions of subsection 6:4.1.17K. 
C.  Special Provisions for Billboards (and off-premises signs). In addition to the general provisions set forth in this Article, Billboards shall be subject to the following special provisions. 
1.  Relocation of Billboards Permitted. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any billboard, which was lawfully erected prior to December 9, 1996, may be relocated to a new site, provided the relocation meets the provisions of this chapter and except as follows. 
2.  Location. Billboards shall only be permitted in S-1 and I-1 districts. 
3.  Spacing. On all streets and highways within the jurisdiction of this chapter, no billboards may be established: 
a.  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other billboard located on the same side of the street; 
b.  Within five hundred (500) feet from the vertical point of any other billboard located on the opposite side of the street; 
c.  Within five hundred (500) feet of residentially zoned property on the same side of and fronting the street in question; 
d.  Within five hundred (500) feet of residentially zoned property on the opposite side of and fronting the street in question; 
e.  At intersecting streets, within five hundred (500) feet of any other billboard measured by the curb line or curb line extension. A billboard may be located at this point or at a vertical point on the opposite side of the street, provided all other criteria are met; 
f.  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any historic site, place or district that is recorded on the national register, or any public park, measured by the curb line of the existing streets and in no case within five hundred (500) feet of the boundaries of such locations. A billboard may be located at this point or at a vertical point on the opposite side of the street, provided all other criteria are met; 
g.  Within one thousand (1,000) feet from the center of any designated scenic highway when locating a billboard on a street which intersects with a scenic highway. 
When determining whether a proposed billboard meets the spacing requirements set forth herein, distances shall be measured from the center of the billboard and shall take into account any billboard, residential property, historic district, public park or scenic highway, regardless of whether it is located in the City of Mauldin or unincorporated area of the county. 
4.  Computation of Number: 
a.  Double-Faced Sign. Two (2) adjacent signs on a single structure with both faces oriented in the same direction and not more than five (5) feet apart at the nearest point between the two (2) faces. A double-faced sign may be referred to as a side-by-side sign or a double deck sign. A doubled-faced sign shall constitute one (1) Outdoor Advertising Sign. 
b.  Back-to-Back Sign. A single structure with two (2) parallel and directly opposite signs with their faces oriented in opposite directions located not more than five (5) feet apart. A back-to-back or a back-to-back double-face sign shall constitute one (1) Outdoor Advertising Sign. 
c.  V-Type Sign. Two (2) signs in the shape of the letter "V" when viewed from above with their faces oriented in different directions and with an angle facing the road to which the sign is oriented of no more than sixty (60) degrees. A V-type sign shall constitute one (1) Outdoor Advertising Sign. 
5.  Maximum Allowable Display Area: 
a.  Double-Faced. Three hundred (300) square feet per face. 
b.  Back-to-Back Double-Faced. Three hundred (300) square feet per face. 
c.  Back-to-Back. Six hundred seventy-two (672) square feet per face. 
d.  V-Type. Six hundred seventy-two (672) square feet per face. 
Twenty (20) percent of the six hundred seventy-two (672) square feet allowable for extended copy of "pop-ups". 
6.  Maximum Allowable Height: 
a.  A billboard shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
b.  All measurements shall be taken from the road grade level to which the sign is oriented. 
7.  Minimum Setback from Right-of-Way: 
a.  Twenty (20) feet for sign dimensions of six hundred seventy-two (672) square feet (fourteen (14) feet by forty-eight (48) feet) 
b.  Fifteen (15) feet for sign dimensions of three hundred (300) square feet (twelve (12) feet [by] twenty-five (25) feet). 
c.  Ten (10) feet for sign dimensions of seventy-two (72) square feet (six (6) feet by twelve (12) feet). 
8.  Abandoned Billboard. A billboard without copy shall either display copy or be removed within ninety (90) days after official notification from the Zoning Administrator. 
9.  Scenic Highway. No billboards shall be allowed on the following scenic highways and corridors: I-385 within the city limits, US 276 from I-385 to Highway 417, US 276 from Knollwood Drive to the northern city limits, East Butler Road from Hyde Circle to the city limits east of I-385. 
10.  Permit Issuance, Existing Billboards. All billboards existing in the City which were lawfully erected prior to December 9, 1996, shall be required to be repermitted within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this section. In order to obtain the permit, the owner shall furnish the City with the following information on each billboard: 
a.  Location. 
b.  Color photographs of each face and support structure. 
c.  Size description of each face, excluding pop-ups. 
11.  Permits for Relocated Billboards. A permit for the relocation of a billboard shall not be issued by the City unless: 
a.  An officer of the company applying for a permit to relocate a sign certifies in writing that the company has provided the information required by subsection 6:4.1.7.4(2)I.i[sic] above for all of its existing billboards in the County. 
b.  The City has certified that the off-premises sign at the original location has been completely removed. 
c.  The City has verified that the proposed billboard and its proposed location meet the criteria set forth in this section. 
d.  All other requirements for obtaining a permit have been met, including the payment of a permit fee as charged by the City Codes Department. 
e.  No permit for the relocation of a billboard shall be issued if the company requesting such permit is presently in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
12.  Posting of Permits. The City Codes Department shall issue all permits required by this section in duplicate, one (1) of which shall be weather resistant. The owner of each billboard in the City shall be responsible for affixing the weather resistant permit to the billboard in a prominent location and for ensuring that such permit is continuously attached at all times thereafter. 
13.  Renewal. All permits issued in accordance with this section shall be valid only for the calendar year in which they are issued and shall be renewed not later than January 15 of each calendar year. A renewal fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) shall be charged. No renewal permit shall be issued if the company requesting such permit changes an existing sign so it violates any of the provisions of this chapter. 
14.  Construction of Relocated Sign: 
a.  Any billboard relocated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter must be constructed within twelve (12) months from the date the permit is issued. 
b.  A relocated billboard shall have no more faces than it had at its previous location. 
c.  The face or faces of a relocated billboard shall have no more display area (square footage) per face than it had at its previous location. In no event shall the face of a relocated billboard exceed the maximum allowable display area set forth in subsection 6:4.1.17K[sic] herein. 
6:4.1.18 Administration and Permit Procedures. 
An application for a sign permit shall be filed with the Business and Development Services Department on an application form provided by the office. 
A.  Applicant and Licenses. Sign Permit applications may be filed by the owner of the property or by an agent specifically authorized by the owner to file such application. When the sign value and cost of work exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), a General Contractor with a valid South Carolina State License will be required for the application. When electrical work is required for illumination of a sign, an electrician that has a valid State license will be required for the application. In addition, all licensed contractors involved in construction of a sign must also hold a valid City business license. 
B.  Information Required. Each application for a sign permit shall contain the information required on the application form including: the Tax Map number and address of the parcel the sign is to be located on, job description and scope of work, the value of the proposed sign and cost of work, contractor's information, sign details and sign measurements; and the type of illumination proposed for the sign, if applicable. 
C.  Plan Review. The application shall also include two (2) complete sets of scaled drawings of the sign which depicts and describes the following: 
1)  Wall Signs. A scaled façade elevation drawing indicating the length of the building façade and/or tenant space and the location and dimensions of any existing and proposed wall signs; the size of each sign proposed and the calculation used to determine the sign face allowance in square footage shall also be provided. 
2)  Freestanding Ground Signs. A simple site plan that is drawn to a scale of not less than 1 inch = 60 feet shall be provided. The plan shall show dimensions of all property lines, the location of abutting street(s) and associated street rights-of-way. The plan shall illustrate the location of all existing structures on the site and the location of all existing and proposed freestanding signs on the parcel. Dimensions shall be provided to illustrate compliance with sign setback requirements from property lines and the street right-of-way line, and also illustrate compliance with site visibility standards outlined in Section 3:3 of this Ordinance. The site plan shall also illustrate compliance with the required sign base landscaping and also show any ground lighting fixtures and/or electrical sources. 
3)  Building Permit. Freestanding ground signs that are seven (7) feet in height or greater will require a building plan submittal with footing details that are provided and sealed by an South Carolina Licensed Engineer. 
4)  Electrical and Illumination Detail. If a sign is proposed to be internally or externally illuminated, a lighting specification plan shall be provided on the details of the light fixture and shall also provide light levels (foot-candle measurement) emitted from the light source. A licensed electrician may also be required to perform any electrical work required for illumination of the sign. 
D.  Restrictive Covenants and Home Owner Association (HOA) documentation. It shall be the sole responsibility of the owner and/or applicant to ensure that all proposed uses, construction, and all other activities requiring a permit are in compliance with any existing lawful restrictive covenant. In the event a permit is issued and a conflict between the restrictive covenant and the zoning ordinance is determined, the more restrictive requirement of the two (2) shall prevail. 
E.  Fees. An application review fee as determined by the Permit Fee schedule shall be due and payable when the application is submitted. Work performed without a permit shall be subject to a penalty fee. If a sign permit is denied, the sign permit portion of the application fee shall be refunded. 
F.  Staff Review. Provided the application is complete, staff shall have ten (10) business days to review the application for compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
G.  Issuance. If the proposed plan conforms to the provisions of this Ordinance, the plans will be stamped approved and the sign and other applicable permits will be issued. One (1) copy of the plan approval and permit will be returned to the applicant for display on site during construction; the City will also retain one (1) copy. 
H.  Permit Validity. Upon approval and issuance of a sign permit, the applicant shall have six (6) months to complete work on the approved signage, after which the permit shall become null and void. Any unapproved changes in the approved plans shall render the sign permit invalid. Reapplication for sign permits that have expired shall be in accordance with the sign regulations in effect at the time of reapplication. 
I.  Sign Inspection. Upon notification that the sign is complete, the City inspector shall conduct an inspection for the purpose of verifying that the sign is in compliance with the requirements of the permit and all other provision of this Article. Prior to the inspection of a freestanding ground sign, the permittee or sign contractor shall locate and identify on site the edge of the street right-of-way and all property lines adjacent to the sign for purposes of verifying the sign location in relation to the setback requirements. 
J.  Variance. Requests for variances from the sign standards set forth in this ordinance shall be heard by the Zoning Board of Appeals and subject to the provisions set forth in subsection 4:1.2 of the Mauldin Zoning Ordinance. 
6:4.1.19 Variance to Sign Requirements. 
Requests for variances from the sign standards set forth in this ordinance shall be heard by the Zoning Board of Appeals and subject to the provisions set forth in subsection 4:1.2 of the Mauldin Zoning Ordinance. 
6:4.1.20 Notice of Violation and Citation Procedures. 
a)  Notice required before penalty. No penalty shall be assessed unless and until the person alleged to be in violation with the provisions of this Article has been notified of the violation in accordance with this section. 
b)  Notice of Violation; opportunity to cure. 
1.  Whenever the city official charged with the duty of enforcing the regulations of this article has reasonable cause to believe that a person is violating the provision of this ordinance, that official shall notify that person of the violation via a written warning. Such warning shall include an opportunity to cure the violation within a prescribed period of time. 
2.  Upon receipt of a written request from the alleged violator or property owner, a single extension of time, not to exceed a period of thirty (30) days, may be granted to cure or correct the violation. Such request must be received prior to the city issuing a formal citation pursuant to subsection 6:4.1.20.b)3. below. 
3.  Any person, who, after being given a written citation warning, does not comply with the provisions of this chapter within the time period allotted for compliance, shall be served a formal written citation with a prescribed date to appear before the Mauldin Municipal Court. Such citation shall also include an assessed penalty for the violation in accordance with the schedule of penalty fees in subsection c) below. 
4.  When the person violating the provisions of this ordinance cannot be ascertained, then the notice of violation shall be sent to the owner of the land on which the violation occurs. Such notification shall be delivered by first class, Restricted Certified mail by the U.S. Postal Service. 
c)  Sign Penalty Fee Schedule. The following "Table of Penalties for Sign Violations" shall apply for violations of this chapter. Repeat Offenses that occur within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days of the date on the citation for the first offense shall not receive a written warning, but shall be subject to a fine for each subsequent violation in accordance with the penalty schedule. 
TABLE OF PENALTIES FOR SIGN VIOLATIONS 
Sign Type Written Warning/
Time to Cure First Offense
Fine Second Offense
Fine Third Offense
Fine Temporary Signs Removal within 24 Hours $50.00 $100.00 $200.00 Permanent Signs Removal within 30 calendar days 200.00 500.00 500.00  
( Ord. No. 782 , amds. 3, 4, 12-15-2014) 
ARTICLE 7. - PROVISIONS FOR USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION 

Sec. 7:1 - General Provisions. 
The Board of Appeals may issue permits for those uses permitted on review which are in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and the specific conditions set forth below. 
The Board may grant or deny or modify a request for a use permitted by special exception after a public hearing has been held on the written request submitted by an applicant. It may also attach any necessary conditions such as time limitations or requirements that one (1) or more things be done before the request can be initiated. Additionally, the Board may require an acceptable bond to ensure that uses allowed by special exception are completed consistent with time limitations or requirements. The Board shall act on the request for uses permitted by special exception within seventy-five (75) days of the date of submittal. Failure to act within seventy-five (75) days shall constitute approval of the request. 
If the request is granted the Board shall determine that: 
A.  The use meets all required conditions; 
B.  The use is reasonably necessary for the public health or general welfare; 
C.  The use is appropriately located with respect to transportation facilities, water supply, fire and police protection, waste disposal, and similar services; and 
D.  The use will not violate neighborhood character nor adversely affect surrounding land uses. 
If the Board denies the request, the reasons shall be entered in the minutes of the meeting at which the permit is denied. 
In granting the permit, the Board may designate such reasonable and appropriate conditions in addition to the specific conditions contained in this Ordinance to assure that the proposed use will be in harmony with the area in which it is to be located and with the spirit of this Ordinance. 
No use permitted by special exception shall be approved by the Board of Appeals until the Zoning Administrator has reviewed the application and submitted a report on the proposal to the Board of Appeals. 
Sec. 7:2 - Mobile Home Parks. 
Mobile home parks shall be permitted only in the R-M district as prescribed in Article 5, Section 5:4, within the area zoned. The following regulations shall apply to all mobile home parks. 
7:2.1 Plan Approval. 
Prior to construction of a mobile home park or enlargement of a mobile home park existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, a development plan approved by the Greenville County Board of Health shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator. 
The Zoning Administration shall review the proposed development and then request that the Planning Commission staff review the plat for the purpose of determining: 
A.  That the spirit of the zoning regulations shall not be violated; 
B.  That the proposed development does not conflict with proposed or existing development in adjacent areas; and 
C.  That the proposed development will be a desirable addition to the physical pattern of the city. 
The plan shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch and shall contain the following information: 
A.  The location of the proposed park and the nature of the surrounding land uses; 
B.  The location and dimensions of streets, rights-of-way, drives, parking spaces, and walks; 
C.  The location and size of mobile home plots; 
D.  The location and size of service buildings and recreation areas; 
E.  The location and type of screening, fences or hedges; 
F.  The names and addresses of abutting property owners and of developers. 
Any mobile home, service building, or recreation area located in any mobile home park shall be placed in accordance with an approved development plan. 
7:2.2 Design Requirements. 
1.  Park Size. The minimum mobile home park size shall be three (3) acres. 
2.  Plot Size. Each mobile home shall be on a plot not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in area, have an average width not less than fifty (50) feet, and an average length of not less than one hundred (100) feet. 
3.  Setbacks. No mobile home shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet to the right-of-way line of a street or highway and not closer than fifteen (15) feet from side and rear property lines. Each mobile home shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the front, side, and rear lines of the plot on which it is located. 
4.  Off-Street Parking. Off-street vehicular parking shall be as follows: two spaces for each mobile home, plus one (1) space for each two (2) park office employees. 
5.  Access. No mobile home shall have direct access to a public street or highway. All mobile home plots shall have access to an interior roadway, which is not less than thirty (30) feet in width, having a paved surface not less than twenty (20) feet in width. 
6.  Screening. Where any property line of a mobile home park abuts land zoned for or occupied by a residential use, there shall be provided and maintained along the property line of the mobile home park a continuous visual screen not less than six (6) feet in height. The screen shall be a wall, fence, or compact evergreen hedge or other type of evergreen foliage, or a combination of fence and shrubbery. 
7.  Utility Requirements. Within the area zoned, each mobile home space in a mobile home park shall be provided with approved water and sewer service which is connected to the municipal water and sewerage system. 
8.  Recreation Areas. Recreation space of not less than two hundred (200) square feet for each mobile home plot shall be provided in the mobile home park. 
9.  Operating Requirements. The operator of each mobile home park shall comply with all State and County Health Department rules and regulations governing the sanitation and operation of mobile home parks, and shall maintain the park in such a way as not to be detrimental to surrounding properties. 
Sec. 7:3 - Public Utility Buildings and Uses. 
Public utility buildings and uses such as sewage lift stations, pump stations, electrical substations, and telephone equipment buildings, which are not detrimental to other uses permitted in the district, may be permitted in any district. Such uses shall be enclosed within a building or by a suitable fence providing protection and screening against light, noise, fumes, or unsightliness. Open area on the premises shall be appropriately landscaped. 
Sec. 7:4 - Junk Yards, Auto Wreckers, Scrap Processors. 
Junkyards, Auto Wreckers and Scrap Processors may be permitted in the I-1, Industrial District subject to the following conditions. 
7:4.1 Site Size. 
All junkyards, automobile salvage-wrecking yards, scrap metal processors, and like uses shall be located on a site of at least two (2) acres. 
7:4.2 Separation Requirements. 
Junkyards: including automobile salvage-wrecking yards, scrap metal processors, and like uses (including recycling centers and recycling plants) shall be located a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from all residential districts, residential uses, churches, daycares, schools, and other similar uses. 
7:4.3 Design Requirements. 
Open storage shall be confined to the side and rear of the site and not located closer to the street than the leading edge of the principle structure. 
All commercial vehicles associated with the use shall be stored in an enclosed or screened area and shall not be visible from adjacent properties or from the street. 
7:4.4 Screening. 
Open storage shall be enclosed by a continuous, opaque visual screen and maintained along all property lines. The screen shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in height and shall consist of a solid, opaque privacy fence or wall (finished face out) and also supplemented with vegetation planted in a five-foot planting strip along the exterior base of the wall. One (1) evergreen tree or large maturing evergreen shrub shall be planted at the base of the wall, eight (8) feet on center and shall cover a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the wall face at full maturity. 
7:4.5 Hours of Operation. 
Hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
7:4.6 Site Lighting. 
Site lighting shall be limited to sixteen (16) feet in height and shall be full cut-off type fixtures. Lighting shall not produce direct glare or light trespass onto adjacent properties or street rights-of-way. 
Sec. 7:5 - Livestock in Residential Districts. 
Livestock, excluding pigs and sheep may be kept in the R-20, R-15, and R-12 districts subject to the district regulations and the following conditions. 
7:5.1 Site. 
The minimum lot area upon which livestock may be kept is one (1) acre. Not more than one (1) head of livestock shall be permitted for each one-half-acre of lot area. 
7:5.2 Setback. 
No barn or other structure where livestock is kept or fed, and no grazing or pasturing shall be permitted within fifty (50) feet of any property line, except where such property line abuts a street, railroad, or watercourse at least fifty (50) feet in width. 
7:6 - Non-depository financial institutions, debt relief businesses, precious metal businesses and all like businesses. 
A.  All non-depository financial institutions, debt relief businesses, precious metal businesses and all like businesses (excluding retail businesses such as pawnshops or jewelry stores who obtain a precious metal dealer license in the normal course of their retail business) shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The use shall be located no closer than three thousand (3,000) feet measured lot line to lot line, from the nearest non-depository financial institution, debt relief business, precious metal business and all like businesses. 
2.  The uses shall be located within a group nonresidential development, shopping center, or the like with all structures constituting a minimum of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet. 
3.  The uses shall conform to the color scheme of the development with neutral colors. 
B.  Non-conformity: A non-depository financial institution, debt relief business, precious metal business or like business that existed and was lawfully constructed, located and operating on the date of this resolution, and that does not conform to the zoning district and/or separation distance standards adopted herein, shall be deemed a non-conforming use and may continue in operation subject to the provisions set forth below: 
1.  If a non-depository financial institution ceases operations at a particular location, a new certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for a new non-depository financial institution at that location without first complying with all the requirements of this Section. 
2)  The ability to continue a non-conforming non-depository financial institution, debt relief business, precious metal business and all like businesses shall cease and such use shall terminate whenever a certificate of occupancy for a change of owner, occupant, tenant, or business is required. 
( Ord. No. 783 , § 3, 12-15-2014; Ord. No. 863 , amd. 2, 10-15-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 786 , amd. 11, adopted March 16, 2015, repealed former § 7:6 which pertained to churches, and derived from the 1999 zoning ordinance. See § 10.12, Places of Worship: All residential districts. 
 Subsequently, Ord. No. 783 , § 3, adopted Dec. 15, 2014, enacted provisions designated as § 7:12. Inasmuch as § 7:12 already exists, said provisions have been redesignated as § 7:6, at the request of the city. 
Sec. 7:7 - Private Recreation Area. 
A private recreation area or country club may be permitted in the R-20, R-12, R-M1, and R-M districts subject to the requirements of the district in which it is located and the following requirements. 
7:7.1 Lot Area. 
A private recreation area shall be located on a site not less than two (2) acres in area. 
7:7.2 Setback Requirements. 
All buildings, game courts, swimming pools, and similar structures shall be set back from front, side, and rear property lines a minimum of fifty (50) feet. 
7:7.3 Food and Entertainment. 
The provision of food and entertainment for members and guests may be permitted provided that such provision shall not cause a nuisance in the residential district. 
Sec. 7:8 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 786 , amd. 12, adopted March 16, 2015, repealed former § 7:8 which pertained to child care centers or child day care centers, and child care homes, and derived from the 1999 zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 7:9 - Schools: Public, Private, Parochial. 
A public, private or parochial school may be permitted in any zoning district subject to the district requirements: 
7:9.1 Setbacks Requirements. 
All proposed structures shall be set back from the front, side, and rear property lines a minimum of thirty (30) feet. 
7:9.2 Off-Street Parking. 
Off-street parking shall conform to the requirements of subsection 6:1.1.6. 
7:9.3 Indoor Area. 
The building shall comply with the maximum occupant load of the current addition of the International Building Code and any other applicable requirements. 
7:9.4 Outdoor Area. 
At least seventy-five (75) square feet of outdoor recreation area shall be available for each student present. Such area may be located on another parcel provided it is contiguous to the subject property and under the same ownership, and shall be enclosed by a fence having a minimum height of four (4) feet. 
7:9.5 Screening. 
A wall, fence, dense hedge, or other permanent year-round foliage, or combination thereof, which provide a solid, opaque, visual barrier at least six (6) feet in height shall be provided along the side and rear lot lines where any non-residential use is adjacent to a single family use. 
Sec. 7:10 - Reserved. 
Sec. 7:11 - Accessory Dwelling. 
One (1) accessory dwelling unit may be permitted with approval of the Board of Appeals in conjunction with any permitted principal use in the C-2, S-1, and I-1 districts subject to the following conditions: 
A.  The accessory dwelling unit must be located entirely within the structure containing the permitted principal use. 
B.  The accessory dwelling unit must be clearly incidental and subordinate to and necessary to the operation of the permitted principal use. 
C.  The accessory dwelling unit shall not interfere with the operation of the permitted principal use, nor shall the operation being carried on by the permitted principal use create conditions which are adverse or hazardous to the person or persons occupying the accessory dwelling unit. 
Sec. 7:12 - Professional Offices in the RM-1 District. 
Professional offices may be allowed in the RM-1 district subject to the following requirements. 
7:12.1 Size. 
The minimum lot area required for professional offices to be developed in RM-1 is two (2) acres. In no instance shall an office development, parking, and other related activities occupy more than seventy (70) percent of the gross lot area. 
7:12.2 Front Setback. 
All buildings and structures shall be set back from all street right-of-way lines not less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
7:12.3 Side Setback. 
All buildings and structures shall be set back not less than fifteen (15) feet from property lines. 
7:12.4 Rear Setback. 
All building shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet to rear lot lines. 
7:12.5 Off-Street Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 5:9. 
7:12.6 Additional Requirements. 
Applications for professional offices in the RM-1 district shall include the following data and other reasonable information the Mauldin Board of Appeals and the Zoning Administrator may require in their review of the application: 
A.  Number of professional offices and overall square footage thereof. 
B.  Location of all curb cuts and points of egress and ingress and all sidewalks and dimensions thereof. 
C.  The location and size of any existing or proposed roads on any part of the site. 
D.  The location of all parking. 
E.  A complete landscaping and screening plan. 
F.  Plans showing complete drainage of entire site. 
G.  Prospective sketch indicating exterior color and materials, all structures, and screening. 
H.  A copy of covenants, grants, easements, or other restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the use of land, buildings, and structures including proposed easements for grants and public utilities. 
Before the Zoning Administrator makes a recommendation to the Board of Appeals, it shall determine the following: 
A.  The spirit of the Zoning Ordinance is not violated. 
B.  The proposed development will harmonize with the existing development. 
C.  The proposed development is a desirable addition to the physical pattern of the neighborhood. 
D.  The design is such that the additional traffic will not be a burden on existing streets. 
E.  No adverse environmental impacts will be created by the proposed development. 
F.  The architectural character blends with the surrounding area. 
Sec. 7:13 - Group and Family Care Homes. 
1.  Lot Requirements. The minimum lot area for a Group Care Home shall be thirty thousand (30,000) square feet. Setback requirements for a Group Care Home shall be the district requirements for single-family homes. 
2.  Appearance. All Group Care Homes shall be similar in location and appearance to other residential structures in the area including but not limited to: similar orientation of the structure on the lot, roof design, pitch and materials. 
3.  Separation Requirements. Group Care Homes shall be spaced a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from all other Group Care homes as measured from the closest property line of each property containing a group home. 
4.  Parking. Shall be provided in accordance with Section 6:1, Parking Standards. In addition, parking shall be not be located in any required setback and shall be located to the side and/or rear of the structure. 
5.  Landscaping. Parking areas shall be buffered from adjacent residential uses with a minimum of a fifteen (15) foot wide landscape buffer consisting of a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs necessary to establish a year round screen from view of adjacent properties. 
6.  Private Open Space. A minimum of five hundred (500) square feet of open space shall be provided. 
( Ord. No. 786 , amd. 10, 3-16-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 786 , amd. 10, adopted March 16, 2015, enacted new provisions designated as § 7:12. Inasmuch as § 7:12 already exists, said § has been redesignated as § 7:13 at the request of the city. 
Sec. 7:14 - Communication Tower. 
7:14.1 Purpose and Intent. 
The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect the health, safety, welfare, and property values of the citizens of Mauldin from potential adverse affects caused by the proliferation of telecommunication towers. The intent is to minimize hazards from tower failure and falling ice, as well as hazards to low-flying aircraft, and personal injury to unauthorized persons scaling these towers. By maximizing the use of existing telecommunication towers and other suitable structures, the natural beauty of the City of Mauldin can be preserved. 
7:14.2 Location. 
Communication towers may be located in the following zoned areas in the City of Mauldin: 
A.  Communication towers are permitted as a principal use in the C-2, S-1, and I-1 Zoning Districts, if located at least twenty-five (25) percent of the height of the tower from a residential district and are subject to the applicable setback requirements of the district in which they are located. Communication towers may be approved as a Use Permitted by Special Exception by the Board of Appeals in the C-2, S-1, and I-1 zoning districts where the tower is located within twenty-five (25) percent of the tower height of a residential district and are subject to the applicable setback requirements of the district in which they are located. 
B.  Communication towers are not permitted in single-family or multifamily residential zoning districts unless they comply with the ancillary use requirements as defined in [subsection] (C) below. 
C.  Communication towers are permitted as an ancillary or secondary Use Permitted by Special Exception by the Board of Appeals on residentially or nonresidentially zoned sites where another use (other than single-family or duplex use) is already established as the principal use of the property, such as a school, church, multifamily residential complex, shopping center, office building, public utility site, or other similar use provided the principal use complies with applicable zoning and subdivision regulations. On sites zoned O-D or C-1 adjacent to a residential district, or sites located within a residential district, the minimum setback of the zoning district in which it is located is increased by one (1) foot for each one (1) foot of tower height in excess of forty (40) feet from all residential property lines. The maximum required setback is two hundred (200) feet. 
D.  In the C-1 and O-D Zoning Districts, communication towers are permitted as a Use Permitted by Special Exception by the Board of Appeals and are subject to the requirements of the district in which they are located. In the PD and C-1N Zoning Districts, communication towers are permitted as a Use Permitted by Special Exception by the Mauldin City Planning Commission and are subject to the requirements of the district in which they are located. 
E.  A proposed freestanding tower shall not be constructed within two hundred (200) feet of the right-of-way of any designated scenic highway, nor within two hundred (200) feet of a property listed on the National Register of Historic Places except upon approval by the Board of Appeals as a Use Permitted by Special Exception. 
7:14.3 Application Procedure. 
All applications for construction of communication towers or placement of telecommunications antenna in the City of Mauldin shall be made to the office of the Mauldin City Building Codes and Zoning Administrator. The application shall be accompanied by the application fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00). If a public hearing is necessary, notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing. The notice shall be blocked in, carry an appropriate descriptive title, and shall state the time, dates, and place of the hearing. The Mauldin city staff shall properly post and maintain on the property a Notice of Public Hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. The City of Mauldin shall notify the Greenville County Planning Commission staff who shall submit a written review and recommendation of the application to the Board of Appeals or Mauldin City Planning Commission. Following the public hearing the Board or Commission will evaluate the staff's recommendation in its consideration of the application. The Board or Commission may impose additional or more restrictive requirements if it is determined that it is within the best public interest. 
Each application for a Use Permitted by Special Exception by the Board of Appeals or Planning Commission for a communication tower shall include the following information in addition to the general information required by this Ordinance. 
Site Plan, which shall include the following information: 
1.  The location and height of the proposed tower(s), guy anchors (if any), and required setbacks; 
2.  Transmission building and other accessory uses; 
3.  Parking; 
4.  Access; 
5.  Landscaped areas; 
6.  Fences; 
7.  Adjacent land uses and zoning; 
8.  Photos of the site and immediate area; and 
9.  Statements and documentation as required in subsection 7:12.7.9. 
Prior to approving a Site Plan, the Board of Appeals or the Mauldin City Planning Commission, as applicable, must make the following findings: 
1.  The proposed structure will not endanger the health and safety of residents, employees, or travelers, including, but not limited to, the likelihood of the failure of such structure; 
2.  The proposed structure will not impair the use of or prove detrimental to neighboring properties; 
3.  The proposed structure is necessary to provide a service that is beneficial to the surrounding community; 
4.  The permitted use meets the setback requirements of the underlying zoning district in which it is located; 
5.  The proposed tower is located in an area where it does not substantially detract from aesthetics and neighborhood character; 
6.  The proposed use is consistent with potential land uses recommended in the General Development Plan for the City of Mauldin, and 
7.  Within residentially zoned areas, communication towers shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of another communication tower unless such towers are located on the same property. 
7:14.4 Height. 
Freestanding communication towers shall have a maximum height of two hundred (200) feet. Additional height, up to three hundred (300) feet, may be approved as a Use Permitted by Special Exception by the Board of Appeals. For communication towers on buildings, the maximum height shall be twenty (20) feet above the roofline of buildings forty (40) feet or less in height, and forty (40) feet above the roofline of buildings fifty (50) feet in height or greater. 
7:14.5 Landscaping. 
Landscaping shall be required as follows: 
A.  Around the base of the communication tower, outside of the security fence, at least one row of evergreen shrubs capable of forming a continuous hedge at least five (5) feet in height shall be provided, with individual plantings spaced not more than five (5) feet apart. In addition, at least one (1) row of evergreen trees with a minimum caliper of one and three-fourths (13/4) inches at the time of planting and spaced not more than twenty-five (25) feet apart shall be provided within fifty (50) feet of the perimeter security fence. 
B.  The landscaping requirements may be waived in whole or in part by the Zoning Administrator if it is determined that existing natural vegetation provides adequate screening or if the Zoning Administrator determines that the landscaping requirements are not feasible due to physical constraints or characteristics of the site on which the communication tower is to be located. Where the physical constraints or characteristics of the site are such that the landscaping cannot be located as prescribed above, the Zoning Administrator may require that plant material be placed in another, feasible location on site, which would serve to meet the intent of the landscaping requirements. 
C.  All required landscaping shall be installed according to established planting procedures using good quality plant materials. 
D.  A Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued until the required landscaping is completed in accordance with the approved Landscape Plan and verified by an on-site inspection by the Zoning Administrator or the Zoning Administrator's designee, unless such landscaping has been waived in accordance with (B), above. A temporary Certificate of Occupancy may, however, be issued prior to completion of the required landscaping if the owner or developer provides to the City a form of surety satisfactory to the City Attorney and in an amount equal to the remaining plant materials, related materials, and installation costs as agreed upon by the Zoning Administrator or the Zoning Administrator's designee and the owner or developer. 
E.  All required landscaping must be installed and approved by the first planting season following issuance of the temporary Certificate of Occupancy or the surety bond will be forfeited to the City. 
F.  The owners and their agents shall be responsible for providing, protecting, and maintaining all landscaping in healthy and growing condition, replacing unhealthy or dead plant materials within one (1) year or by the next planting season, whichever first occurs. Replacement materials shall conform to the original intent of the Landscape Plan. 
G.  Eight-foot-high fencing shall be provided around the communication tower and any associated building. 
7:14.6 Illumination. 
Communication towers shall only be illuminated as required by the Federal Communications Commission and/or Federal Aviation Administration. 
7:14.7 Signage. 
A single sign for the purposes of emergency identification shall be permitted. The permitted sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area and shall be attached to the fence surrounding the tower. Under no circumstances shall any signs for purposes of commercial advertisement be permitted. 
7:14.8 Access to Site. 
Each parcel on which a communication tower is located must have access to a public road twenty (20) feet in width. 
7:14.9 General Requirements. 
Communication towers, in addition to the requirements set forth above, must also comply with the following requirements: 
A.  A statement shall be submitted from a registered engineer that the NIER (Non-ionizing Electromagnetic Radiation) emitted therefrom does not result in a ground level exposure at any point outside such facility which exceeds the lowest applicable exposure standards by any regulatory agency of the United States Government or the American National Standards Institute. For roof mounted communication towers, the statement regarding the NIER shall address spaces which are capable of being occupied within the structure on which the communication tower is mounted. 
B.  Communication towers and their foundations shall meet the requirements of the Standard Building Code for wind and seismic loads. Drawings and calculations shall be prepared and sealed by a South Carolina Registered Professional Engineer and shall be submitted with the building permit application. 
C.  All communications towers and supporting facilities shall be subject to periodic reinspection(s) by the Building Standards Department. If any additions, changes, or modifications are proposed to the site or its components, proper plans, specifications, and calculations shall be submitted for permit approval to the Building Standards and Zoning Departments. Prototypical drawings indicating various types of antenna(s) to be located on the communication tower may be submitted at the time of the appropriate permit application. Additional antennas may be added to the communication tower without additional permits or inspections so long as electrical wiring is not required. 
D.  Unless otherwise required by the F.C.C. or the F.A.A., communication towers shall be light grey in color. 
E.  Satisfactory evidence shall be submitted, with the building permit application for a freestanding communication tower, that alternative towers, buildings, or other structures do not exist within the applicant's tower site search area that are structurally capable of supporting the intended antenna or meeting the applicant's necessary height criteria, or provide a location free of interference from AM towers. 
F.  A communication tower must be removed within one hundred twenty (120) days of the date such tower ceases to be used for communication purposes. 
COMMUNICATION TOWER USE LOCATION MATRIX 
Communication towers are allowed in all zoning districts in the City of Mauldin subject to the following restrictions: 
Zoning
District Permitted
Use Use by
Special
Exception All SetbacksR-20 X District requirements, plus one (1) foot for each one (1) foot of tower height in excess of forty (40) feet. Two-hundred-foot maximum. R-15 X Same as above. R-12 X Same as above. R-10 X Same as above. R-M1 X Same as above. R-M X Same as above. OD X District requirements, or district requirements, plus one (1) foot for each one (1) foot of tower height in excess of forty (40) feet if located adjacent to a residential district. Two-hundred-foot maximum. C-1 X District requirements, or district requirements, plus one (1) foot for each one (1) foot of tower height in excess of forty (40) feet if located adjacent to a residential district. Two-hundred-foot maximum. C-1N X District requirements. PD X District requirements. C-2, S-1, I-1 X District requirements, if located within twenty-five (25) percent of the tower height of a residential district. C-2, S-1, I-1 X District requirements, if located at least twenty-five (25) percent of the tower height from a residential district.  
* Freestanding towers shall have a maximum height of two hundred (200) feet, or may be allowed up to three hundred (300) feet as a Use Permitted by Special Exception. 
* For towers on buildings, the maximum height shall be twenty (20) feet above the roofline of buildings forty (40) feet or less in height, and forty (40) feet above the roofline of buildings fifty (50) feet in height or greater. 
Editor's note- At the request of the city, former § 7:12.7, Communication Tower, has been redesignated as a new § 7:14. 
ARTICLE 8. - RESIDENTIAL AND GROUP DEVELOPMENT DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 8:1 - Design Standards for Residential Housing Developments. 
Permit and Plan Submittal: All Residential Developments consisting of three (3) or more dwelling units (attached or detached) shall complete a permit application and submit site development plans to the Business and Development Services office in accordance with subsection 4:1.1.3(b), Commercial Construction of this ordinance. 
Developments involving the subdivision of land (including but not limited to single family detached subdivisions, single family attached, zero lot line and townhome developments) shall also provide Preliminary Subdivision Plat prepared in accordance with the standards outlined in Mauldin Land Development Ordinance. Upon completion of a technical review by City staff, the preliminary plat and site development plans shall be scheduled for a public hearing and review by the Mauldin Planning Commission. 
A.  The location and type of material to be used in the visual screen surrounding property. 
In addition to the above information, the following will be required: 
A.  A copy of covenants, grants, or easements, or other restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the use of land, buildings, and structures including proposed easements or grants for public utilities. 
B.  A schedule showing the proposed times for constructing the development. 
1.  General Design Standards for Streets and Internal Drives. 
a)  Group and Multifamily Developments (where there is no subdivision of land). All internal roads and/or driveways within a multifamily apartment or condo development shall be designed to have a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet with extruded curbs and gutter and shall be constructed with four (4) inches of rock base or three (3) inches of hot laid asphaltic binder covered by one and one-half (11/2) inches of hot laid asphalt. 
b)  Attached and detached single family developments (involving the subdivision of land where parcels and/or dwelling units are accessed from a dedicated public or private street). All new streets, alleys, and other infrastructure improvement shall be constructed in accordance with the Mauldin Land Development Ordinance. The Mauldin Public Works Director and City Fire Marshall shall have the authority to consider alternative street designs and/or require additional measures to ensure public safety and/or address road maintenance concerns. 
2.  Open Space and Recreation Areas for Group Residential and Multi-family Developments. Two hundred (200) square feet of useable open space and recreation area shall be provided per dwelling unit. A minimum of fifty (50) percent of this area shall be for outdoor recreation. If the recreation area is developed as a swimming pool, it shall meet all State and County Health Department requirements and shall have a fence installed around the pool of not less than six (6) feet in height. 
3.  Landscaping. Shall be required in accordance with Section 6:2, Landscape and Design Standards of this Ordinance. 
4.  Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 6:1, Parking Standards of this Ordinance. 
5.  Street Lights. Adequate street lighting shall be provided in all residential housing developments in accordance with Section 6:3, Lighting Standards of this Ordinance. 
6.  Public Sidewalk. A public sidewalk, not less than five (5) feet in width, shall be required within the right-of-way along all adjacent streets. Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete with a minimum thickness of at least four (4) inches. Sidewalks shall align vertically and horizontally with abutting sidewalks and shall comply with the Accessibility Guidelines of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the building codes administered by the City of Mauldin. 
( Ord. No. 786 , amds. 8, 9, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 834 , amd. 4, 9-18-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 786, amd. 8, adopted March 16, 2015, changed the title of § 8:1 from "Single-Family Attached and Multifamily Development" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 8:2 - Cluster and Open Space Developments. 
This section is intended to encourage residential subdivision developments that cluster homes to preserve open space for recreational and environmental reasons. A residential cluster development allows the subdivision of land into lots of varying sizes, which provides home buyers a choice of lot sizes according to their needs and a more economical product by reducing the developers overall cost required for the installation of sewer, roads, and other infrastructure. 
1.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to permit residential cluster and open space development in order to: 
a)  Encourage creative and flexible site design that is sensitive to the land's natural features and adapts to the natural topography; 
b)  Protect environmentally sensitive areas of a development site and preserve on a permanent basis open space, tree cover, natural drainage ways and other natural features; 
c)  Decrease or minimize nonpoint source pollution impacts by reducing the amount of impervious surfaces in site development; 
d)  Promote cost savings in infrastructure installation and maintenance by such techniques as reducing the distance over which utilities, such as water and sewer lines, need to be extended or by reducing the length of streets; 
e)  Promote opportunities for social interaction by providing incentives to encourage community recreational spaces, sidewalks and walking and hiking paths in open space areas; and 
f)  Facilitate the economic and efficient provision of public services. 
2.  Applicability and General Provisions. A residential Cluster and Open Space Development shall be permitted in all residential districts as follows: 
a)  R-20, R-15 and R-12: Single Family Detached Cluster Housing. 
b)  R-10, R-8, and R-6: Single Family Attached and Detached Cluster Housing, and Traditional Urban Neighborhood Housing. 
c)  RM-1 and RM: Single Family Attached and Detached Cluster Housing, and Traditional Urban Neighborhood Housing. 
3.  Permitted Density and Open Space Requirements. All densities are based on the total number of dwelling units divided by the total number of acres. The overall density and common open space requirements of a residential cluster and open space development shall be as required in Table 8:2.4 below: 
Table 8:2.4 Development Standards Table, Cluster and Open Space Development. 
TABLE 8:2.4: CLUSTER AND OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT
DENSITIES AND OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS BY ZONING DISTRICT
[2] Zoning 
Classification # of Dwelling Units Per Acre Percent (%) of Open Space Required Density Bonus 
Traditional Urban Neighborhood Housing 
[1] Density Bonus 
Traditional Urban Neighborhood Housing 
[1] # of Dwelling Units Per Acre Percent (%) of Open Space Required R-20 2.2 30% R-15 2.9 30% R-12 3.6 30% R-10 4.4 15% 5.0 15% R-8 5.4 15% 6.2 15% R-6 7.3 15% 8.4 15% RM-1 12.5 15% 14.4 15% RM 14.5 15% 16.7 15% Cluster Housing Developments Minimum Tract Area Dwelling, Attached Cluster Housing: Subject to provisions of Section 8:2 2 Acres Dwelling, Detached Cluster Housing: Subject to provisions of Section 8:2 2 Acres Dwelling, Traditional Urban Neighborhood Housing: Subject to provisions of Section 8:2 and Section 10:7 5 Acres Notes: 

[1] Subject to compliance with Article 10, Conditional Use Standards for Traditional Urban Neighborhood Housing standards. 

[2] Cluster and Open Space Developments involving subdivision of land shall require review and approval by the Planning Commission.  
4.  Development Standards. The following development standards shall apply to Cluster: Single Family, Detached and Single Family, Attached Housing developments: 
a)  Minimum tract area shall be two (2) acres and shall consist of contiguous parcels, not divided by an existing public or private road or a recreational or navigable body of water. 
b)  Density and Open Space standards shall be provided as required in Table 8:2.4, Cluster and Open Space Development Standards above. 
c)  Single, Family Attached structures may be a duplex, triplex or quadraplex but in no case shall exceed four (4) attached units per structure. 
d)  Yard Requirements. There is no minimum lot width or minimum yard requirement, except as required herein, or those required by DHEC and/or the International Building Code. 
e)  Setbacks. Perimeter: No structure shall be erected within twenty-five (25) feet of the developments external lot line. Internal: Buildings shall be setback a minimum of twenty (20) feet from all internal public and/or private streets. 
f)  Street Design. All new streets, alleys and other infrastructure improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the Mauldin Land Development Ordinance. The Mauldin City Public Works Director and City Fire Marshall shall have the authority to consider alternative street designs and/or require additional measures to ensure public safety and/or address road maintenance concerns. 
g)  Sidewalks. Five-foot sidewalks shall be required along all existing and proposed internal streets, and also along the primary street frontage(s) of the development. Alternative methods for pedestrian connectivity within the development may be considered for sites encumbered by environmentally sensitive areas (e.g. steep slopes, flood hazard areas). 
h)  Landscaping. Shall be provided in accordance with Section 6:2, Landscape and Design Standards. 
i)  Parking. Shall be provided in accordance with Section 6:1, Parking Standards. 
j)  Drainage. A complete drainage plan of the entire site, meeting the requirements prescribed in the Mauldin City Drainage Ordinance must be submitted for approval. 
k)  Open Space Provisions. A minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the development area shall be used for common open space. Land dedicated as open space shall be of meaningful proportions and dimensions. 
1.  The open space shall be contiguous to the extent practicable and shall be accessible from a public or private street either directly or via an easement of at least ten (10) feet in width. 
2.  A minimum of thirty-five (35) percent of the total open space must be considered developable acreage (land), as defined in Section 3:3, Definitions. 
3.  With exception to walking paths, trails, and/or greenways, at least fifty (50) percent of land designated to meeting the open space requirement shall remain impervious. 
4.  Recreational lakes or ponds used for stormwater management may be included in the land designated as open space. However, fenced detention or retention areas used for stormwater management shall not be included in the calculation of required open space. 
l)  Management, Dedication and Maintenance of Common Open Space Ownership. 
All common open space, any common areas or common facilities within the cluster residential development shall be permanently protected by recorded covenants and restrictions and shall be conveyed by the property owner(s) to a homeowners association or other legal entity under the laws of the State of South Carolina. 
The person(s) or entity identified above, as having the right to ownership or control over open space, shall be responsible for its continuing upkeep and proper maintenance. 
m)  Riparian Buffers. Riparian buffers shall be provided along all classes of streams in accordance with the Greenville County Soil and Water Conservation Commission Stormwater Management Design Manual. 
n)  A pre-application meeting with the Business and Development Services office shall be required prior to submittal of development plans. 
o)  A preliminary plat and site development plans shall be submitted to the Mauldin Business and Development Services office to schedule a review and approval by the Mauldin Planning Commission. 
5.  Traditional Urban Neighborhood Housing Developments: Shall adhere to the standards included in this section and are also subject to the Conditional Use Standards set forth in Section 10:8 of this ordinance. 
a)  Minimum tract area shall be five (5) acres and shall consist of contiguous parcels, not divided by an existing public or private road or a recreational or navigable body of water. 
b)  Density and Open Space standards shall be provided as required in Table 8:2.4, Cluster and Open Space Development Standards above. A fifteen (15) percent density bonus shall be permitted for developments incorporating a mix of housing types and meeting the design criteria set forth in Section 10:8, Conditional Use, Cluster: Traditional Urban Neighborhood Housing. 
c)  Yard Requirements. There is no minimum lot width or minimum yard requirement, except as required herein, or those required by DHEC and/or the International Building Code. 
d)  A pre-application meeting with the Business and Development Services office shall be required prior to submittal of development plans. 
e)  A preliminary plat and site development plans shall be submitted to the Mauldin Business and Development Services office to schedule a review and approval by the Mauldin Planning Commission. 
( Ord. No. 786 , amd. 6, 3-16-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 786 , amd. 6, adopted March 16, 2015, repealed § 8:2 in its entirety, and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former § 8:2 pertained to cluster development and open space. 
Sec. 8:3 - Group Development. 
Group Development is allowed in the RM-1 district subject to the district regulations and the following requirements: 
A.  A legal description of the proposed boundaries. 
B.  A site plan showing number of dwelling units of various types and overall density thereof. 
C.  Location of all curb cuts and points of egress and ingress and all sidewalks and dimensions thereof. 
D.  The density of land use proposed for every part of the site and number of acres devoted to nonresidential uses if any. 
E.  Location and size of any existing or proposed roads within the acreage. 
F.  Description of open space, uses, areas proposed, and adequacy thereof to serve anticipated demand and if dedication of open spaces proposed, procedures and conditions thereof in detail. 
G.  The location of all parking. 
H.  A complete landscaping plan. 
I.  Plans showing complete drainage of entire site. 
J.  A prospective sketch indicating color and materials of all structures, and screening. 
K.  A copy of covenants, grants, easements, or other restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the use of land, buildings, and structures including proposed easements for grants and public utilities. 
L.  Other information or descriptions as deemed reasonably appropriate by the Zoning Administrator. 
8:3.1 Roads. 
All roads or drives within the Group Development shall be no less than twenty-four (24) feet in width with extruded curbs and gutters and four (4) inches of rock base or three (3) inches of hot laid asphaltic binder covered by one and one-half (11/2) inches of hot laid asphalt. If the roads are to be conveyed to the City of Mauldin, a fifty-foot right-of-way shall be provided and all County Subdivision Regulations shall be met. 
8:3.2 Size. 
The minimum lot area required for Group Development in the RM-1 district is two (2) acres. The principal use of the RM-1 district is residential, thus nonresidential uses, parking, and other related activities shall occupy no more than forty (40) percent of the total development. 
8:3.3 Yard Requirement. 
No structures shall be constructed closer than fifteen (15) feet to an exterior property line and no structure shall be constructed closer than thirty-five (35) feet to a public right-of-way. 
8:3.4 Off-Street Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 6:1. 
8:3.5 Street Lights. 
Adequate street lighting shall be provided in all Group Developments. 
8:3.6 Height. 
No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
Sec. 8:4 - Provisions for Group Development in the S-1 District. 
Group Development is allowed in the S-1 district as a Use Permitted. 
Site Plan Requirements. 
A minimum of three (3) copies of the Site Plan meeting the requirements of this section must be submitted to the office of the Zoning Administrator. In order to issue proper and expeditious review, the site plan must meet the following criteria: 
A.  The site plan must be drawn to a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch by a registered engineer/surveyor of the State of South Carolina. 
B.  A vicinity map, title block, scale, north arrow, site size, and property lines survey. 
C.  The location of any utility easements. 
D.  The land use for every part of the site and the number of acres devoted to each use. 
E.  The site's traffic circulation plan, including the location of curb cuts and points of ingress and egress, and also including the location and width of all streets, drives, medians, service areas, dumpster pads, entrances to parking areas, etc. 
F.  The site's parking plan, including all off-street parking, loading/unloading areas and structures, and also including all parking spaces and their dimensions. 
G.  The sites sign plan, which would include all exterior signage of the development. 
H.  The site's lighting plan, including the location, height, and type of all exterior light fixtures. 
I.  Elevations of proposed development. 
8:4.1 Off-Street Parking. 
Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 6:1. 
ARTICLE 9. - TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES 

[Sec. 9:1 - Temporary Uses and Structures.] 
9:1.1 Purpose and Intent. 
The following provisions are provided in recognition of the need for special allowances to be granted for temporary uses so that they may be permitted within the City of Mauldin. These provisions, authorizing and regulating uses that are truly temporary in nature, are intended to permit such uses (and structures in which they are housed) when consistent with city regulations and policies and when safe and compatible with the area in which they are located. 
9:1.2 Temporary Use Definitions. 
Catering Truck. A truck, van, or similar vehicle from which the vendor offers for sale food and beverages that are prepackaged. 
City Sponsored event means that the city, solely or in partnership with another entity, produces and/or coordinates the event. 
Commissary. A commissary is defined as a permitted fixed food establishment that serves as an operating base for a mobile food vehicle. The commissary is where the vehicle will be stored, parked, serviced, cleaned, supplied, and maintained. 
Food Trailer (Concession Style). An enclosed attached or detached trailer that is equipped with facilities for the preparing, cooking and selling of various types of food products. 
Food Truck. An enclosed motor vehicle equipped with facilities for preparing, cooking and selling various types of food products. 
Ice Cream Truck. A motor vehicle containing a commercial freezer and from which a vendor sells frozen prepackaged food products such as ice cream, frozen yogurt, frozen custard, flavored frozen water and similar. 
Institutional use. Includes but is not limited to religious and charitable organizations, hospitals, and educational institutions. 
Interim Temporary Use. A use (and/or structure containing a use), which is located on a property often for periods exceeding one hundred twenty (120) days due to the nature of the use. 
Intermittent Mobile Food Sales. Food transactions from a mobile vehicle where the vehicle only remains idle for a period of fifteen (15) minutes or less (e.g. ice cream trucks, food vendors at construction sites). 
Mobile Food Vendor Vehicle. A self-contained, motorized vehicle mounted food service unit that returns daily to its base of operations (Commissary) as approved by DHEC and is used for either the preparation or the sale of food products, or for both. 
Mobile Market Food Truck. An enclosed motor vehicle equipped with facilities for the sale of locally grown fresh produce. The produce sold is in its original form and has not been altered or cooked in any other way inconsistent with it coming fresh from the fields and/or gardens in which it was grown. 
Short-Term Temporary Use. A use (and/or structure containing a use) that is temporary in nature and only active for a specified period of time. 
Special Event. A temporary event is an activity sponsored by a governmental, charitable, civic, educational, religious, business, or trade organization which is infrequent in occurrence and limited in duration. Examples include arts and crafts shows, community festivals, carnivals, fairs, circuses, concerts, conventions, exhibitions, trade shows, outdoor religious events, and other similar activities. 
Temporary Event. A single day or multi-day event such as but not limited to: fundraisers, promotional events, arts and crafts shows, carnivals, fairs, circuses, concerts, trade shows, outdoor religious events, and other similar activities. 
9:1.3 Applicability. 
Unless exempted in accordance with this ordinance, all temporary uses and structures are required to obtain a temporary use permit in accordance with subsection 9:1.11. Temporary Uses and structures shall only be permitted in non-residential districts unless specifically allowed under a separate provision of the Code. 
9:1.4 Table of Allowed Temporary Uses and Structures. 
Table TU-1 below summarizes the temporary uses and structures that are allowed within the City and any general or specific standards that apply. 
Table 9:1.4-Temporary Uses and Structures Exempt with Standards: Short Term Temporary Uses/Structures/Events Temporary Use or Structure Ordinance
Reference General Notes-Refer to relative Code Section City Sponsored Events and/or events on City-owned Properties. 9:1.7A Reviewed under separate process Construction Related Activities/Structures - located on approved development site 9:1.7B Duration of active construction permit Fundraising events(non-commercial, not for profit) 9:1.7C Limited to 3 consecutive days Garage and Yard Sales (Residential) 9:1.7D Limited to 30 days per calendar year Intermittent Food Sales (e.g.: ice cream sales, food sales at construction sites) 9:1.7E Primarily limited to stops of 15 minutes or less, Annual Mobile Decal Required. Outdoor Retail Sales 9:1.7F Limited to 60 days per calendar year; must be located on merchant's principal place of business Private, non-commercial events: Limited to One day events, eight hours in duration, and six separate events per year. 9:1.7G Exception: Permit Required if the event is more than one day, mobile food vendor sales are part of function and/or the expected attendance exceeds 100 patrons. Permit Required: Short Term Temporary Uses/Structures/Events Temporary Use (TU) or Structure Ordinance
Reference Notes: Short Term Temporary Events including: Carnivals, circuses, fairs, arts and craft shows, etc. 9:1.8 14 days, 6 events per year Seasonal Sales (pumpkin, Christmas trees, agricultural) 9:1.8D(1) Refer to Code Section Mobile Food Sales on Private Property (not part of a city sponsored event) Section 9:1.10B Permit and Annual Mobile Food Vendor Decal Required Mobile Food Sales on Public Property, Special Events Section 9:1.10C, D Refer to Code Section Permit Required: Interim Temporary Uses/Structures Temporary Use (TU) or Structure Ordinance
Reference Notes: Expansion or Replacement of Existing Facilities 9:1.9A Maximum of two years, refer to code Construction Related Activities/Structures - located off-site (adjacent parcel) 9:1.9B Duration of active construction/development permit Real Estate Sales Office/Model Sales Home 9:1.9C Maximum of three years, refer to code Temporary Storage in a Portable Shipping Container - Residential Use only 9:1.7I Up to 30 days - no permit; more than 30 days, permit required - refer to code.  
9:1.5 Prohibited Temporary Uses. 
A.  Retail sales or display of goods, products, or services are prohibited from being located in a public right-of-way except when the sale of goods are part of an authorized and permitted Temporary event where the event requires the closing of streets. 
B.  Substantial permanent changes to a development site to specifically accommodate a temporary use or activity is prohibited. 
9:1.6 General Provisions. 
Compliance with the following general provisions is required for all temporary uses unless otherwise specified. 
A.  Parking, Accessibility and Traffic Control. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 6:1.1.6, Minimum Parking Requirements, and 6:1.1.7, Additional Requirements for the Physically Disabled and/or Handicapped. Parking must be located on the site where the temporary use is proposed and shall accommodate the temporary use(s), and existing use(s), if applicable. 
B.  Signs. Unless specifically addressed otherwise in this subsection, signage used for a temporary use shall be in accordance with Section 6:4.1.12.B(6), Temporary Signs. A sign permit must be obtained prior to display. 
C.  Lighting. Site lighting shall be in accordance with Section 6:3, Lighting Standards. 
D.  Impacts. Temporary uses and their associated functions will be closely evaluated to ensure that adjacent and/or adjoining properties are not negatively affected; and that the use will not create hazardous vehicular or pedestrian traffic conditions. The Business and Development Services Director shall have the authority to impose additional requirements to mitigate potential negative impacts, including but not limited to: locating event staging areas, noise control, setbacks, screening, and temporary traffic control devices to minimize congestion. 
E.  Adequate Facilities. Sanitary sewer, utilities, drainage, refuse management and any other facilities deemed necessary by the City to protect the public's health, safety and welfare must be provided on site and made accessible to employees, patrons and/or participants. 
F.  Setbacks. Temporary uses, and associated structures and functions shall not be located in any required building setback, landscape buffer, street tree planting strip, or any other landscaped areas required under this chapter. In no case, shall a temporary display or structure be located within fifteen (15) feet of the street right-of-way nor interfere with site visibility at ingress/egress points onto the property. 
G.  Presence of another use. A temporary use may be located on a property housing a a permanent use or may be located on a vacant lot as long as the site is determined to be fully compliant with the State adopted accessibility standards and any other requirements the City deems necessary to ensure public heath, safety and welfare. The location of the temporary use shall not violate any requirements placed on any permanent use. 
H.  Other permits, licenses, inspections. These regulations do not exempt the operator from obtaining any other required permits or inspections such as, but not limited to, building and fire permits; issuance of a city business license, State permits, and Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC). A City business license shall not be issued until an approved temporary use permit is obtained. 
I.  Discontinuation of use. All materials, structures, and products related to the temporary use must be removed from the premises between days of operation on the site, provided that materials, structures and products related to the temporary use may be left on-site overnight between consecutive days of operation. Each site occupied by a temporary use shall be left free of debris, litter, or other evidence of the temporary use upon completion or removal of the use. 
9:1.7 Temporary Uses and Associated Structures Exempt from obtaining a Permit. 
Unless otherwise stipulated in this article, the following uses and/or associated structures shall be permitted in all zoning districts; and do not require the issuance of a zoning or temporary use permit. Such uses, however, shall conform to the general provision requirements set forth in subsection 9:1.6 General Provisions, the requirements set forth below in Section 9:1.7; and any other applicable permitting and licensing requirements of the City of Mauldin. While a zoning permit or temporary use permit is not required for the following uses, a City building and/or fire permit may be required for temporary structures and/or tents. 
A.  City (co) sponsored events and/or other authorized events located on city-owned property are reviewed and approved through a separate City process. 
B.  Construction Related Structures (containers) that are located within the area or parcel of an approved development plan that is under construction shall be allowed without a separate temporary use or zoning permit but may require a building permit. Said structure(s) may be utilized for the duration of the building permit and shall be removed within thirty (30) days following the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or Certificate of Completion. 
C.  Fundraising (non-commercial, not for profit) events are only permitted in non-residential districts and/or on property occupied by a public or institutional use in residential districts. If a fundraising event is specifically listed as a temporary use in subsections 9:1.8, 9:1.9 below, then the provisions of that subsection shall apply. Except as specifically permitted as follows, a fundraising event shall be permitted for no more than three (3) consecutive days. 
D.  Garage/Yard Sales, Residential are permitted in all residential districts but must be located on a parcel containing a dwelling unit(s) and/or on a parcel occupied by an approved non-residential or institutional use. Sales are permitted on any parcel for a total of thirty (30) days per calendar year. The maximum duration for each occurrence is three (3) days. Garage and Yard sales signs are subject to the provisions outlined in Signs, subsection 6:4.1.8. 
E.  Intermittent Food Sales: a vendor and/or mobile food unit that does not sit idle for more than fifteen (15) minutes at any one (1) place shall be permitted in all districts with a valid mobile food vendor decal and City Business License. Intermittent Food Sales located on permitted and active construction sites shall not exceed two (2) hours in duration at any given site and shall exempt from the separation requirements of subsections 9.1.10-A(8) and 9.1.10-B(2) of this Article. 
F.  Outdoor retail sales that are located on the same lot as the merchant's principal use and where no structure is erected in conjunction with a sale are permitted in all nonresidential districts for a maximum of sixty (60) days per calendar year. When such use is located on an internal sidewalk, a minimum of five (5) feet must remain unobstructed so as not to block or interfere with State adopted accessibility requirements and/or pedestrian movement. 
G.  Private, non-commercial events on private property and evangelistic, religious events and services are permitted in all districts without a temporary use permit for events with a duration of one (1) day or less. Exception: A temporary use permit shall be required for multi-day events, when the event attendance is expected to exceed one hundred (100) patrons or more, and/or if mobile food sales are provided. Such events are limited to eight (8) hours in duration, up to six (6) times a year. 
H.  Reserved. 
I.  Storage Containers, Portable on demand, Residential Use. Portable, on demand storage containers are allowed in all zoning districts and shall be subject to the following standards: 
1)  One (1) storage container shall be allowed on a property containing a residential use. Such containers shall not be permitted on any lot that does not contain a principal building. 
2)  To the maximum extent practicable, storage and/or portable on demand containers shall not be located in the front yard. When such structure requires location in the front yard, a Temporary Use permit shall be required. 
3)  Such structures and/or containers shall be setback from all street rights-of-way a minimum of twenty (20) feet and located a minimum of ten (10) feet from side and rear lot lines. 
4)  When located on a property containing a residential use, the unit shall be used only for temporary incidental residential accessory use purposes; it shall not be used for any non-residential purposes or storage nor shall it be used in conjunction with a home occupation. 
5)  No utility shall be connected to the unit. 
6)  No unit shall remain in place longer than thirty (30) days without the issuance of a Temporary Use permit. The Business and Development Services Director may extend the use in thirty-day increments but in no case shall a unit remain in place more than one hundred twenty (120) days in any twelve-month period. 
7)  The Business and Development Services Director shall have the authority to modify the standards of Subsection 9.1.7.I, in the event of a natural or manmade disaster and when there is an active permit on site for repair or reconstruction. 
9:1.8 Short-term Temporary Events. 
Short-term temporary events shall conform to the general provision requirements set forth in subsection 9:1.6 General Provisions, the requirements set forth below in Section 9:1.8; and any other applicable permitting and licensing requirements of the City of Mauldin. Unless otherwise specified, short-term events are only permitted in non-residential districts. 
A.  Permit Required. All short-term temporary events must obtain a Temporary Use permit as set forth in subsection 9:1.11 below. The approved permit must be displayed on the permises at all times when the temporary event is in operation. 
B.  Duration. Except as specifically provided for elsewhere in this section, a short-term events shall be permitted for a period not to exceed four (4) times a year and a maximum duration of fourteen (14) days per event in any given calendar year. The dates of operation must be listed on the permit. A day in operation shall mean any or part of any day on which the use is conducted. 
C.  Limitation on permits. Only one (1) temporary use permit shall be active on any lot or parcel at any given time. An exception to this limitation shall be allowed with written consent from the property/land owner and a staff review of a site plan that shows that the temporary event does not affect the operation of the site nor cause the property to be in violation with local and/or state ordinances. 
D.  Additional standard for specific uses. In addition to the general requirements for temporary uses/structures set forth in subsection 9:1.6 above, the following temporary uses shall comply with the following: 
1)  Seasonal Sales. Seasonal sales, including the sale of such items as Christmas trees and pumpkins, seasonal produce, and other similar agricultural products may be permitted in all non-residential districts or on residentially zoned parcels occupied by a public and/or an approved institutional use subject to the following time limits in Table TU-2 below: 
TABLE TU-2: SEASONAL SALE EVENTS Pumpkin sales 45 days per calendar year Christmas tree sales 60 days calendar days per year Garden sales 60 days per event; two times per year Produce Stands/Farmers Market 180 days per calendar year Ice cream/frozen treat stands 180 days per calendar year  
9:1.9 Interim Temporary Uses/Structures. 
An interim temporary use/structure is use (and structure containing a use) which is located on a property often for periods exceeding one hundred twenty (120) days due to the nature of the use. Such uses are subject to the standards in this section and in subsection 9:1.6, General Provisions and are only permitted in nonresidential districts and on property occupied by an institutional use in residential districts. 
A.  Temporary Facilities (Factory fabricated building) for Expansion or Replacement of Existing Facilities for schools, churches and other institutional uses. Factory fabricated transportable buildings that are designed to arrive at the site ready for occupancy (except for minor unpacking and connection to utilities) and designed for relocation to other sites, may be permitted as follows: 
1)  Duration. The time period shall not exceed a maximum of two (2) years and/or the duration of an active Building permit that has been issued for the expansion or replacement for which the temporary facility is needed. This period may be extended for an additional twelve-month period for good cause shown upon approval of a written request for such an extension by the Zoning Administrator. The request shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the permit. With exception to public schools, in no event shall the extension allow the temporary structures to remain on the site for more than three (3) years. 
2)  Location. Such structures shall comply with the setback requirements as defined by the applicable zoning district. In addition, structures shall not be located within existing vegetated buffers or other areas designated on the site plan to remain free from land disturbance. 
3)  Other requirements. 
a.  The temporary structure shall be either a modular building unit or a building constructed to the standards of the SC State Building Code. 
b.  Underpinning, skirting, or other curtain wall material shall be installed. 
c.  All permits required by applicable building, electrical, plumbing, and mechanical codes shall be obtained prior to installation of the temporary structure. 
d.  The temporary structure shall be compatible with the existing building on the site in terms of exterior color. 
e.  A sketch plan containing sufficient information to show compliance with the above standards shall be submitted and approved prior to installation of the temporary structure. 
B.  Construction related activities/structures located on an adjacent site. Because of site constraints, construction related activities might need to occur on a site that is adjacent to or nearby the construction site. Such uses shall be removed and the site restored to its previous condition within thirty (30) days after the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or Certificate of Completion. 
C.  Real estate sales and/or model home offices. Temporary facilities used as sales/ leasing offices, including those located in a model unit of a residential project or used during construction to expand or replace a permanent building, may be permitted on the same site as the permanent use. Sales offices may be established for pre-sales or leasing prior to construction of the project. 
1)  Duration. Real estate sales and/or model home offices may be approved for a period of up to three (3) years. This period may be renewed for an addition twelve-month period for good cause shown upon approval of a written request for such an extension by the Zoning Administrator. The request shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the permit. Such uses shall be removed and the site restored to its previous condition within thirty (30) days after the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or Certificate of Completion. 
2)  There is no time limit on the use of model sales units for rental housing. 
9:1.10 Temporary Mobile Food Sales (including Catering trucks, food trailers, food and ice cream trucks). 
A.  Specific Requirements for Temporary Mobile Food Sales. Unless otherwise stated, all Temporary Mobile Food Sale uses shall be subject to the General Provisions of subsection 9:1.6 and the following requirements: 
1)  Commissary. Mobile food vendors are required to have a DHEC-approved commissary. Mobile food vendors must report to their commissary at least once every twenty-four (24) hours for cleaning, restocking and general maintenance of their vehicle(s), equipment, and products. Every mobile food vendor shall keep and post in the vehicle a log of regular weekly inspections of the vendor's vehicle(s) and equipment so as to ensure proper repair and sanitary conditions at all times. 
2)  General Maintenance. Mobile food vendor vehicles must keep their vehicle(s) in good, working order. This includes, but is not limited to, keeping vehicle(s) free of excessive wear or damage including dents, rust, and abrasions; maintaining exterior paint so as not to allow excessive chipping, cracking or fading; and replacing any windows with noticeable cracks, dents or scratches that may cause a hazard or reduced clarity of vision below a level specified by manufacturer. 
3)  Goods for Sale. Mobile food vendors shall be limited to edibles and hot and cold beverages containing no alcohol. The selling of non-food or non-drink items shall be limited to merchandise displaying the mobile food vendor's company logo and/or branding. No items for sale may be displayed outside of the vehicle. Ice-cream trucks are allowed in all residential zones, but may only operate for less than thirty (30) minutes in one (1) location, must remain mobile, and only use sound-producing equipment to announce their arrival for no more than five (5) minutes. 
4)  Inspections. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting or replacing the role of the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC), which has the primary task of inspecting mobile food vendors. The city inspector, or their agents, shall have the right, at any time, after displaying proper identification, to enter into or upon any mobile food vendor vehicle for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not any of the provisions of this division are being violated. Any mobile food vendor vehicle which is found, after any city or state inspection, to be unsafe or in anyway not compliant with this chapter or other applicable laws and ordinance may be directed to be out of operation until the cited deficiency is corrected. 
5)  License. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a mobile food vendor within the city without first obtaining a City of Mauldin Business License, Temporary Use permit, and a Mobile Food Vendor Decal. Upon being granted a business license, mobile food vendor decal, and temporary use permit the vendor must comply with the affirmative mandates and must not violate the prohibitions regarding sales, operations, locations, and restrictions contained in this chapter. The failure to do so may result in the revocation or suspension of the business license, applicable permits and decal. 
6)  Noise. Mobile food vendors, their vehicle(s) and their customers shall not cause any public disturbance through noise caused either by the operation of a vehicle or their public interactions. No mobile food vendor may use a public address system, speaker system, or any other device that produces a loud noise to attract customers or advertise products. Mobile food vendors are subject to compliance with the City of Mauldin Noise Ordinance. 
7)  Power and Water. Mobile food vendor vehicles must be self-contained and not require any outside power or water source. Mobile food vendors may utilize power and water if provided to them with written permission granted from the property owner of the site at which the mobile food vendor is located. 
8)  Proximity to Restaurants and other eating establishments. Unless approved as an intermittent food vendor per subsection 9:1.7E and/or part of a city (co) sponsored event and/or located on city owned property, mobile food vendor vehicles shall not operate or be located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a lawful eating establishment during the establishment's normal operating hours. This requirement may be waived if the mobile food vendor provides written documentation, signed by the establishment's owner, that the owner has no objection to a closer proximity. If a new, lawful eating establishment opens within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a permitted mobile food vendor's location, the mobile food vendor may remain at that location until the permit expires. 
9)  Recycling. Mobile food vendors are encouraged to use recyclable materials for the serving of their food products, and shall provide adequate recycling receptacles for the disposal of those products. 
10)  Restrooms. Mobile food vendor vehicles must be located within three hundred (300) feet of a restroom available to employees and customers. Written permission of use of private restrooms located near public property is allowed but must be included in the permit application outside of those hours. 
11)  Spacing. When multiple mobile food vendor vehicles have been approved to locate on the same property, there should be no less than twenty (20) feet between each vehicle to allow for easy passage by customers. No mobile food vendor vehicle shall impede pedestrian traffic, emergency vehicle passage, or block any private entrances and/or exits, sidewalks, or pedestrian entrances and exits. 
12)  Streets. Mobile food vendors may not conduct business on public streets, in city-owned rights-of-way, or positioned in areas causing customers to be within twenty (20) feet of a public street. In the event a mobile food vendor is a part of an approved special event that requires the closing of streets, the mobile food vendor may conduct business in the closed street as a part of the event. 
13)  Trash. Every mobile food vendor must supply adequate trash receptacles for use by customers during operations. Each mobile food vendor shall pick up any and all litter resulting from their operations in the vicinity of their vehicle(s) and dispose of any and all waste in a street trash receptacle, dumpster, or other large capacity waste receptacle. Mobile food vendors must have permission to dump waste into a private receptacle. 
14)  Zoning Restrictions. Food Trucks, Food Trailers, and Mobile Markets are restricted from operating on private property located in areas zoned "Residential", unless approved and permitted as part of a temporary private, non-commercial neighborhood event or residential properties occupied by a permitted institutional or public use, or as authorized under a separate provision of this ordinance. 
B.  Temporary Mobile Food Sales on Private Property. Mobile food sales are permitted in all non-residential districts with an approved temporary use permit provided that the use/structure/vehicle for mobile food sales is compliant with the General Provisions outlined in subsection 9:1.6, Specific Requirements in subsection 9:1.10 above and the following standards: 
1)  Permit Required. All mobile food vendors must obtain a temporary use permit and vendor decal both of which are to be displayed at all times on the premises where the temporary use is in operation. Existing eating establishments with mobile food vending facilities located on-site shall be exempt from obtaining a temporary use permit when mobile food vending sales occur on the same property as the existing eating establishment. 
2)  Restrictions. Mobile Food Sales shall not be located within two hundred (200) feet of a residential use and/or within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a lawful eating establishment during the establishment's normal operating hours unless operating as an intermittent food vendor per subsection 9:1.7E, or part of a city (co) sponsored event and/or located on city owned property, or permitted as part of a temporary private, non-commercial neighborhood event or residential properties occupied by a permitted institutional or public use, or as authorized under a separate provision of this ordinance. 
3)  Duration. A Temporary Use permit for Mobile Food Sales shall be permitted for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days in any calendar year. The day(s) of operation must be listed on the permit. A day in operation shall mean any or part of any day on which the use is conducted. 
4)  Hours of Operation. Temporary Mobile Food Sales shall be permitted to operate from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., or 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. when located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a residential use. 
5)  Location. Temporary Mobile Food Sales may be located on vacant, undeveloped and/or existing developed properties with written consent from the property owner(s). Such consent must be provided with the Temporary Use Permit application. Multiple vendors may be approved on vacant and/or undeveloped parcels with review and approval of an approved site plan. 
6)  Proximity to public right-of way. All structures and sales shall be conducted at least fifteen (15) feet from all public rights-of-way. 
7)  Structures and Signs. Mobile food vendors are restricted from placing tables, chairs, tents, or other structures outside of their vehicle. This excludes tables used for menus and condiments. Mobile food vendors may not display signage outside of their vehicle with the exception of an A-frame menu board advertising the menu for the mobile food vendor. A-frame menu boards shall be limited to a sign face area of twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches and shall not exceed four (4) feet in height. 
8)  Site Plan. Mobile food vendors and/or private property owners must submit a site plan detailing the property location, layout of the mobile food vendor vehicle(s) on the site, and distance(s) (setback) from all street rights-of way. When located on a developed/active parcel, a complete site layout is required illustrating existing buildings, setbacks, parking, and loading and vehicular use areas. 
C.  Temporary Mobile Food Sales on Public Property. Mobile food sales may be permitted to operate on public property with an approved temporary use permit provided that the use/structure/vehicle for mobile food sales is compliant with the General Provisions outlined in subsection 9:1.6, Specific Requirements in subsection 9:1.10 above and the following standards: 
1)  Permit Required. All mobile food vendors must obtain a temporary use permit and vendor decal both of which are to be displayed at all times on the premises where the temporary use is in operation. 
2)  Insurance. At the time of application for a business license, the mobile food vendor must provide proof of general liability insurance for operation of the vehicle as a motor vehicle and the conduct of the business if the business is to be conducted on public streets or city owned property in amounts reasonably determined by the city in consultation with its risk manager. Failure to maintain this insurance will result in immediate revocation of the license. 
3)  Restrictions. Mobile food vendors shall not operate on public property that is within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a public fair, festival or event also located on public property, unless they are a part of the specified festival, fair or event, at which point they are confined to the approved area of the special event only. 
4)  Duration. A Temporary Use permit for Mobile Food Sales shall be permitted for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days in any calendar year. The days of operation must be listed on the permit. A day in operation shall mean any or part of any day on which the use is conducted. 
5)  Hours of Operation. Temporary Mobile Food Sales shall be permitted to operate from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., or 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. when located within three hundred (300) feet of a residential use. A mobile food vendor vehicle is limited to six (6) hours of operation in a specified public area per day. 
6)  Location, City Owned Properties. Temporary Mobile Food Sales may operate on the following city owned properties: Mauldin Cultural Center, Mauldin City Hall, Mauldin Senior Center, and all city-owned parks and/or green spaces. An approved temporary use permit is required for operation in these locations specifying the date(s), time(s) and nature of operation. The city reserves the right to limit the number of permits issued for a specific site during a specific time frame, restrict the exact placement of mobile food vendors/vehicles on approved site(s), and place additional restrictions as needed for operations located on public property. Mobile Food Vendors located on City owned properties shall not be subject to the separation requirements from residential uses and/or eating establishments. 
7)  Location, Schools. Mobile food vendors are restricted from school property between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. unless written permission signed by the principal and/or other authorized school official is submitted with the Temporary Use permit application. 
8)  Proximity to public right-of way. All structures and sales shall be conducted at least fifteen (15) feet from all public rights-of-way. 
D.  Temporary Mobile Food Sales, Special Events. Mobile food vendors with their base operations located outside the Mauldin City Limits and participating in an approved Special Event are not required to apply for a separate temporary use permit or Mobile Food Vendor decal provided that the Special Event has included mobile food vending sales in their site plan and has met all requirements. Operation of a mobile food sale/vendor/vehicle during a Special Event is restricted to the hours of the Special Event and the boundaries of the Special Event. All mobile food vendors involved in a Special Event must possess, and display, appropriate and valid SC DHEC inspection papers at all times during the Special Event. 
E.  Additional Permit Requirements. In addition to compliance with the Temporary Use permit requirements outlined in subsection 9:1.11 below, mobile food vendors shall file for a Mobile Vendor Decal permit with the City of Mauldin's Business and Development Services Department. 
1)  The applicant shall provide the following information (one (1) permit application is required for each mobile food vendor vehicle): 
a.  Name and description of applicant, business and goods to be sold. 
b.  Name, address and contact number of Commissary. 
c.  A color photograph of the applicant taken within thirty (30) days prior to the date of filing. 
d.  A ten-year background check as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any criminal offense, other than a moving violation, and the punishment or penalty assessed therefore. 
e.  A ten-year driving record. Certified by the SC Department of Transportation or the comparable agency of any state in which the applicant has lived in the past ten (10) years. 
f.  A copy of the vehicles registration and insurance. 
g.  Color photographs of the vehicle's interior, exterior, equipment and set up. 
h.  Such other relevant information as maybe required by the City in order to assure a full review of information needed to assess the impact of the proposed operation on the health, safety and well-being of the public. 
2)  Upon being issued a Temporary Use permit, each mobile food vendor applicant will receive a mobile food vendor window decal, which must be displayed prominently on the front or driver's side window of the mobile food vendor vehicle. Decals are valid January 1 until December 31 each year after which a new decal, permit application, and payment of applicable fees are required. 
3)  Each mobile vendor decal permit issued by the City shall contain the signature and seal of the Zoning Administrator and shall show the permittee's name and address, a license plate tag number of the vehicle used, the kind of goods to be sold, the decal permit number, date of issuance, and the length of time the permit shall be valid. 
4)  The permit and decal are issued to a specific mobile food vendor for a specific mobile food vendor vehicle. No mobile food vendor shall transfer a permit or decal to another vehicle owned or controlled by the same mobile food vendor. In the event the mobile food vendor acquires during a calendar year a replacement vehicle to serve the same purpose as the vehicle for which the city issued a permit and decal, then a replacement permit and decal shall be issued and the original permit and decal shall become null and void, and must be returned to the city prior to the issuance of replacements. 
5)  Mobile Food Vendors shall be responsible for Business License fees and Hospitality Taxes as required by the City of Mauldin. 
9:1.11 Administration and Temporary Use permit procedures. 
To ensure that proposed Temporary uses comply with the requirements of this chapter, no use that is classified as a temporary use shall be placed or established on the property without first receiving a temporary use permit. An application for a Temporary Use Permit shall be filed with the City of Mauldin's Business and Development Services Department on an application form provided by the office. 
A.  Applicant. Temporary Use permit application may be filed by the owner of the property or by an agent specifically authorized by the owner to file such application. Where an agent filed the application, the agent shall provide written documentation that the owner of the property has authorized the filing of the application. 
B.  Information Required. Each application for temporary use permit shall contain the information required on the application form. The application shall be accompanied by a sketch plan showing the boundaries of the property, the use of adjacent properties, the location of the temporary use or structure on the property, access and parking provisions, restroom facilities, and other information sufficient to show that the temporary use/structure complies with the standards set forth in this chapter. 
C.  Restrictive Covenants. It shall be the sole responsibility of the owner and/or applicant to ensure that all proposed temporary uses and activities requiring a city permit are in compliance with any existing lawful restrictive covenant. In the event a permit is issued and a conflict between the restrictive covenant and the issuance of the permit is determined, the more restrictive requirement of the two (2) shall prevail. 
D.  Fees. An application fee as determined by the City of Mauldin Permit Fee Schedule shall be due and payable when the application is submitted. Uses established without an approved permit shall be subject to a penalty fee. 
E.  Staff Review and Issuance. Provided the application is complete, staff shall have ten (10) business days to review the application for compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. In addition to a Temporary Use permit, certain structures may require building and/or fire permits. In the event a Building or Fire permit is required, the Temporary Use permit shall be held until all such permits have been approved. 
F.  Permit Validity. The Temporary Use permit shall be valid for the time period stated on the permit. 
G.  Appeals. Appeals of the decision of the Zoning Administrator shall be heard by the Zoning Board of Appeals and subject to the provisions set forth in subsection 4:1.7 of this ordinance. 
H.  Public Emergencies. In the event of a natural disaster, catastrophic even or public emergency the City Administrator or his/her designee may waive any temporary use permit procedures and authorize the placement of temporary use facilities that are deemed necessary or desirable in conjunction with the management of the emergency. 
( Ord. No. 782 , amd. 1, 12-15-2014; Ord. No. 815 , amd. 2, 2-20-2017) 
ARTICLE 10. - CONDITIONAL USES 
Conditional uses are uses that are generally compatible with the other uses that are permitted in a particular zoning district but require a closer evaluation on the location, characteristics, configuration, and intensity of the use. The following standards and criteria are over and above those set forth elsewhere in this Ordinance; and are imposed herein on all such conditional uses, listed below to enhance land use compatibility. 
( Ord. No. 786 , amd. 5, 3-16-2015) 
Editor's note- At the discretion of the editor, and in order to maintain the Code format, sections have been added. 

Sec. 10:1 - Accessory Apartment: R-10, R-8, and R-6, RM-1, RM Districts. 
1.  An accessory apartment may be attached, within an existing single-family dwelling, or housed in an approved accessory structure that is located in the rear yard and is not located closer than five (5) feet of an adjacent or neighboring property line. 
2.  An accessory apartment shall only be permitted on a lot that is owner occupied and contains a detached single family dwelling unit. 
3.  No more than one (1) accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted on a single deeded lot in conjunction with the principal dwelling unit. 
4.  The accessory dwelling unit shall not be served by a driveway separate from that serving the principal dwelling unless the accessory dwelling is accessed from a rear alley and the principal dwelling is accessed from a street. 
5.  Accessory apartments shall not be considered as an additional dwelling unit for the purpose of determining minimum lot size or maximum density. 
6.  The gross floor area of the accessory apartment housed within an existing single-family dwelling shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet or contain no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the principal single-family dwelling, whichever is greater. When housed within an accessory structure, the size of an accessory apartment shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the gross floor area of a principal dwelling unit on the property (for example, establishment of a five hundred (500) square foot accessory apartment would require the principal dwelling unit to be at least one thousand (1,000) square feet in size.) 
7.  Accessory dwelling units shall not be sold apart from the principal dwelling unit upon the same lot where it is located. 
8.  Accessory dwelling units shall not be leased or rented for tenancies of less than thirty (30) calendar days or leased to more than eleven (11) different individuals in any calendar year. 
9.  Home Occupations shall be prohibited from operating within an accessory dwelling unit. 
( Ord. No. 786 , amd. 5, 3-16-2015) 
Sec. 10:2 - Accessory Structures: All Residential Districts. 
1.  Location: Accessory Structures (except for detached garages) shall only be located in a side or rear yard and shall not be located to project beyond the front building line of the principal structure. 
2.  Setback: Except for fences, and/or walls erected on a property line, accessory structures shall be setback a minimum of five (5) feet from all adjacent and/or neighboring property lines. 
3.  Detached Garages/Carports: Detached garages shall only be permitted in front of the principal structure if the garage/carport is not located within the front setback; and the structure is located and/or designed so that it is clearly subordinate to the principal structure in terms of scale. A garage accessed from an alley shall have a minimum rear setback of at least twenty (20) feet from the rear property line. 
4.  Size: The maximum floor area of all residential accessory structures contained on a site shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total gross floor area of the principal structure. 
5.  Height: Accessory structures located in a residential district shall comply with the height standards set forth for the district, and in no case shall exceed the height of the principal structure. 
6.  Common Facilities: Accessory structures providing common facilities for residential developments (clubhouse, pool house, etc.) shall not be subject to the gross floor area limitations or location requirements set forth in this subsection. 
7.  Non-residential: Accessory structures for non-residential uses that are permitted in a residential zoning district shall not encroach into any required setback and shall be screened from the view of adjacent residential uses with a fifteen-foot landscape buffer that shall consist of a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs that will be provide a year round visual screen. 
( Ord. No. 786 , amd. 5, 3-16-2015) 
Sec. 10:3 - Adult Care Center-RM-1, and RM residential districts; all Commercial Districts (excluding I-1 District). 
1.  The minimum lot area requirement for an Adult Care Center shall be 30,000 square feet. 
2.  No structure shall be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to an exterior property line, and no structure shall be located closer than thirty-five (35) feet to a public right-of-way. Interior setbacks are not regulated. 
3.  The structure shall have a residential appearance. 
4.  When located in a residential district, the maximum number of adults to be cared for shall be limited to sixteen (16). 
5.  Off street parking shall be provided at the rate of: One (1) space per staff person and consultative person expected on the premises at any one (1) time, plus one (1) space for each six (6) adults permitted. 
6.  Safe and adequate provisions shall be provided on-site to accommodate all drop-off and pick up activities, ensuring a safe route from motor vehicle to the building entrance. 
7.  Adult daycare centers located in a designated residential district are limited to those following the social (non-medical) model of care for individuals who need supervision and activities but not extensive personal care or medical monitoring. 
8.  Each daycare facility shall provide forty (40) square feet of available activity space per participant, inside the center, not including offices, bathrooms, kitchens, closets, vestibules, and private living space; and also provide a minimum outdoor recreation area of fifty (50) square feet per participant outside of the center. The outdoor space shall afford adequate facilities such as decks, patios, and manicured lawn areas in a manner that allows participants safe access and enjoyment outside. 
9.  A fifteen-foot landscape buffer shall be provided and maintained along all exterior property lines that abut a residential use. The landscape buffer shall consist of a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs that will be provide a year round visual screen. 
10.  Except as may otherwise be required by state or federal law, nothing herein shall allow or authorize the use of any daycare facility as: 
a)  A public or private hospital, retreat, institution, community residence, house or place where a mentally ill person, or a person who is alcoholic dependent or drug-dependent is received or detained as a patient or for treatment or rehabilitation; or 
b)  A community residence, halfway house, transitional house or other state or federally regulated facility to which persons are or may be transferred from correctional facilities or institutions. 
( Ord. No. 786 , amd. 5, 3-16-2015) 
Sec. 10:4 - Adult Day Care Home-All residential districts. 
Shall be required to obtain a Home Occupation permit and shall be subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Adult Day Care Homes (by definition) are limited to providing service to no more than five (5) adults. 
2.  Adult Day Care Homes shall only be located within a single family detached dwelling unit that is owner occupied. 
3.  The residential character and appearance of the structure shall not be altered to accommodate the use except to provide a suitable means of egress and handicap accessibility. 
4.  In addition to the owner, one (1) full time non-resident employee shall be permitted. The employee's position shall be listed on the business license application (as well as the occupant) certifying compliance. 
5.  No more than one (1) vehicle may be used in conjunction with the business. Said vehicle must be stored in a carport, garage, or enclosed in an area that is screened from the view of adjacent and/or adjoining properties. 
6.  Parking shall not be permitted within any required setback and must be located on premises. 
7.  Client drop off and pick up areas shall be located on site so as not to obstruct traffic flow on adjacent public and/or private streets. 
8.  Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.; and no overnight accommodations shall be permitted. 
9.  During the hours of business activity, the total gross floor area of the dwelling unit may be devoted to the use. 
10.  All outdoor recreation areas located within fifty (50) feet of a residential use, shall provide a ten-foot landscape buffer consisting of a mix or evergreen trees and shrubs to provide a year round visual screen. 
( Ord. No. 786 , amd. 5, 3-16-2015) 
Sec. 10:5 - Child Day Care Center: RM-1 and RM Residential Districts; all Commercial Districts (excluding I-1 district). 
1.  When located in a residential zoning district, the maximum number of children to be cared for shall be limited to sixteen (16). 
2.  Off street parking shall be provided at the rate of: One (1) space per staff person and consultative person expected on the premises at any one (1) time, plus one (1) space for each six (6) children permitted. 
3.  Safe and adequate provisions shall be provided onsite to accommodate all drop-off and pick up activities ensuring a safe route from motor vehicle to the building entrance. 
4.  Child daycare facilities shall provide forty (40) square feet of available activity space per participant, inside the center (not including offices, bathrooms, kitchens, closets) and shall also provide a minimum outdoor play area of fifty (50) square feet per participant. 
5.  The entire play area shall be enclosed by a fence having a minimum height of four (4) feet, and constructed to provide maximum safety to the children. 
6.  A fifteen-foot landscape buffer shall be provided and maintained along all exterior property lines that abut a residential use. The landscape buffer shall consist of a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs that will be provide a year round visual screen. 
7.  Except as may otherwise be required by state or federal law, nothing herein shall allow or authorize the use of any daycare facility as: 
a)  A public or private hospital, retreat, institution, community residence, house or place where a mentally ill person, or a person who is alcoholic dependent or drug-dependent is received or detained as a patient or for treatment or rehabilitation; or 
b)  A community residence, halfway house, transitional house or other state or federally regulated facility to which persons are or may be transferred from correctional facilities or institutions. 
( Ord. No. 786 , amd. 5, 3-16-2015) 
Sec. 10:6 - Child Day Care Home-All residential districts. 
1.  Child Day Care Homes shall only be located within a single family detached dwelling unit that is owner occupied. 
2.  The residential character and appearance of the structure shall not be altered to accommodate the use except to provide a suitable means of egress and handicap accessibility. 
3.  By definition, a Child Day Care Home is limited to providing care to six (6) or fewer children. 
4.  Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.; and no overnight accommodations shall be permitted. 
5.  During the hours of business activity, the total gross floor area of the dwelling maybe devoted to the use. 
6.  The building shall contain a minimum of thirty-five (35) square feet of floor area for each child present. 
7.  Client drop-off and pick-up shall be located on site so as not to obstruct traffic flow on adjacent public and/or private streets. 
8.  Parking shall not be permitted within any required setbacks and must be located on premises. 
9.  At least seventy-five (75) square feet of outdoor play area shall be available for each child present. Outdoor play shall only occur between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
10.  The entire play area shall be enclosed by a fence having a minimum height of four (4) feet, constructed to provide maximum safety to the children. If the outdoor play area is within fifty (50) feet of another residential structure, a ten-foot landscape buffer shall be required at the rate of one (1) evergreen tree or evergreen shrub per five (5) linear feet of fence line. 
( Ord. No. 786 , amd. 5, 3-16-2015) 
Sec. 10:7 - Dwelling, Single Family Attached Housing: R-10, R-8 and R-6 and RM-1, RM Districts. 
a)  Single Family, Attached housing developments shall be subject to the following development standards based on the zoning district in which the development is proposed: 
10:7.1: Development Standards Table, Attached Housing. 
TABLE: 10:7.1: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

Attached Single Family Housing Developments Zoning District Minimum Tract Area 
Density: # units/acre Maximum # of units/Structure  
R-10 2 Acres 4.4/acre 4  
R-8 2 Acres 5.4/acre 4  
R-6 2 Acres 7.3/acre 4  
RM-1 12/acre 6  
RM 16/acre 6 

Maximum Height (FT)
R-10 35 ft.
R-8 35 ft. 
R-6 35 ft.
RM-1 45 ft.
RM 45 ft.

b)  Setbacks. Perimeter: No structure shall be erected within twenty-five (25) feet of the developments external lot line. Internal: Buildings shall be setback a minimum of twenty (20) feet from all internal public and/or private streets. 
c)  Lot Width. Minimum lot width per unit shall be twenty (20) feet in a townhome development for interior units. End units must maintain a required thirty-foot lot width. 
d)  Street Design. All new streets, alleys and other infrastructure improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the Mauldin Land Development Ordinance. The Mauldin City Public Works Director and City Fire Marshall shall have the authority to consider alternative street designs and/or require additional measures to ensure public safety and/or address road maintenance concerns. 
e)  Sidewalks. Five-foot sidewalks shall be required along all existing and proposed internal streets, and also along the primary street frontage(s) of the development. 
f)  Landscaping. Shall be provided in accordance with Section 6:2, Landscape and Design Standards. 
g)  Parking. Shall be provided in accordance with Section 6:1, Parking Standards. 
h)  Open Space Provisions. A minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the development area shall be used for common open space. Land dedicated as open space shall be of meaningful proportions and dimensions. 
1)  The open space shall be contiguous to the extent practicable and shall be accessible from a public or private street either directly or via an easement of at least ten (10) feet in width. 
2)  A minimum of thirty-five (35) percent of the total open space must be considered developable acreage (land), as defined in Section 3:3, Definitions. 
3)  No more than fifty (50) percent of the land dedicated to meeting the overall open space requirement may be used for active recreation facilities (e.g.: playgrounds, ball fields, community swimming pool(s), clubhouse(s), and similar uses). 
4)  With exception to walking paths, trails, and/or greenways, at least fifty (50) percent of land designated to meeting the open space requirement shall remain impervious. 
5)  Recreational lakes or ponds used for stormwater management may be included in the land designated as open space. However, fenced detention or retention areas used for stormwater management shall not be included in the calculation of required open space. 
i)  Management, Dedication and Maintenance of Common Open Space Ownership. 
a)  The owner and developer or subdivider shall select the land area dedicated for open space purposes and type of ownership. The type of ownership may include, but is not necessarily limited to, the following: 
1.  The City, subject to acceptance by the governing body; 
2.  Other public jurisdictions or agencies, subject to their acceptance; 
3.  Non-profit or quasi-public organizations committed to the protection and conservation of open space, subject to their acceptance; 
4.  Homeowner or cooperative associations or organizations; or 
5.  Shared, undivided interest by all property owners within the subdivision. 
b)  All common open space, any common areas or common facilities within the cluster residential development shall be permanently protected by recorded covenants and restrictions and shall be conveyed by the property owner(s) to a homeowners association or other legal entity under the laws of the State of South Carolina. 
c)  Maintenance of Open Space: The person(s) or entity identified above, as having the right to ownership or control over open space, shall be responsible for its continuing upkeep and proper maintenance. 
j)  Riparian Buffers. Riparian buffers shall be provided along all classes of streams in accordance with the Greenville County Soil and Water Conservation Commission Stormwater Management Design Manual. 
k)  A preliminary plat and site development plans shall be submitted to the Mauldin Business and Development Services office to schedule a review and approval by the Mauldin Planning Commission. 
l)  A pre-application meeting with the Business and Development Services office shall be required prior to submittal of development plans. 
( Ord. No. 786 , amd. 5, 3-16-2015) 
Sec. 10:8 - Dwellings, Cluster: Traditional Urban Neighborhood Housing: R-10, R-8, R-6, RM-1 and RM Districts. 
1.  A mix of housing types is encouraged in a Traditional Urban Neighborhood Development (TUND). Developments that incorporate a mix of housing types shall receive a fifteen-percent density bonus in accordance with Section 8.2, Cluster and Open Space Development. 
a)  Developments having an R-10, R-8 or R-6 zoning designation shall be permitted a mix of single family attached and single family detached structures. To ensure an appropriate mix of housing types, a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the total number of dwelling units permitted for the development shall be either attached or detached housing units. 
b)  Developments having an RM-1 or RM zoning designation shall be permitted a mix of single family attached, single family detached and multi-family structure of not more than four (4) units per buildings. To ensure an appropriate mix of housing types, a minimum of thirty-five (35) percent of the total number of dwelling units permitted for the development shall be either attached or detached housing units. 
2.  Neighborhood Form. 
a)  A twenty-five-foot perimeter setback from all external lot lines shall be maintained. 
b)  The development shall be divided into blocks, streets, lots, and open space. 
c)  Similar land uses shall generally front across each street. Dissimilar categories shall generally abut at rear lot lines. Corner lots which front on streets of dissimilar use shall generally observe the setback established on each front street. 
3.  Streets. 
a)  All streets whether public or privately maintained shall be constructed to meet a City accepted public street standard. 
b)  Streets and alleys shall, wherever practicable, terminate at other streets within the neighborhood and connect to existing and projected streets outside the development. Cul-de-sacs shall only be permitted where topography or other natural features make a street connection impracticable. 
c)  The average perimeter blocks within the development shall not exceed one thousand three hundred fifty (1,350) feet. No block face should have a length greater than five hundred (500) feet without a dedicated alley or pathway providing through access. 
d)  A continuous network of rear alleys is recommended for most lots within the development; rear alleys must provide vehicular access to lots less than sixty (60) feet in width. 
e)  Utilities shall run along alleys, wherever practicable. When impracticable, utilities and associated easements should be provided at the rear of the lot. 
f)  Streets within the development shall be organized according to a hierarchy based on function, size, capacity, and design speed; streets and rights-of-way may therefore differ. The proposed hierarchy of streets shall be indicated on the site development plan. Each street type proposed in the development shall be separately detailed. Alternative methods of assembling the required street elements will be considered to allow neighborhood street designs that area most appropriate and to setting and use. 
g)  To prevent build-up of vehicular speed, disperse traffic flow, and create a sense of visual enclosure, long uninterrupted segments of straight streets should be avoided. Methods of achieving this objective includes: 
i.  A street can be interrupted by intersections designed to calm the speed and disperse the flow of traffic; 
ii.  A vista located along a street can be terminated with a significant feature (a building, park, natural feature, public monument, a specifically designed building façade or buildings sited to provide a visual "gateway" to an ensuing place; 
iii.  Perceived street length by a noticeable street curve where the outside edge of the curve is bounded by a building or other vertical elements that hug the curve and deflect the view; 
iv.  Other traffic calming configurations are acceptable so long as emergency access is adequately provided. 
h)  At least fifty (50) percent of the proposed local streets shall be designed to accommodate on-street parking on at least one (1) side of the street. 
i.  On-street parking lanes shall be constructed of concrete. 
ii.  Bulb-outs shall be used at intersections and at the property line of every second lot thereafter to delineate the on-street parking area, and to provide a location for temporary placement of containers for trash and recycling. 
iii.  Bulb-outs shall be landscaped with low growing plant material and shall be maintained by the HOA designated for the development. 
i)  Primary vehicular access to a residential lot should be provided from an alley. Individual driveway cuts shall be limited on streets where on-street parking is provided. 
j)  All proposed streets shall be designed to accommodate a twelve-foot-wide pedestrian zone that includes sidewalks, street trees and pedestrian amenities. The sidewalk shall have a minimum unobstructed width of five (5) feet. Street trees shall be located within the pedestrian zone at an average rate of one (1) large maturing deciduous tree for every forty (40) lineal feet of road frontage and shall be installed by one (1) of the following methods: 
i.  Trees may be planted in a minimum five-foot by five-foot square tree pit close to the curb edge of the sidewalk protected with tree frames and grates; or 
ii.  Trees may be planted in a five-foot to seven-foot planting strip adjacent to the curb edge of the sidewalk. Planting strips may include grass, flowers and other plant materials where appropriate and shall be maintained by the HOA designated for the development. 
4.  Buildings and Lots. 
a)  All lots shall share a frontage line with a street or square; lots fronting a square shall be provided access from a rear alley. 
b)  Consistent build to lines shall be established along all streets and public space frontages. Front build to lines shall not vary by more than five (5) feet from any one (1) lot to another lot on a given block face, as defined in Section 3:3, Definitions. A minimum percentage build out at the build to line shall be established on the site plan along all streets and square frontages. 
c)  Garage doors are not permitted on the front façade of any detached single family dwelling unit. For parcels that do not have rear alley access, any garage or carport, whether attached or detached, shall be recessed a minimum of twelve (12) feet from the build-to line of the front façade of the principal dwelling unit. 
d)  Single family detached dwelling units shall not exceed a maximum build to line of twenty-five (25) feet, and shall not exceed a building height of thirty (30) feet. 
e)  Single-family attached dwelling units shall not exceed a maximum build-to line of fifteen (15) feet; and shall not exceed a building height of forty (40) feet. 
f)  Accessory Structures (including detached garages) shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of Section 10.2, Conditional Uses of this chapter with the exception that accessory structures shall only be located in the rear yard. 
g)  Accessory apartments shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions in Section 10.1 of this Ordinance. The total number of accessory apartments within the development shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the total number of single family attached and detached dwelling units. 
5.  Parking. Except as otherwise provided by this section, parking requirements shall be in accordance with Section 6:1, Parking Standards of this Ordinance. 
a)  On street parking around the street edges of any particular block shall count towards the parking requirements of the uses located within that block. 
b)  All parking lots shall be located to the side or rear of the structure and not located closer to the street than the edge of the structure. 
c)  Parking lots shall be located in the interior block or shall take access from an alley. 
6.  Landscaping. Except as otherwise provided by this section, landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Section 6:2, Landscape and Design Standards of this ordinance. 
7.  Street lights shall be provided within the development and shall comply with the general lighting standards in Section 6:3, Lighting Standards of this chapter. 
8.  Open Space Provisions. Land dedicated as open space shall be of meaningful proportions and dimensions so as to be consistent with the purpose and intent of this section. The open space shall be contiguous to the extent practicable and shall be accessible from a public or private street either directly or via an easement of at least ten (10) feet in width. 
a)  A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the total open space must be considered developable acreage (land), as defined in Section 3:3, Definitions. 
b)  No more than fifty (50) percent of the land dedicated to meeting the overall open space requirement may be used for active recreation facilities (e.g.: playgrounds, ball fields, community swimming pool(s), clubhouse(s), and similar uses). 
c)  With exception to walking paths, trails, and/or greenways, at least fifty (50) percent of land designated to meeting the open space requirement shall remain impervious. 
d)  Open Space: Recreational lakes or ponds used for stormwater management may be included in the land designated as open space. However, fenced detention or retention areas used for stormwater management shall not be included in the calculation of required open space. 
9.  Management, Dedication and Maintenance of Common Open Space Ownership. 
a)  The owner and developer or subdivider shall select the land area dedicated for open space purposes and type of ownership. The type of ownership may include, but is not necessarily limited to, the following: 
1.  The City, subject to acceptance by the governing body; 
2.  Other public jurisdictions or agencies, subject to their acceptance; 
3.  Non-profit or quasi-public organizations committed to the protection and conservation of open space, subject to their acceptance; 
4.  Homeowner or cooperative associations or organizations; or 
5.  Shared, undivided interest by all property owners within the subdivision. 
b)  All common open space, any common areas or common facilities within the cluster residential development shall be permanently protected by recorded covenants and restrictions and shall be conveyed by the property owner(s) to a homeowners association or other legal entity under the laws of the State of South Carolina. 
c)  Maintenance of Open Space: The person(s) or entity identified above, as having the right to ownership or control over open space, shall be responsible for its continuing upkeep and proper maintenance. 
9.  Riparian Buffers. Riparian buffers shall be maintained and/or provided along all classes of streams in accordance with the Greenville County Soil and Water Conservation Commission Stormwater Management Design Manual. 
10.  A preliminary plat and site development plans shall be submitted to the Mauldin Business and Development Services office to schedule a review and approval by the Mauldin Planning Commission. 
11.  A pre-application meeting with the Business and Development Services office shall be required prior to submittal of development plans. 
( Ord. No. 786 , amd. 5, 3-16-2015) 
Sec. 10:9 - Dwellings, Two-Family (Duplex): R-10, R-8, R-6, RM-1. 
1.  All duplex structures shall be separated a minimum of five-hundred (500) feet from all other properties containing a duplex and/or multi-family structure (excluding single family lots containing an accessory apartment). The separation requirement shall be measured from lot line to line to ensure compliance with this standard. (This standard shall not be eligible for a variance.) 
2.  The minimum lot size for construction of a duplex under this standard shall be as follows (This standard shall not be eligible for a variance): 
a)  R-10: twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) square feet. 
b)  R-8: ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
c)  R-6: seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. 
d)  RM-1: seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. 
3.  Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 6:1, Parking Standards of this ordinance. Parking areas shall not be located in any required setback. 
4.  Off street parking located in the front yard shall be limited to two (2) off-street parking spaces. All off-street parking areas shall be screened from the view of adjacent single-family uses with a ten-foot landscape buffer that shall consist of a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs that will be provide a year round visual screen. 
5.  It is the intent of these standards to ensure that duplex structures resemble single-family homes in the neighborhoods where they are to be located. Pursuant to this intent, a duplex structure shall be architecturally compatible with single-family residential structures in the area in which it is to be constructed. Architectural compatibility shall be determined based upon compliance with the following standards: 
a)  The structure shall be oriented on the lot in a manner similar to the residential structures on both sides of the street on the block on which the proposed use is to be constructed. 
b)  The structure shall have a single front entrance and any other entrances as required under various codes shall be located on the side(s) or rear of the structure. A corner side of the structure may have a single entrance provided the intent of this section is met. 
c)  The height of the structure shall be no more than four (4) feet taller than the height of the tallest single-family residential structure located on the side of the street on the block on which the proposed use is to be constructed. 
d)  The roof design, pitch and materials proposed for the structure shall be similar to the roof design, pitch and materials of the residential structures on both sides of the street on the block on which it is to be constructed. 
e)  The siding proposed for the structure shall be similar to the siding on the residential structures on both sides of the street on the block on which it is to be constructed. 
f)  A front porch shall be provided on the proposed structure if a majority of the residential structures on both sides of the street on the block on which the new structure is proposed have front porches. 
6.  The duplex structure and the site on which it is located shall be maintained in accordance with standards established by applicable local and state regulations. A maintenance plan shall be submitted in order to ensure proper maintenance of the property in accordance with this provision. 
( Ord. No. 786 , amd. 5, 3-16-2015) 
Sec. 10:10 - Dwellings, Triplex and Quadraplex Structures: RM-1 District. 
1.  All triplex and quadraplex structures shall be separated a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from all other properties containing a duplex and/or multi-family structure (excluding single family lots containing an accessory apartment). The separation requirement shall be measured from lot line to line to ensure compliance with this standard. (This standard shall not be eligible for a variance.) 
2.  The following minimum lot areas shall be required for a triplex and quadraplex units that are located in the RM-1 district (This standard shall not be eligible for a variance.): 
a)  Triplex (three (3) attached units): nine thousand (9,000) square feet. 
b)  Quadraplex (four (4) attached units): twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. 
3.  Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 6:1, Parking Standards, of this ordinance and shall not be located in any required setback. 
4.  Off street parking located in the front yard shall be limited to three (3) off-street parking spaces. All off-street parking areas shall be screened from the view of adjacent single-family uses with a ten-foot landscape buffer that shall consist of a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs that will provide a year round visual screen. 
5.  It is the intent of these standards that triplex and quadraplex structures resemble single family homes in the neighborhoods where they are to be located. Pursuant to this intent, a triplex and quadraplex structure shall be architecturally compatible with the single family residential structures in the area in which it is to be constructed. Architectural compatibility shall be determined based upon compliance with the following standards: 
a)  The structure shall be oriented on the lot in a manner similar to the residential structures on both sides of the street on the block on which it is to be constructed. 
b)  The structure shall have a single front entrance and any other entrances as required under various codes shall be located on the side(s) or rear of the structure. A corner side of the structure may have a single entrance provided the intent of this section is met. 
c)  The height of the structure shall be no more than four (4) feet taller than the height of the tallest single-family residential structure located on the side of the street, and on the block on which the proposed use is to be constructed. 
d)  The roof design, pitch and materials proposed for the structure shall be similar to the roof design, pitch and materials of the residential structures on both sides of the street on the block on which it is to be constructed. 
e)  The siding proposed for the structure shall be similar to the siding on the residential structures on both sides of the street on the block on which it is to be constructed. 
f)  A front porch shall be provided on the proposed structure if a majority of the residential structures on both sides of the street on the block on which the new structure is proposed have front porches. 
( Ord. No. 786 , amd. 5, 3-16-2015) 
Sec. 10:11 - Home Occupation-All residential districts. 
1.  A home occupation shall be located within the single family detached dwelling or an approved accessory structure. Home occupations shall not be permitted to operate from an accessory apartment dwelling unit. (This standard shall not be eligible for a variance.) 
2.  Unless otherwise provided under a separate provision, a home occupation shall be limited to twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the principal structure or six hundred (600) square feet, whichever is less. (This standard shall not be eligible for a variance.) 
3.  Home occupations shall be operated by a resident of the dwelling; however, one (1) non-resident employee shall be permitted as part of the home occupation. The employee's position shall be listed on the business license application, as well as the occupant certifying compliance. 
4.  The Home Occupation shall cause no change in the external appearance of the existing dwelling and structure on the property. 
5.  The home occupation shall not involve the retail sale of merchandise except for products related directly to services performed (i.e. beautician who sells hair products, sales of home baked goods and candies as covered under Section 44-1-143, known as the South Carolina Cottage Food Law). Sales of goods where all transactions occur exclusively "on-line" shall be exempt from this standard. (This standard shall not be eligible for a variance.) 
6.  The property shall not contain any outdoor displays or storage of goods, equipment or services that are associated with the home occupation. (This standard shall not be eligible for a variance.) 
7.  The home occupation shall not be a nuisance or cause any undue disturbance in the neighborhood (e.g. excessive deliveries UPS, Fed Ex). No equipment or process shall be used in connection with the home occupation that creates noise, vibrations, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference off-premises. (This standard shall not be eligible for a variance.) 
8.  A home occupation shall be allowed one (1) nonilluminated attached sign not to exceed two (2) square feet in sign face area. The sign shall be mounted flat against the wall of the principal building in which the occupation is conducted. 
9.  Only two (2) vehicles shall be permitted and used in connection with the home occupation; vehicles shall be parked or stored on premises. In addition, vehicles that display advertising associated with the home occupation shall be parked in an enclosed garage or screened so it is not visible to adjacent and/or neighboring properties outside of normal business hours. 
10.  Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 6:1, Parking Standards of this Article. 
11.  The number of patrons and vehicles of the home occupation shall be limited to three (3) at any one (1) time. 
12.  The following occupations and/or businesses and/or similar and like uses (as determined by the Zoning Administrator) shall not be permitted as a Home Occupation. (This standard shall not be eligible for a variance.) 
Automotive Service and/or Repair. 
Body repair shops. 
Landscaping Business (other than office use). 
Commercial Greenhouse. 
Contractor's Business (other than office use). 
Furniture Repair and Cabinet Shop. 
Physician's and/or Chiropractor's Clinic. 
( Ord. No. 786 , amd. 5, 3-16-2015; Ord. No. 861 , amd. 1, 9-17-2018) 
Sec. 10:12 - Places of Worship-All residential districts. 
For the purposes of these development standards, Places of Worship shall be placed in the following categories based upon the number of seats in the sanctuary: 
1.  Small place of worship-Not more than three hundred (300) seats in the sanctuary. 
2.  Medium place of worship-Three hundred one (301) to eight hundred (800) seats in the sanctuary. 
3.  Large place of worship-More than eight hundred (800) seats in the sanctuary. 
4.  Minimum lot size: The minimum lot size for places of worship shall be as follows: 
a)  Small place of worship-Minimum lot size for the zoning district in which the place of worship is located. 
b)  Medium place of worship-Two (2) acres. 
c)  Large place of worship-Three (3) acres. 
5.  Places of Worship shall comply with the following setbacks: 
a)  Small and medium place of worship: 
• Front: Same as residential uses in the zoning district. 
• Side: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
• Rear: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
• No parking or other outdoor activities shall be located in any of the required setbacks. 
b)  Large place of worship: 
• Front: Fifty (50) feet, except that buildings, or portions of buildings, with a width not exceeding fifty (50) feet, may be set back a distance equivalent to the front setback for residential uses in the zoning district in which the place of worship is located. 
• Side: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
• Rear: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
• No parking or other outdoor activities shall be located in any of the required setbacks. 
6.  Access points. A Place of Worship whose parcel is accessed from a local residential street shall be limited to a total of two (2) driveway access points. 
7.  Parking. Off street parking shall be provided at the following ratio: 
a)  Minimum: One (1) space per eight (8) seats in the sanctuary(ies). 
b)  Maximum: One (1) space per three (3) seats in the sanctuary(ies). 
8.  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided as required by Section 6:2, Landscape and Design Standards of this chapter, except as required by the following standards: 
a)  Parking and outdoor activity areas shall be buffered from adjacent residential uses with a minimum of a fifteen-foot-wide landscape buffer consisting of a mix of evergreen trees and shrubs necessary to establish a year round screen from view of adjacent properties. The purpose of the landscape buffer is to visually separate the parking and outdoor activity area(s) from adjacent residential uses. Where grade changes or other features of the site make it difficult for a standard buffer to visually separate the parking and outdoor activity area(s) from adjacent residential uses, the buffer shall be developed and/or located as required to create an effective visual separation. 
b)  Parking and outdoor activity areas shall be buffered from the street with a planting strip with a minimum width of ten (10) feet which incorporates one (1) large deciduous tree for each thirty (30) feet of street frontage or one (1) small deciduous tree for each twenty (20) feet of street frontage. The planting strip shall also include one (1) evergreen shrub for each five (5) lineal feet of street frontage. 
9.  Lighting. Lighting shall be in accordance with Section 6:3, Lighting Standards. 
10.  Height. The height of all buildings shall not exceed fifty (50) feet. Steeples, spires, bell towers, minarets, and similar architectural features shall not be subject to the height limitation. 
11.  No commercial activities (selling of items to the general public on an on-going basis) shall be permitted. 
12.  Outdoor speaker systems shall be prohibited. 
13.  Factory fabricated transportable buildings designed to serve as expansion space for existing places of worship may be utilized subject to requirements in Article 9, Temporary Uses and Structures. 
14.  Accessory Structures. Accessory uses and structure shall be permitted in accordance with the Conditional Use provisions in Section 10:2, Accessory Structures, of this ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 786 , amd. 5, 3-16-2015) 
Sec. 10:13 - Multi-family Dwellings: C-1, C-2, and S-1 Districts. 
    This section establishes design standards for multi-family dwellings in the C-1, C-2, and S-1 zoning districts. These standards are not intended to restrict imagination, innovation, or variety, but rather to assist in focusing design principles, which can result in creative solutions that will develop a satisfactory visual appearance, preserve taxable values, and promote the public health, safety, and general welfare. These standards are supplemental to other regulations which would otherwise apply. 
A.  Maximum Density. The maximum density shall not exceed sixteen (16) dwelling units per acre. Notwithstanding the maximum density may be increased to a maximum of twenty (20) dwelling units per acre if the multi-family residential development project meets one (1) of the following criteria: 
1.  The ground floor of the applicable principal structure(s) shall be entirely occupied or reserved for occupancy by retail or commercial uses; 
2.  The applicable principal structure(s) shall front a public sidewalk not less than eight (8) feet in width and shall not be set back further than ten (10) feet from the front property line. Furthermore, no off-street parking shall be located between the principal structure(s) and the front property line; 
3.  The entire project qualifies as a service-based senior living facility. As used herein, a service-based senior living facility shall mean a facility which provides both services and housing restricted to persons generally fifty-five (55) years of age and older. Examples of such services may include security, concierge, enriching activities, dining, religious services, and housekeeping. 
B.  Orientation. 
1.  Multi-family residential buildings shall be configured in a manner that activates street frontages and enhances pedestrian activity by orienting buildings and entrances towards adjacent streets, sidewalks, and open spaces. 
2.  Principle buildings shall be sited to maximize natural ventilation, solar access, and access to views, to the maximum extent practicable. 
C.  Entrances. 
1.  All entrances shall be adequately illuminated and oriented to promote natural surveillance. 
2.  The main entrance of each principal building must face the street. On corner lots, the main entrance may face either of the streets or be oriented to the corner. With buildings that have more than one (1) main entrance, only one (1) entrance must meet this requirement. 
3.  Shared building entrances shall be pedestrian-scaled and covered with canopies or overhangs. 
4.  Exterior open stairways and corridors serving more than one (1) dwelling unit and facing a public street or residential zoning district are prohibited. 
D.  Building façades. 
1.  Buildings shall incorporate varied massing and design across long façades. Building walls shall be articulated at a minimum of every fifty (50) feet. Articulation may include modulating building elements such as recesses, projections, expressed entries, building form, columns, pilasters, colonnades, arcades, and/or other clearly expressed architectural details. No horizontal section of the building façade shall exceed fifty (50) feet without incorporating visible changes in the façade elevation. 

2.  In order to modulate their scale, buildings at least three (3) stories in height shall individually articulate the base, middle, and cap through the use of expression lines, cornices, string cornices, step-backs, or similar articulating feature. For the purposes of this section, the base generally includes the ground floor of the building, including entryways and windows; the middle is generally described as the upper stories of a building and typically features windows and/or balconies; and the cap includes the area from the top floor to the roof of the building. 

3.  For buildings at least three (3) stories in height, upper story decks or patios should be configured to avoid direct views into the private spaces of adjacent residential uses. 
4.  The articulation of buildings pursuant to this section shall include at least three (3) of the following: 
a)  Awnings or other weather protection for pedestrians; 
b)  Distinct changes in texture and color of wall surfaces; 
c)  A covered front porch or other designated gathering area occupying at least twenty-five (25) percent of the front façade width; 
d)  Vertical accents or focal points such as towers, spires, cupolas, window walls, or widow walks; 
e)  Distinctive window trim including lintels and sills; 
f)  Art work or bas relief; 
g)  Repetitive ornamentation, including decorative features such as wall-mounted light fixtures, with a maximum spacing of fifty (50) feet; or 
h)  Other comparable elements, as approved by the Business and Development Services Director. 
E.  Fenestration. 
1.  At least twenty-five (25) percent of the area of a street-facing façade must include windows or main entryways. 
2.  Windows on side façades shall be positioned to avoid direct views into the windows of an existing adjacent residential dwelling. 
3.  Windows and doors of proposed dwellings shall allow for casual surveillance of the parking and common open space areas. 
4.  Windows shall complement the rhythm, size, proportion, and trim of adjacent residential buildings. 
F.  Roof Form. 
1.  For buildings at least three (3) stories in height, roof lines shall vary and be expressed in a visually interesting manner that complements the composition of the building and the surrounding area. This can be achieved through the use of dormers, varied cornice lines and/or parapets, and other similar architectural features. 

2.  Overhanging eaves and roof rakes on gable ends shall extend at least six (6) inches past the supporting walls. 
3.  Flat roofs shall incorporate parapet walls with three-dimensional cornice treatments designed to conceal the roof and roof-mounted mechanical equipment. All parapet walls visible from a public street shall be finished. 
4.  The parapet wall shall be similar in color and material to the building and shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the height of the supporting wall. 
5.  When adjacent to residential zoning districts, the roof form of multi-family residential buildings shall complement the character of surrounding residential structures. 
6.  All roof vents, pipes, antennae and other roof penetrations should be of a color that will minimize their visual impact unless concealed by a parapet, located on the rear elevation, or configured to have a minimum visual impact as seen from the street or existing residential development. 
G.  Materials. 
1.  Building materials shall either be similar to the materials already being used in the immediate area or, if dissimilar materials are being proposed, other characteristics such as scale and proportions, form, architectural detailing, color, and texture shall be utilized to ensure that enough similarity exists for the building to be compatible despite the differences in materials. 
2.  Where two (2) or more materials are proposed to be combined on a façade, the heavier and more massive elements shall be located below the lighter elements (e.g., brick shall be located below stucco). Use of a heavier material as a detail on the corner of a building or along cornices or windows is acceptable. 
3.  Primary façade materials shall not terminate or change at outside corners, and shall continue a minimum distance of two (2) feet from the front corners along the side façades. 
4.  The following materials shall not be used in the exterior building finish: 
a)  Corrugated metal siding; 
b)  Exposed smooth-finished concrete block; 
c)  Styrofoam-backed and synthetic stucco within twelve (12) feet of the grade level and within two (2) feet of any exterior door jamb; or 
d)  Vinyl siding. 
H.  Service Areas and Equipment. 
1.  Exterior mechanical equipment, vending machines, service and delivery areas, outdoor storage, trash storage, and accessory uses and structures that may produce noise, odors, glare, vibration, or other nuisances, shall be screened from view of public and common areas and adjacent properties. 
2.  Adequate facilities for waste disposal shall be provided and shall be appropriately screened. 
I.  Parking Location. 
1.  Parking areas shall be located and designed to reduce or eliminate visual and operational impacts on surrounding land uses. 
2.  Parking structures, when included, shall provide: 
a)  Building façade treatments and materials similar to façades with residential units; 
b)  Clear sight lines of abutting streets, driveways, and pedestrian pathways; 
c)  Light-colored interior walls and ceilings; and 
d)  Adequate and uniform interior lighting without glare to surrounding properties. 
J.  Landscaping and Screening. 
1.  Building foundations shall be landscaped along the full length of each front façade. Landscaping shall wrap around the corners and shall continue around building sides to a logical conclusion point or a minimum distance of ten (10) feet, whichever is less. 
2.  Foundation landscaping shall have an average depth of six (6) feet and a minimum depth of four (4) feet. Foundation landscaping depth along a sidewalk may be reduced by up to fifty (50) percent, where needed to provide for adequate pedestrian circulation or pedestrian amenities. 
K.  Exterior Lighting. 
1.  Exterior lighting shall be compatible with building architecture and scaled (dimension and intensity) to complement its context. 
2.  Adjacent to residential zoning districts, exterior lighting, whether pole-mounted or wall-mounted, shall not exceed a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet above grade. Uplighting of building or site features shall be directed away from adjacent properties. 
3.  Internally illuminated signage or awnings are prohibited in direct view of any adjacent residential zoning district. 
L.  Pedestrian Walkways. 
1.  Pedestrian walkways at least four (4) feet in width shall be provided between buildings, streets, driveways, community spaces, and off-street parking. 
2.  Sudden changes of grade or sharp turns resulting in "blind spots" are discouraged. 
3.  Walkways shall transect common open space to enhance visual access while minimizing conflicts between vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians. 
4.  Entry points and intersections of pedestrian walkways should be framed by landscaping consisting of plant, lighting, and hardscape materials scaled to the pedestrian context. 
M.  Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design. Multi-family residential development is encouraged to adhere to the generally accepted Principles of Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED), to the maximum extent practicable. These principles involve the design of walkways, fences, lighting, signage, and landscape to enhance natural site surveillance, control of access, and clear definition of public and private spaces. 
( Ord. No. 834 , amd. 5, 9-18-2017) 
ARTICLE 12. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 12:1 - Complaints. 
Whenever a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint, stating fully the causes and basis of the alleged violation, shall be filed with the Business and Development Services Director. He/she shall record properly the complaint, immediately investigate, and take action as provided by this ordinance. 
Sec. 12:2 - Remedies. 
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained; or any building, structure, or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the Business and Development Services Director or any appropriate authority of the municipality, or any adjacent, nearby or neighboring property owner who would be affected by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute an injunction or any other appropriate action in proceeding to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure, or land. 
Sec. 12:3 - Penalties for Violation. 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provisions of this ordinance, or who shall fail to comply with any order made thereunder; or who shall continue to work upon any structure after having received written notice from the Business and Development Services Director to cease work, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days or both. Each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. Notice of violation shall be sufficient if directed to the owner, the agent of the owner, or the contractor and left at his known place of residence or place of business. 
ARTICLE 13. - PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE DECLARED TO BE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS 
The provisions of this ordinance shall be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this ordinance are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions, or covenants, the most restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern. 
ARTICLE 14. - SEPARABILITY 
If for any reason one (1) or more sections, sentences, clauses, or parts of this ordinance are held unconstitutional or invalid, such decisions shall not affect, impair, or invalidate the remaining provisions of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE 15. - EFFECTIVE DATE 
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and adoption. 
Adopted by the Council of the City of Mauldin this 14 day of December 1987. 
ZONING COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table lists ordinances that amend the zoning ordinance. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section Section 
this Code  9-15-2014 1       Added 6:11.7.J 2014-10 
(Res.) 10-27-2014 Exh. A       Rnbd Art. 2       as 1:3       Rnbd Art. 3       as Art. 2       Rnbd 3:2(3:2.1-3:3.3)       as 2:1(2:2.1-2.2.3)       Rnbd Art. 4       as 3:13       Rnbd 5:2.5, 5:2.6       as 5:2.3, 5:2.4       Rnbd 5:2.3, 5:2.4       as 5:2.5, 5:2.6       Rnbd 5:12(5:12.1-5:12.12)       as 5:13(5:13.1-5:13.12)       Rnbd 5:13(5:13.1-5:13.8)       as 5:12(5:12.1-5:12.8)       Rnbd Art. 6       as 3:2       Rnbd 6:1(6:1.1-6:1.3)       as 3:2.1-3:2.4       Rnbd 6:1.4       as 3:12       Rnbd 6:1.5, 6:1.6       as 3:12.1, 3:12.2       Rnbd 6:2       as 3:12.3       Rnbd 6:2.1-6:2.7       as 3:12.4-3.12.10       Rnbd 6:3-6:6       as 3:4-3:7       Rnbd 6:6.1-6:6.3       as 3:7.1-3:7.3       Rnbd 6:7       as 3:8       Rnbd 6:7.1, 6:7.2       as 3:8.1, 3:8.2       Rnbd 6:8       as 3:9       Added Art. 6       Rnbd 6:9(6:9.1-6:9.7)       as 6:1(6.1.1-6:1.7)       Rnbd 6:10(6:10.1-6:10.3)       as 6:1.2(6:1.2.1-6:1.2.)       Added 6:4       Rnbd 6:4(6:4.1-6:4.13)       as 6:4.1(6:4.1.1-6:4.1.13)       Rnbd 6:4.15       as 6:4.14       Rnbd 6:4.16, 6:4.17       as 6:4.1.16, 6:4.1.17       Rnbd 6:4.18       as 6:4.1.16       Rnbd 6:11.19       as 6:4.1-18       Rnbd 6:11.20-6:11.21       as 6:4.1.19-6:4.1.20       Rnbd 6:12       as 3:2.5       Added Art. 8       Rnbd 6:13(6:13.1-6:13.7)       as 8:1(8:1.1-8:1.7)       Rnbd 6:14       as 3:10       Rnbd 6:15(6:15.1-6:15.5)       as 3:11(3:11.1-3:11.5)       Rnbd 6:16       as 7:12.7       Rnbd 6:16.1-6:16.9       as 7:12.7.1-7:12.7.9       Rnbd 6:17(6:17.1-6:17.4)       as 6:2(6:2.1-6:2.4)       Rnbd 6:17.5-6:17.7       as 6:2.6-6:2.8       Rnbd 6:17.8       as 6:2.5       Rnbd 6:17.10-6:17.12       as 6:2.9       Rnbd 6:18(6:18.1-6:18.6)       as 8:2(8:2.1-8:2.6)       Added 8:2.7       Rnbd 6:18.7, 6:18.8       as 8:2.8, 8:2.9       Rnbd 6:19(6:19.1-6:19.7)       as 6:3(6:3.1-6:3.7)       Added 7:8.1, 7:8.2       Rnbd 7:10, 7:11(7:11.1-7:11.6)       as 7:11, 7:12(7:12.1-7:12.6)       Rnbd 7:12.1(7:12.1-7:12.6)       as 8:3(8:3.1-8:3.6)       Rnbd 7:13(7:13.1)       as 8:4(8:4.1)       Rpld 7:14       Rnbd Art. 8       as Art. 4       Rnbd 8:1(8:1.1, 8:1.2)       as 4:1.1(4:1.1.1-4:1.1.2)       Rnbd 8:2(8:2.1)       as 4:1.1.3       Rnbd 8:3       as 4:1.1.4       Rnbd 8:4       as 4:1.1.5       Rnbd Art. 9       as 4:1.2       Rnbd 8:2(8:2.1)       as 4:1.1.3       Rnbd 9:1-9:3(9:3.1-9:3.3)       as 4:1.2.2-4:1.2.7       Rnbd 9:4       as 4:1.3.8       Rnbd 9:5(9:5.1-9:5.4)       as 4:1.3.1-4:1.3.7       Rnbd 9:6       as 4:1.2.8       Rnbd 9:7, 9:8       as 4:1.2.9, 4:1.2.10       Rnbd 9:9       as 4:1.2.1       Rnbd Art. 10       as 4:2       Rnbd 10:1(10:1.1-10:1.4)       as 4:2.1(4:2.1.1-4:2.1.3)       Rnbd 10:1.5       as 4:2.3.2       Rnbd 10:1.6       as 4:2.3.3       Rnbd 10:2, 10:3       as 4:2.2, 4:2.3       Rnbd 10:3.1       as 4:2.3.1       Rnbd 10:3.4-10:3.7       as 4:2.3.4-4:2.3.7       Rnbd Art. 11       as Art. 13       Rnbd Arts. 12-14       as 12:1-12:3       Rnbd Arts. 15, 16       as Arts. 14, 15 782 12-15-2014 1       Added 9:1.1-9:1.11 2 3:3 3       Added 6:4.1.12B.6) 4 6:4.1.12B.5)d. 783 12-15-2014 1 5:9.2 2 3:3 3       Added 7:6 4 3:12.3 786  3-16-2015 2 3:3 3       Rpld 5:1       Added 5:1(5:1.1-5:1.7) 4       Rpld 5:2(5:2.1-5:2.6)       Added 5:2(5:2.1-5:2.4)       Rpld 5:3(5:3.1-5:3.6)       Added 5:3(5:3.1-5:3.4)       Rpld 5:4(5:4.1-5:4.4)       Added 5:4(5:4.1-5:4.4)       Rpld 5:5(5:5.1-5:5.8)       Added 5:5(5:5.1-5:5.4) 5       Added 10:1-10:12 6       Rpld 8:2(8:2.1-8:2.9)       Added 8:2(8:2.1-8:2.4) 7       Rpld 3:2.5 8 8:1 9       Rpld 8:1.1-8:1.7 10       Added 7:13 11       Rpld 7:6 12       Rpld 7:8 5:6.1 5:7.1 5:8.1 5:9.1 5:13.1, 5:13.2 14       Added 5:6.3, 5:7.3, 5:8.3, 5:9.3, 5:10.3, 5:13.3       Rnbd 5:6.3-5:6.12       as 5:6.4-5:6.13       Rnbd 5:7.3-5:7.9       as 5:7.4-5.7.10       Rnbd 5:8.3-5:8.9       as 5:8.4-5:8.10       Rnbd 5:9.3-5:9.9       as 5:9.4-5:9.10       Rnbd 5:10.3-5:10.8       as 5:10.4-5:10.9       Rnbd 5:13.3-5:13.8       as 5:13.4-5:13.9 15 5:7.1 5:7.3 5:8.1 5:8.3 5:9.2, 5:9.3 5:13.2, 5:13.3 Memo of  5- 8-2015 7:4 7:7 788  5-18-2015       Added 4:3.1-4:3.4 789  6- 1-2015 1 5:7.1 5:8.1 5:9.1 805  5-16-2016 1 5:1.3 2 3:3 3 6:2.6 4       Rpld 3:11       Added 3:11 815  2-20-2017 1 9:1.2 3:3 2 9:1.4-9:1.8 822  4-17-2017 1 6:2, 6:3 2-4 3:3 831  9-18-2017 1       Added 5:6.5       Rnbd 5:6.5-5:6.13       as 5:6.6-5:6.14 2 5:7.5 5:8.5 5:9.5 832  9-18-2017 1 3:3 2 3:8(3:8.1, 3:8.2) 833  9-18-2017 1 6:1(6:1.1) 834  9-18-2017 1 5:7.3 2 5:8.3 3 5:9.3 4       Added 8:1(B)6 5       Added 10:13 835 11-20-2017 1 3:8.1.B 2 3:12.3.6 3 5:6 836 11-20-2017 1 3:3 2       Added 3:11.1 3:11(tit.) 3 5:1.3 845  4-16-2018 1       Added 5:15 861  9-17-2018 1 10:11(5) 863 10-15-2018 1 3:3 2 7:6(A) 882  1-22-2019 1       Added 5:16 2 6:1.1.2(A)tbl. 6:2.8(b)tbl. 6:3.2 6.2.8tbl.  
