City of West Columbia, SC Code of Ordinances
Supplement Preface
Current through 12-31-2018
   As of January, 2018, the Code of West Columbia, South Carolina, is being
supplemented by American Legal Publishing its successor in interest.  This
supplement brings the code up to date through December 31, 2018.
The electronic version of this Code of Ordinances was created February, 2004.
For more recent provisions, please contact the city.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval
system, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet:  www.amlegal.com
CITY OFFICIALS
CITY OFFICIALS
 
MAYOR
Bobby E. Horton
COUNCIL MEMBERS
Trevor Bedell
Jimmy Brooks
Casey Jordan Hallman
Mike Green
Temus C. “Tem” Miles, Jr.
Erin P. Porter
Mickey Pringle
Teddy Wingard
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
Brian Carter
DEPUTY CITY ADMINISTRATOR
Michelle Dickerson
CITY TREASURER/ASSISTANT CITY ADMINISTRATOR
Justin Black, C.P.A.
CITY CLERK
Crystal Bouknight
CITY ATTORNEY
Nikki G. Setzler, Esq.
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF WEST
COLUMBIA, SOUTH CAROLINA; ESTABLISHING THE SANE; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF
CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN, EXCEPT AS HEREIN EXPRESSLY PROVIDED;
PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES ; PROVIDING A
PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; AND PROVIDING WHEN THIS ORDINANCE SHALL
BECOME EFFECTIVE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF WEST COLUMBIA, SOUTH CAROLINA, AND
IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED BY AUTHORITY OF THE COUNCIL:
Section 1
   The code of ordinances, consisting of titles 1 through 9 inclusive, is
hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances of the City of West
Columbia, South Carolina," and shall be treated and considered as a new and
original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances of the city passed on or before October 1, 1989 to the
extent provided in section 2 hereof.
Section 2
   All provisions of the code shall be in full force and effect from and after
October 1, 1989 and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the
City of West Columbia, enacted on final passage on or before October 1, 1989,
and not included in such code or recognized and continued in force by reference
therein are hereby repealed from and after October 1, 1989, except as
hereinafter provided. No resolution of the city, not specifically mentioned, is
hereby repealed.
Section 3
   (a)   The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not affect the
following:
   (1)   Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective
date of this ordinance;
   (2)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any
evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by
the city;
   (3)   The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in
conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of the code;
   (4)   Any ordinance or resolution fixing salaries of officers or employees
of the city;
   (5)   Any appropriation ordinance or resolution;
   (6)   Any right or franchise granted by the council to any person, firm or
corporation;
   (7)   Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing,
locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any
street or public way in the city;
   (8)   Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing the street
grades of any streets in the city;
   (9)   Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements or
assessing taxes therefor;
   (10)   Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any plat or
subdivision in the city, or providing regulations for the same;
   (11)   Any ordinance or resolution levying or imposing charges, taxes or
fees now due or accrued;
   (12)   Any ordinance annexing property to the city;
   (13)   Any zoning ordinance of the city or amendments thereto;
   (14)   Any ordinance or resolution regulating the erection, alteration,
repair, demolition, moving or removal of buildings or other structures;
   (15)   Ordinances or resolutions prescribing traffic regulations for
specific locations, prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking
prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading
zones, not inconsistent with the code;
   (16)   Any ordinance or resolution fixing utility rates and charges;
   (17)   Any ordinance enacted after October 1, 1989;
   (b)   Nor shall the repeal be construed to revive any ordinance or part of
an ordinance that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed
by this ordinance.
Section 4
   Whenever in the code an act is prohibited, or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor by the council, or whenever in the code
the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be
unlawful by the council, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any provisions of the code shall be punished by a fine of not more
than $200, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days, or both, as
provided in section 1-3-49 of the code.
Section 5
   Any and all additions and amendments to the code when passed in any form as
to indicate the intention of the council to make the same a part thereof shall
be deemed to be incorporated in the code so that reference to the "Code of
Ordinances of the City of West Columbia, South Carolina," shall be understood
and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Section 6
   In case of the amendment by the council of any section of the code for which
a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 1-3-49 of
the code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case the amendment
contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the afore-- mentioned
general penalty is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty
so provided in the other section shall be held to relate to the section so
amended, unless the penalty is specifically repealed therein.
Section 7
   A copy of the code shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk-
treasurer, preserved in loose--leaf form, or in some other form as the clerk--
treasurer may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the
clerk--treasurer, or someone authorized by the clerk--treasurer to insert in
their designated places all amendments, ordinances or resolutions which
indicate the intention of the council to make the same a part of the code when
the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from the
code all provisions which may be repealed from time to time by the council.
This copy of the code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine
it.
Section 8
   It shall be unlawful for any person to change or alter by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of the code, or to insert or delete pages or
portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the code in any manner whatsoever
which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person
violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-3-49 of the
Code of the City of West Columbia, and in section 4 of this ordinance.
Section 9
   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the
extent of the conflict, hereby repealed.
Section 10
   This ordinance shall become effective on October 1, 1989.
   PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL ON THIS 18th Of September,
1989.
   Paul E. Waites
Mayor
   ATTEST:
   Robert N. Wise
Mayor Pro Tem
   Jennifer T. Cunningham
City Clerk--Treasurer
   C. N. "Jack" Carroway,
Council Member
   S. C. "Ike" Cogburn, Jr.
Council Member
   Bernard E. Epperson
Council Member
   Bobby E. Horton
Council Member
   Lloyd E . Kirkland, Sr.
Council Member
   H. Douglas Reeves
Council Member
   William H. Rhodes
Council Member
TITLE 1 GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-1-1   Form of government.
   The form of government for the City of West Columbia shall be that of the
council form of government, with a mayor and eight (8) council members, with
all being elected at large from the city, and provided in sections 5-11-10
through 5-11-40 of the Code of Laws of South Carolina, 1976, as amended. (Ord.
of 12/8/75)
* Editorial Note: References in the above section to the 1962 state code have
been updated to the 1976 code for ease of reference.  State Law Reference:
Requirement for selection of form of government, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 5-5-10 et
seq.
Chapter 2 Governing Body
1-2-1   The council.
   Except as otherwise provided, all powers of the city and the determination
of all matters of policy shall be vested in the council, with each member,
including the mayor, having one (1) vote.
State Law Reference: Powers of municipality vested in council, S.C. Code 1976,
Sec. 5-7-160.
1-2-2   Inauguration; tenure; compensation.
   (a)   Council members shall take office not less than 48 hours nor more than
five (5) days following certification of their election. They shall remain in
office for the term provided by law and until their successors are elected and
qualify.
   (b)   Council members shall receive as compensation such amount as shall be
set by council; provided, that an ordinance increasing or decreasing such
salaries shall not become effective until the commencement date of the terms of
two (2) or more members elected at the next general election following the
adoption of the ordinance, at which time it will become effective for all
members. Council members may also receive payment for actual expenses incurred
in the performance of their official duties within limitations prescribed by
council. State Law Reference: Taking office, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 5-15-120;
salaries and expenses of council, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 5-7-170.  Cross
Reference: Term of office, Sec.
1-7-1.
1-2-3   Qualifications.
   Council members shall be qualified electors of the city, and except where
authorized by law, no council member shall hold any other municipal office or
municipal employment while serving the term for which he was elected. If any
council member shall cease to possess these qualifications or those required by
law, the city council may institute proceedings to vacate his office.
State Law Reference: Council members prohibited from holding other political
office, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 5-7-180; grounds for forfeiture of office, S.C.
Code 1976, Sec. 5-7.200; council as judge of election and qualifications of its
members and of grounds for forfeiture, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 5-7-210.
1-2-4   Oath of office.
   Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, the mayor and
members of the city council shall take the following oath: "I do solemnly swear
(or affirm) that I am duly qualified according to the Constitution of this
state to exercise the duties of the office to which I have been elected and
that I will, to the best of my ability, discharge the duties thereof, and
preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution of this state and of the United
States, so help me God. As (name of office) of the City of West Columbia, I
will equally, fairly, and impartially, to the best of my ability and skill,
exercise the trust reposed in me, and I will use by best endeavors to preserve
the peace and carry into effect according to law the purposes for which I have
been elected, so help me God."
State Law Reference: Oath of office for council members, S.C. Code 1976, Sec.
5-15-150; Constitutional oath of office, S.C. Const., Art. VI, Sec. 5.
1-2-5   Mayor pro tem.
   (a)   The council shall bi-annually, at the first regular council meeting in
December following the city’s council elections, elect as provided by the terms
herein, one (1) of its members as mayor pro tempore for a term of two (2)
years. Said term of two (2) years shall run from the first regular meeting in
December of each odd year to the first regular meeting in December two years
hence. After a term of two (2) years, the member who has served may not serve a
back-to-back term.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the mayor pro tempore to act as mayor during
the absence or disability of the mayor, or in the case of a vacancy in the
office of mayor.
(Code 1965, Sec. 2-19, as amended by Ord. of 11/7/95, as amended by Ord. of 12/
5/06, as amended by Ord. of 10/6/09)
State Law Reference: Mayor pro tem, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 5-7-190.
Chapter 3 RULES OF PROCEDURE AND ORDINANCES
Article A
Meetings of Governing Body
1-3-1 Date and time.
   (a)   Regular meetings of council shall be held at 6:00 p.m. on the first
Tuesday in each month unless changed by a majority.
   (b)   Special meetings of council may be held on the call of the mayor or of
a majority of the members. Notice of a special meeting or public hearing shall
be given twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the time of the meeting or
hearing to all available members by the clerk-treasurer.
   (c)   All regular and special meetings of council shall be open to the
public; provided, however, that council may hold executive sessions and closed
meetings in accordance with the Freedom of Information Act. (Amended by Ord. of
3/3/98, as amended by Ord. of 10/3/06
1-3-2   Order of proceedings.
   (a)   The order of the proceedings of the council shall be as follows:
   (1)   Call to order;
   (2)   Determination of quorum;
   (3)   Invocation;
   (4)   Pledge of Allegiance;
   (5)   Announcements/communications by Mayor;
   (6)   Presentations and recognitions;
   (7)   Requests for appearances/citizen comment period;
   (8)   Approval of minutes for previous meetings;
   (9)   Council committee reports;
   (10)   Unfinished business;
   (11)   New business;
   (12)   Adjournment.
   (b)   Council may adjourn to executive session at any place on the agenda
after the Pledge of Allegiance.
   (c)   For the purposes of this section, “Pledge of Allegiance” refers to the
Pledge of Allegiance of the United States of America formally adopted by the
U.S. Congress in 1942 and amended in 1954. (Amended by Ord. of 6/16/14)
1-3-3   Quorum and rules of order.
   (a)   A majority of the council members serving shall constitute a quorum
for the conduct of business at any meeting. Except as otherwise required by
state law or ordinance, all proceedings of council shall be governed by
“Robert’s Rules of Order.” The Chairperson shall preside, except that in the
absence of the Chairperson, the members present shall elect a temporary
presiding member to serve until such absence ends.
   (b)   The council shall annually, at the first regular council meeting in
December, elected as provided by the terms herein, one (1) of its members as
Chairperson for a term of one (1) year. Said term of one (1) year shall run
from the first regular meeting in December of each year to the first regular
meeting in December one (1) year hence.
   (c)   Upon second reading of the amended version of the ordinance codified
herein, whereby the position of Chairperson is created, a vote of the council
members for the purpose of electing the initial Chairperson shall be noticed
and scheduled to occur immediately prior to the beginning of the next council
meeting, regardless of whether such meeting is a regular or special meeting.
The initial term of the first elected Chairperson shall run from the date of
such election until the first regular council meeting in December 2014.
Following completion of the initial term of the first Chairperson, successive
elections and terms of the Chairperson shall be as provided in subsection (b)
above. (Amended by Ord. of 4/1/14)
1-3-4   Voting requirements.
   (a)   All actions of council shall be by majority vote of members present at
a public meeting.
   (b)   The mayor shall vote in the same capacity as other council members.
   (c)   Every member of the council present shall vote on every question
except when required to refrain from voting by state law. When a council member
declares a potential conflict of interest, he/she shall submit a written
statement describing the conflict as required in S.C. Code Sec. 8-13-700(B). In
the event a council member abstains from voting, but does not have a potential
conflict of interest, an affirmative vote in favor of a motion shall be
recorded.
   (d)   The vote on every question shall be by roll call and the vote by name
shall be recorded in the council minutes by the clerk-treasurer.
   (e)   No member of council may leave the council chamber while in public
session without permission of the presiding officer.
   (f)   Any member of the council may, if he desires, have his reasons for
voting for or against any measure recorded in the minutes.
   (g)   No member of council or the mayor shall vote on any question of a
private nature, in the event of which he is personally or pecuniarily
interested.
(Amended by Ord. of 6/15/15)
State Law Reference: Conflict of interest, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 5-7-130.
1-3-5   Minutes of meetings.
   The clerk-treasurer shall keep the minutes of all public meetings of council
which shall be a matter of permanent public record. At each council meeting,
the minutes of the previous meeting shall be presented for approval. Minutes
shall not be considered the official record of a meeting until approved by
council. Any member of council desiring to express a position on a matter voted
upon by council in the minutes may do so by presenting the position, in
writing, to the council not later than the next regular meeting.
1-3-6   Appearance of citizens.
   Any citizen who has business with the city shall be entitled to appear
before the council at any regular or special meeting to present any matters
pertaining to the city with the exception of personnel matters. Persons
desiring to speak or desiring to make a presentation must notify the clerk to
place the subject matter on the agenda. (Ord. of 3/24/92)
1-3-7   Agenda.
   Matters to be considered by the council at a regular meeting shall be placed
on a written agenda prepared by the clerk-treasurer five (5) days prior to the
meeting. Matters not an the agenda may be considered upon approval of the
presiding officer. State Law Reference: Notice of meeting, S.C. Code 1976, Sec.
30-4-80
1-3-8   Committees.
   (a)   There shall be such standing committees of the council as the council
may provide. The committees shall consist of three council members nominated by
the Chairperson.
   (b)   Special committees of three council members may be appointed by the
Chairperson at any time to make investigations and recommendations regarding
any matter. (Amended by Ord. of 4/1/14)
Sec. 1-3-9  Public invocation.
   (a)   For the purposes of this section, “public invocation” means an
invocation delivered in a method provided pursuant to this section to any open
meeting of city council. In order to comply with applicable constitutional law,
a public invocation must not be exploited to proselytize or advance any one, or
to disparage any other faith or belief.
   (b)   A public invocation as defined by this section shall be permitted
before each meeting of the city council for the benefit of the city council.
The policy may allow for an invocation to be offered, at the beginning of the
meeting, on a voluntary basis by:
      (1)   A member of the council provided that the opportunity for
invocation duty is regularly and objectively rotated among all members of
council; or
      (2)   A chaplain appointed by city council. (Ord. of 6/16/14)
   State Law Reference: S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 6-1-160.
1-3-10   through 1-3-20 reserved.
ARTICLE B
Ordinances and Resolutions
1-3-21   Ordinances required.
   (a)   Council shall act by ordinance in all matters required by law to be
done by ordinance, including:
   (1)   Adopt or amend an administrative code of ordinances;
   (2)   Create, alter or abolish any city department, office or agency;
   (3)   Provide for a fine or other penalty or establish a rule or regulation
in which a fine or other penalty is imposed for violations;
   (4)   Appropriate funds and adopt a budget;
   (5)   Grant, renew or extend franchises, licenses or rights in public
streets or public property, and close abandoned streets;
   (6)   Authorize the borrowing of money or the issuance of bonds;
   (7)   Levy taxes, assess property for improvements or establish charges for
services;
   (8)   Annex area to the city;
   (9)   Convey or lease or authorize the conveyance or lease of any lands of
the city; and
   (10)   Amend or repeal any ordinance described in items (1) through (9)
above.
   (b)   In all other matters, council may act either by ordinance or
resolution, written or oral, recorded in the minutes. State Law Reference: Acts
required to be done by ordinance, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 5-7-260.
1-3-22   Codification of ordinances.
   (a)   All ordinances relating to administration, health, safety, vehicles,
streets (except franchises and encroachments), traffic, railroads, crimes and
offenses, utilities, solicitations, pollution, municipal court, descriptions of
areas annexed to the city, and any other ordinances or portions of ordinances
so required by council shall be codified and updated annually in a loose--leaf
code of ordinances.
   (b)   Standard codes, technical regulations and zoning ordinances may be
cited in the code by reference; and copies thereof shall be made available by
the clerk-treasurer for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price.
1-3-23   Notice required.
   Prior to the introduction of an ordinance granting a franchise, license or
right for the use of any street or public property, or for the permanent
closing of any abandoned street, the applicant for the ordinance shall publish
a notice in a conspicuous public place in the city stating the nature of the
franchise, license or right sought or a description of the street sought to be
closed, and the date on which the application is to be presented to council
which shall be at least one (1) week after the notice is posted. This
requirement shall not apply to the temporary closing of a public street
initiated by council.
1-3-24   Form of ordinances.
   (a)   Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the
form required for final adoption which shall include:
   (1)   A title briefly describing the content;
   (2)   Findings, reasons or basis for the ordinance, if desired and
appropriate;
   (3)   An enacting clause;
   (4)   Citation of any ordinance repealed;
   (5)   The provisions of the ordinance including section numbers if the
ordinance is to be codified or amends an existing codified ordinance;
   (6)   The effective date of the ordinance;
   (7)   The name of the person requesting introduction of the ordinance;
   (8)   The approval of the city attorney as to form and the assignment of an
ordinance number; and
   (9)   Space for the signatures of the mayor or presiding member of council
and the clerk-treasurer attesting notice, if required, and adoption.
   (b)   Written resolutions shall be in any similar form as deemed appropriate
by the city attorney. State Law Reference: Form of ordinances, S.C. Code 1976,
Sec. 5-7-270.
1-3-25   Introduction of ordinances.
   An ordinance may be proposed by any member of council. A proposed ordinance
shall be referred to the city attorney for approval as to form. The city
attorney shall render assistance in the preparation of notices and ordinances.
After an ordinance is in proper form and required notices have been given, the
city attorney shall send the ordinance to the clerk-treasurer to be held for
public inspection. An ordinance shall be deemed to be introduced when its title
is read during a public meeting of council.
1-3-26   Introduction of resolutions.
   A voice motion of a member of council shall be considered to be the
introduction of an oral resolution and no written record shall be required,
other than a notation of the clerk-treasurer in the council minutes. A
resolution proposed in writing shall be introduced in the same manner as an
ordinance.
1-3-27   Enactment of ordinances.
   (a)   An ordinance to levy a tax, adopt a budget, appropriate funds, grant a
franchise, license or right to use or occupy a public street or public property
for commercial purposes shall be complete in the form in which it is finally
passed, and in that form remain on file with the clerk-treasurer for public
inspection at least one (1) week before final adoption.
   (b)   No ordinance shall be adopted until it shall have been read two (2)
times and on two (2) separate days with at least six (6) days between each
reading.
   (c)   Emergency ordinances may be adopted on one (1) reading without notice
or hearing by affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of members present. An
emergency ordinance may not levy taxes, relate to a franchise or a service rate
and shall expire automatically on the 61st day following enactment.
   (d)   The introduction and reading of any ordinance shall be by the reading
of the title only unless full reading is requested by a member of council.
   (e)   After the introduction of an ordinance, any member of council or any
citizen of the city interested therein may request a public hearing which may
be held at any time designated by council prior to final adoption.
   (f)   Upon final adoption by vote of council, an ordinance shall be signed
by the mayor or presiding member and attested by the clerk-treasurer, who shall
file the original in the council minutes. State Law Reference: Procedure for
passing ordinances, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 5-7-270; emergency ordinances, S.C.
Code 1976, Sec. 5-7-250(d).
1-3-28   Adoption of resolutions.
   Written or oral resolutions may be adopted on one (1) reading unless a
public hearing is set by a majority of the members of council present.
1-3-29   through 1-3-40 reserved.
ARTICLE C
Use of Code and Penalties
1-3-41   How code designated and cited.
   The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated "The Code of Ordinances of the City of West
Columbia, South Carolina," and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be
cited as "West Columbia City Code." (Code 1965, Sec. 1-1)
1-3-42   Rules of construction.
   (a)   In the construction of this code, and of all ordinances of the city,
the following definitions and rules shall be observed, unless such construction
would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council, or the text
clearly requires otherwise.
   (1)   Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be
sufficient.
   (2)   City. The City of West Columbia, South Carolina.
   (3)   Council or city council. The city council of the City of West
Columbia.
   (4)   Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, but if the
last day is Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
   (5)   Corporate limits. The words "corporate limits," "corporation limits"
or "city limits" shall mean the legal boundary of the City of West Columbia.
   (6)   County. The County of Lexington in the State of South Carolina.
   (7)   Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring or
authorizing an officer or the head of a department of the city to do some act
or make certain inspections it shall authorize the head of the department to
designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or
make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section
provide otherwise.
   (8)   Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the
feminine and neuter.
   (9)   Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall give such authority to a majority of such
persons or officers.
   (10)   Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.
   (11)   Number. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural
shall include the singular.
   (12)   Oath. The word "oath" shall include an affirmation in all cases in
which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases
the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed."
   (13)   Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the
sense requires it.
   (14)   Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include
any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint
tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building
or land.
   (15)   Person. The word "person" shall include associations, clubs,
societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate and any other
group acting as a unit, as well as individuals.
   (16)   Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every
species of property except real property, as herein described.
   (17)   Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next
before and next after, respectively.
   (18)   Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal
property.
   (19)   Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands,
tenements and hereditaments.
   (20)   Roadway. The word "roadway" shall mean that portion of a street
improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
   (21)   Shall; may. The word "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
   (22)   Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street
between the curb line, or the lateral lines of a roadway where there is no
curb, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians.
   (23)   Signature or subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a
person shall include a mark when the person cannot write.
   (24)   State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of
South Carolina.
   (25)   Street. The word "street" embraces highways, avenues, boulevards,
roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, and the approaches thereto and all other public
thoroughfares in the city, and means the entire width thereof between opposed
abutting property lines; it shall include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the
contrary is expressed or unless such construction would be inconsistent with
the manifest intent of the city council.
   (26)   Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a
building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or
who occupies the whole or a part of such buildings or lands, either alone or
with others.
   (27)   Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   (28)   Title of officer. Whenever the title of an officer is given it shall
be construed as though the words "of the City of West Columbia" were added.
   (29)   Week. The word "week" shall mean seven (7) days.
   (30)   Written, in writing. The word "written" or "in writing" shall include
any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or
otherwise.
   (31)   Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year.
   (b)   In the construction of this code and of all ordinances of the city,
all officers, agents, employees and other persons, together with all things and
places therein referred to, shall, unless a contrary intention appear, be
construed to mean the officers, agents, employees and other persons, things and
places situated in the city or employed by or appertaining to the city.
1-3-43   Catchlines of sections.
   The underlined catchlines of the several sections of this code are intended
as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be
deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section,
nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such
sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (Code 1965, Sec.
1-3)
1-3-44   Effect of repeal of ordinances.
   (a)   The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force
before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
   (b)   The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding
pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed or cause of action
arising under the ordinance repealed. (Code 1965, Sec. 1-4)
1-3-45   Severability of parts of code.
   The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid, or unenforceable by the
invalid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability, shall not affect any of
the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this
code. (Code 1965, Sec. 1-5)
1-3-46   Amendments to code.
   (a)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code of ordinances, which
amend, repeal or in any way affect this code of ordinances, may be numbered in
accordance with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion
herein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any
part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded
from the code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby and the
subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted,in the case of repeal,
shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until the time that
this code of ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are
readopted as a new code of ordinances.
   (b)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this code may be made by
amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances
of the City of West Columbia, South Carolina, is hereby amended to read as
follows:_________________________" The new provisions shall then be set out in
full as enacted.
   (c)   In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to
be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of
the City of West Columbia, South Carolina, is hereby amended by adding a
section, to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows:
_________________________" The new section shall then be set out in full as
enacted.
   (d)   In lieu of the foregoing paragraph, when the city council desires to
enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature embracing a subject not
previously existing in the code, but which the city council desires to
incorporate into the code, a provision in substantially the following language
may be made a part of the ordinance: "It is the intention of the city council,
and it is hereby ordained, _____ that the provisions of this ordinance shall
become and be made a part of the Code of Ordinances of the City of West
Columbia, South Carolina, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered
to accomplish that intention."
   (e)   All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed
must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the
case may be.
   (f)   When necessary, section and subsections to the code may be renumbered
by the official codifier for the city to fulfill the intent of the governing
body, but all such changes shall be approved in advance by the city attorney.
1-3-47   Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.
   The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as those
of the 1965 code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the 1965 code and
included herein shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new
enactments.
1-3-48   Altering code.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of this code or to insert or delete pages or
portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in any manner whatsoever
which will cause the law of the City of West Columbia to be misrepresented
thereby. Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be
punished as provided in section 1-3-49 hereof. (Code 1965, Sec. 1-7)
1-3-49   General penalty; continuing violations.
   (a)   Whenever in this code in any ordinance or resolution of the city any
act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or
misdemeanor, or whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of
this code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days, or both, in the discretion of
the court; provided that no penalty shall exceed the penalty provided by the
state law for similar offenses. In addition to the fine, all court costs shall
be imposed on and paid by the offender.
   (b)   Each day any violation of any provision of this code or of any
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. of 10/5/93)
Cross Reference: Municipal court, Sec.
1-6-1 et seq.  Editorial Note: The city must remit a portion of the fine to the
state for convictions of traffic/criminal offenses under state law. Additional
amounts must be remitted for DUI and drug convictions.
1-3-50   Municipal uniform ordinance summons for violations of city ordinances.
   (a)   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance or resolution of the city,
any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or
misdemeanor, or whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, a municipal
uniform ordinance summons shall be issued and shall be a summons to appear in
the city's court for the citation issued upon said ticket.
   (b)   The ordinance summons must cite only one violation per summons and
must contain at least the following information:
   (1)   Tthe name and address of the person or entity charged;
   (2)   Tthe name and title of the issuing officer;
   (3)   Tthe time, date, and location of the hearing;
   (4)   Aa description of the ordinance the person or entity is charged with
violating;
   (5)   Tthe procedure to post bond; and
   (6)   Tany other notice or warning otherwise required by law.
   (c)   The uniform ordinance summons may not be used to perform a custodial
arrest, unless otherwise allowed by state law or city or county ordinance
authorized by state or federal law.
   (d)   Issuance of the uniform ordinance summons shall vest jurisdiction in
the municipal court to hear and dispose of the charge for which the uniform
ordinance summons was issued and served. The uniform ordinance summons may be
issued by any city law enforcement officer or any other city employees
designated by the council as code enforcement officers. The bond amount for
violations shall be prescribed by the chief municipal court judge. City law
enforcement or code enforcement officers are prohibited from accepting bonds.
Bonds are to be posted in the manner prescribed in the uniform summons.
   (e)   Any law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer who serves an
ordinance summons must allow the person served to proceed without first having
to post bond or to appear before a magistrate or municipal judge. Acceptance of
an ordinance summons constitutes a person's recognizance to comply with the
terms of the summons.
   (f)   This section does not apply to any ordinance which regulates the use
of motor vehicles on the public roads.
   (g)   Any person who fails to appear before the court as required by an
ordinance summons, without first having posted such bond as may be required or
without having been granted a continuance by the court, is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, must be fined not more than five hundred
($500.00) dollars nor imprisoned for more than thirty (30) days. In addition to
the fine, all court costs shall be imposed on and paid by the offender.
   (h)   The form attached to the ordinance codified in this section is hereby
adopted as West Columbia's uniform ordinance summons. (Ord. of 4/19/93 as
amended by Ord. of 10/5/93) State Law Reference: S.C. Code Ann. § 56-7-80
(1992).
Chapter 4 Officers and Departments
1-4-1   Council's powers.
   City council may, by ordinance, create, change and abolish offices,
departments or agencies of the municipal government in addition to those
created by this chapter, and may prescribe the functions of all departments,
offices and agencies, except that no function assigned by law to a particular
department, office or agency may be discontinued or assigned to any other
agency. State Law Reference: Authority to establish offices, departments and
agencies, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 5-11-40.
1-4-2   Creation of specific departments.
   The following departments are hereby created and established:
   (1)   Police;
   (2)   Fire;
   (3)   Streets/sanitation;
   (4)   Water distribution/sewer collection;
   (5)   Finance;
   (6)   Water plant;
   (7)   Building inspections;
   (8)   Vehicle maintenance; and
   (9)   Human resources. (Amended by Ord. of 11/17/14)
l-4-3 Officers and employees.
   (a)   Officers and employees shall be appointed for such terms as the
council may designate, and shall be subject to removal from office or
employment for any cause that council may deem sufficient, subject to the
personnel policies and procedures of the city.
   (b)   Officers and employees shall be responsible for such functions and
duties as are prescribed in this code and such other duties as the council may
from time to time determine.
   (c)   Officers and employees shall receive such compensation as fixed from
time to time by the council.
1-4-4   Social security.
   City employees, including police officers, shall be covered by social
security, in accordance with law and as provided by agreements between the city
and the state agents. (Code 1965, Sec. 2-34)
1-4-5   Office hours.
   Except for officially designated holidays, all city offices shall remain
open from Monday through Friday from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. (Code 1965, Sec. 2-
2)
1-4-6   City administrator.
   (a)   The office of city administrator is hereby established. The
administrator shall be appointed by the council which shall be responsible for
fixing his compensation. He shall be appointed solely on the basis of his
executive and administrative qualifications. The city administrator shall serve
at the pleasure of the council for an indefinite term, subject to the personnel
policies and procedures of the city.
   (b)   The city administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of
the city government. He shall be responsible to the council for proper
~administration of the policies and affairs of the city, and to that end he
shall have power and authority to:
   (1)   Direct, supervise, and coordinate administrative activities and
operations of all city departments;
   (2)   Ensure that all laws and ordinances are enforced;
   (3)   Appoint and remove department heads for cause with approval of
council;
   (4)   Administer personnel policies, classification, compensation and
evaluation of all city employees;
   (5)   Prepare the annual budget, submit it to the council, and be
responsible for its administration after adoption;
   (6)   Prepare and submit to the council at the end of each fiscal year a
complete annual report on the finances and administrative activities of the
city for the preceding year and make such other financial or other
administrative reports from time to time as may be required by the council;
   (7)   Administer policies governing purchasing;
   (8)   Keep the council informed of the financial condition and future needs
of the city and make recommendations as may seem to him desirable;
   (9)   Provide the council with information and guidance in matters of policy
determination; and
   (10)   Perform such other duties as may be required of him by the council.
   (c)   The city administrator shall relate to and communicate with the mayor
and council as a whole any and all problems, situations and conditions which
arise concerning the department or activity of the city which, in the opinion
of the city administrator, is of significance. (Except for the purpose of
inquiry, the members of council shall communicate directly with the city
administrator in any and all matters concerning any department or activity of
the city.) No member of council shall give orders to any subordinate of the
city administrator except in case of emergency.
   The administrator has overall responsibility for prioritizing workloads and
all requests by council members. If legitimate, they must be included in the
overall workload. If the administrator determines that the order/request
requires approval by the entire council, then it will be presented at the next
scheduled meeting. (Ord. of 5/3/94; amended by Ord. of 4/1/14)
1-4-7   City clerk.
   (a)   At the first regular council meeting following each municipal election
or as soon thereafter as practical, the council shall appoint a city clerk.
   (b)   The term of office of the clerk shall be two (2) years, provided he
may be removed from office by the council, subject to the personnel policies
and procedures of the city.
   (c)   In addition to other duties that may be assigned, the clerk shall:
   (1)   attend all meetings of the council and keep a true record of all
proceedings;
   (2)   attest to the signature of the mayor to all ordinances and other
records of the city;
   (3)   make such reports to the council as it may require. (Code 1965, Secs.
2-41 to 2-44, 2-46, 2-52 to 2-54; as amended by Ord. of 4/3/90) Amendment Note:
The above section was replaced in total by Ord. of 4/3/90 which separated the
office of city clerk and city treasurer.  State Law Reference: Appointment and
duties of municipal clerk, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 5-7-220.
1-4-8   City attorney.
   (a)   At the first regular council meeting following each municipal
election, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the council shall appoint a
city attorney, who shall serve for a term of two (2) years; provided, that he
may be removed for cause by the council. The council shall be the sole judge of
what constitutes cause for removal.
   (b)   It shall be the duty of the city attorney to attend the meetings of
the council as requested, to draft ordinances and other legal documents, to
advise the council with reference to such matters as may be submitted to him,
and to perform such other duties as council may assign. (Code 1965, Secs. 2-60
to 2-62)
1-4-9   City treasurer.
   (a)   At the first regular council meeting following each regular municipal
election, or as soon thereafter as practical, the council shall appoint a city
treasurer.
   (b)   The term of office of the treasurer shall be two (2) years; provided,
he may be removed from office by the council subject to the personnel policies
and procedures of the city.
   (c)   Before assuming the duties of his office, the treasurer shall enter
into a bond for the faithful performance of his duties, in such amount and with
such sureties as may be required and approved by council.
   (d)   In addition to other duties that may be assigned, the treasurer shall:
   (1)   make such reports to the council as it may require;
   (2)   Collect and receive all funds of the city from whatever sources
derived; and
   (3)   Make an annual statement of the receipts and disbursements of the city
and submit the same to the city council at the time prescribed by the council.
(Ord. of 4/30/90)
CrossReference: Disbursements of funds, Sec.
1-5-2.
HistoricalNote: Ord. of 4/3/90 separated the offices of city clerk and city
treasurer.
Chapter 5 Financial Administration
Article A
General Provisions
State Law Reference:  Council to provide for annual independent audits, S.C.
Code 1976, Sec. 5-7-240; publication of quarterly financial statements, S.C.
Code 1976, Sec. 5-21-50.
Sec. 1-5-1  Fiscal year.
   The fiscal year of the city shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30. 
(Code 1965, Sec. 2-1)
Sec. 1-5-2  Disbursements.
   All disbursements of city funds shall be made by the clerk-treasurer upon
his approval and by check co-signed by the mayor.
Sec. 1-5-3  Adoption of budget.
   The prepared budget for the general fund and water and sewer fund of the
city and the estimated revenue for payment of budgeted expenses are hereby
adopted and made a part of this code as fully as if incorporated herein.
State Law Reference:  Adoption of annual budget and tax levy, S.C. Code 1976,
Sec. 5-11-40.
Sec. 1-5-4  Annual property tax.
   The council shall impose by ordinance, a copy of which shall be published at
least twenty (20) days before the adoption thereof and setting forth the
amounts levied for the several purposes for which levies may be made, an annual
tax on all real estate lying within the corporate limits and on all personal
property within the corporate limits and on all personal property within the
city, including bonds and stocks of banks, insurance companies and other
corporations and the real estate of churches and school associations from which
the church and school associations draw a revenue or which is intended to be
rented out for that purpose, except property that is exempt from taxation under
the constitution and laws of this state, as will yield an amount necessary for
the general fund operating purposes and for debt service requirements of the
city, making a total of forty (40) mills.  A change in the tax shall be by
ordinance and in accordance with the above notice requirement.
Sec. 1-5-5  Annual property tax; collection.
   The city treasurer is hereby authorized and directed to contract with
Lexington County for the collection of the tax in accordance with the statutes
and laws of the state with an agreement heretofore reached by and between the
city council and the county council for Lexington County. 
(Ord. of 6/23/87)
State Law Reference:  Collection of property taxes, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 5-7-
300.
Sec. 1-5-6  Annual property tax; penalties.
   Any tax, except taxes on motor vehicles, not paid by December 31, shall bear
a penalty of five (5) percent if not paid through April 15; after April 15, all
unpaid tax shall bear a penalty of seven (7) percent, plus collection costs of
five (5) percent.
State Law Reference:  Taxes on motor vehicles, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 12-37-2610.
Sec. 1-5-7   Special property tax assessments for rehabilitated historic
properties.
   (a)   Authority and jurisdiction. In accordance with the authority conferred
by S.C. Code §§ 5-21-140 and 4-9195, the West Columbia City Council docs hereby
establish and enact this Special Property Tax Assessments for Rehabilitated
Historic Properties statute for the City of West Columbia, South Carolina.
   (b)   Intent. The purpose of this section is to encourage the rehabilitation
and preservation of historic commercial properties; to promote community
development and redevelopment; to encourage sound community planning; and to
promote the health, safety, and welfare of this community.
   (c)   Scope of regulations. The regulations set forth herein apply to
rehabilitation of all commercial structures and real property which qualify as
“rehabilitated historic property” in the manner provided in this section, that
is located within the municipal limits of the City of West Columbia.
   (d)   Effective date. The effective date of this section is the date of
final reading approval of the ordinance codified herein by the West Columbia
City Council.
   (e)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
   (1)   Approval of rehabilitation work. The proposed and completed
rehabilitation work is approved by the City of West Columbia Board of Zoning
Appeals (“Board”) as appropriate for the historic building and the historic
district in which it is located.
   (2)   Certification. In order to be eligible for the special tax assessment,
historic commercial properties must receive preliminary and final
certification.
   (3)   Expenditures for rehabilitation. The actual cost of rehabilitation
relating to one or more of the following:
   a.   Improvements located on or within the historic building as designated;
   b.   Improvements outside of but directly attached to the historic building;
   c.   Architectural and engineering services attributable to the design of
the improvements;
   d.   Costs necessary to maintain the historic character of the building as
designated.
   (4)   Final Certification. A commercial property that has received final
certification has met the following conditions:
   a.   The owner of the property applies for and is granted historic
designation by the National Register of Historic Places, either individually or
as a contributing property, and has provided proof of the designation to the
City of West Columbia, or the property is deemed significant to a historic
district or property listed in the National Register of Historic Places and is
at least fifty (50) years old;
   b.   The completed rehabilitation receives approval of rehabilitation work
from the Board and the Board grants the property preliminary certification; and
   c.   The minimum expenditures for rehabilitation were incurred and paid.
   (5)   Historic designation. A commercial property receives a “historic
designation” for one or more of the following reasons:
   a.   The owner of the commercial property applies for and is granted
historic designation by the National Register of Historic Places, either
individually or as a contributing property, and has provided proof of the
designation to the City of West Columbia; or
   b.   The commercial property is designated as a historic property by the
City of West Columbia if the City of West Columbia determines the property to
be significant to a historic district or property listed in the National
Register of Historic Places and the property is at least fifty (50) years old.
   (6)   Minimum expenditures for rehabilitation. The owner or his estate
rehabilitates the building, with expenditures for rehabilitation exceeding
twenty (20%) percent of the fair market value of the building.
   (7)   Preliminary certification. A commercial property that has received
preliminary certification has met the following conditions:
   a.   The owner of the commercial property applies for and is granted
historic designation by the National Register of Historic Places, cither
individually or as a contributing property, and has provided proof of the
designation to the City of West Columbia, or the property is designated as a
historic property by the City of West Columbia if the City of West Columbia
determines the property to be significant to a historic district or property
listed in the National Register of Historic Places and is at least fifty (50)
years old;
   b.   The proposed rehabilitation receives approval of rehabilitation work
from the Board; and
   c.   The project commenced before the date of adoption of this section and
work was permitted to have begun prior to receiving preliminary certification;
or the project commenced on or after the date of adoption of this section and
the preliminary certification was received prior to beginning work.
   (8)   Rehabilitated historic property. Commercial property that has met all
the criteria for final certification qualifies as rehabilitated historic
property.
   (9)   Reviewing Authority. In accordance with S.C. Code §§ 4-9-195(B)(7)(b)
and 521-140, the City of West Columbia hereby designates the Board of Zoning
Appeals (“Board”) to review the rehabilitation work as contemplated in this
section by reason of the Board’s familiarity with the historic character of the
area and by reason of the Board’s review of proposed exceptional uses of
historic properties pursuant to section 804 of the West Columbia Zoning
Ordinance. Accordingly, the Board shall have the authority to approve
rehabilitation work pursuant to this section.
   (f)   Eligible rehabilitation.
   (1)   Standards for rehabilitation work. To be eligible for the special tax
assessment, historic rehabilitations must be appropriate for the historic
building and the historic district in which the historic property is located.
Rehabilitation projects must meet the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for
Rehabilitation that outline historic preservation guidelines used in
determining eligibility for federal tax incentives.
   (2)   Work to be reviewed. The following work will be reviewed according to
the standards set forth above:
   a.   Repairs or alterations to the exterior of a designated building;
   b.   New construction on the property on which a building is located;
   c.   Alterations to interior primary public spaces of a designated building;
   d.   Any remaining work where the expenditures for such work are being used
to satisfy the minimum expenditures for rehabilitation.
   (3)   Time limit of rehabilitation. To be eligible for the special tax
assessment, rehabilitation must be completed within two (2) years of the
preliminary certification date. If the project is not complete after two years,
but the minimum expenditures for rehabilitation have been incurred, the
property shall continue to receive the special tax assessment until the project
is completed or until the end of the special assessment period, whichever shall
occur first.
   (g)   Process.
   (1)   Required fee. There shall be a one hundred and fifty ($150.00) dollar
fee for preliminary and final certification for each application for review of
rehabilitation work for single family and duplex structures and a three hundred
($300.00) dollar fee for all other structures. Fees are payable to the City of
West Columbia. Final certification will not be granted without payment of the
required fees.
   (2)   Required plan. Owners of commercial property seeking approval of
rehabilitation work must submit a rehabilitated historic property application
with supporting documentation and application fee prior to beginning work.
   (3)   Preliminary certification. Upon receipt of the completed application,
the proposal shall be placed on the next available agenda for the Board to
determine if the project is consistent with the Secretary of the Interior’s
Standards for Rehabilitation that outline historic preservation guidelines used
in determining eligibility for federal tax incentives. After the Board makes
its determination, the owner shall be notified in writing. Upon receipt of the
determination, the owner may:
   a.   Begin rehabilitation, if the application has been approved; or
   b.   Revise such application in accordance with any comments provided by the
Board and resubmit the application, if the original application has not been
approved.
   (4)   Substantive changes. Once preliminary certification has been granted
to an application, substantive changes to the rehabilitation plan must be
approved by the Board. Unapproved substantive changes are conducted at the risk
of the property owner, and may disqualify the project from eligibility.
   (5)   Final certification. Upon completion of the rehabilitation project,
the project must receive final certification in order to be eligible for the
special tax assessment. The Zoning Administrator or his designated agent will
inspect completed projects to determine if the work is consistent with the
approval granted by the Board pursuant to subsections (e) and (f) above. Final
certification will be granted when the completed work meets the standards in
subsection (f) above and verification is made that expenditures have been made
in accordance with subsections (e)(3) and (e)(6) above. Upon receiving final
certification, the property will be assessed for the remainder of the special
assessment period on the fair market value of the property at the time the
preliminary certification was made or the final certification was made,
whichever occurred earlier. If a completed project does not comply with all
requirements for final certification, final certification must not be granted
and any monies not collected by the City of West Columbia due to the special
assessment must be returned to the City of West Columbia.
   (6)   Additional work. For the remainder of the special assessment period
after final certification, the property owner shall notify the Board of any
additional work or rehabilitation, other than ordinary maintenance. The Board
will review the work at a regularly scheduled meeting and determine whether the
project is consistent with the standards for rehabilitation set forth in
subsection (f) above. If the additional work is determined to be not
appropriate for the historic building or the historic district, the owner may
withdraw his request, or revise the proposed additional work for further
consideration.
   (7)   Decertification. When historic property has received final
certification and is assessed as rehabilitated historic property, it shall
remain so certified and must be granted the special tax assessment for the
remaining period until the property becomes disqualified by any one of the
following:
   a.   Written notice by the owner to the City of West Columbia to remove the
preferential assessment;
   b.   Removal of the historic designation by the City of West Columbia;
   c.   Rescission of the approval of rehabilitation work by the Board because
of alterations or renovations by the owner or his estate which cause the
property to no longer possess the qualities and features which made it eligible
for final certification.
   (h)   Length of assessments.
   (1)   The special assessment period shall be fifteen (15) years from the
date of the preliminary certification.
   (2)   All qualifying commercial property may receive preliminary
certification from the City of West Columbia and upon this preliminary
certification, the property must be assessed for two years on the fair market
value of the property at the time the preliminary certification was made. If
the project is not complete after two years, but the minimum expenditures for
rehabilitation have been incurred, the property continues to receive the
special assessment until the project is completed.
   (3)   Upon completion of a project, the project must receive final
certification from the City of West Columbia in order to be eligible for the
special assessment. Upon final certification, the property must be assessed for
the remainder of the special assessment period on the fair market value of the
property at the time the preliminary certification was made or the final
certification was made, whichever occurred earlier. If a completed project does
not comply with all requirements for final certification, final certification
must not be granted and any monies not collected by the county due to the
special assessment must be returned to the county.
   (4)   The special assessment only begins in the current or future tax years
as provided for in this section. In no instance may the special assessment be
applied retroactively.
   (5)   If an application for preliminary or final certification is filed by
May first or the preliminary or final certification is approved by August
first, the special assessment authorized by this section is effective for that
year. Otherwise it is effective beginning with the following year. (Ord. of 8/
7/12)
Sec. 1-5-8  Local hospitality tax.
   (a)   There is hereby imposed a local hospitality tax of two percent (2%) on
the gross proceeds of the sale of prepared meals and beverages in
establishments within the city (hereinafter "vendor"). Payment of the
hospitality tax established hereby shall be the liability of the customer.
   (b)   The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the customer
when payment for meals or beverages is tendered and shall be held in trust for
the benefit of the city until remitted as provided in  subsection (c) below.
   (c)   Payment of the hospitality tax established herein shall be remitted by
the vendor to the City of West Columbia on a monthly basis, along with such
return or form as may be established by the city for such purposes, not later
than the twentieth day of the month and shall cover the tax due for the
previous month. Any tax not timely remitted shall be subject to a penalty of
five (5%) percent of the sum owed for each month or portion thereof until paid.
The failure to collect from the customer the tax imposed by this section shall
not relieve the vendor from making the required remittance.
   (d)   The failure of any vendor subject to this section to remit to the city
the tax imposed by the provisions of this section shall constitute a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) or imprisonment for up to thirty (30) days, or both.
   (e)   There is hereby established a special account to be known as the Local
Hospitality Tax Account into which the taxes remitted shall be deposited by the
city and used solely for the purposes provided by law. (Ord. of 6/28/16)
Secs. 1-5-9 through 1-5-20 reserved.
Article B
Purchasing
Article 1.  General Provisions
Part A.  Name, Purposes and Application
Sec. 1-5-111  Name.
   This chapter shall be known as and cited as the "Procurement Code of the
City of West Columbia."
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
[State Law Reference:  See S.C. Code § 11-35-50 and South Carolina Consolidated
Procurement Code, §§ 11-35-10 et seq.]
Sec. 1-5-112  Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the fair and equitable
treatment of all purposes involved in public purchasing by the city, to
maximize the purchasing value of public funds in procurement, and to provide
safeguards for maintaining a procurement system of quality and integrity. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-113  Application.
   This chapter applies to contracts for the procurement of supplies, services,
and construction, entered into by this city after the effective date of this
chapter unless the parties agree to its application to contracts entered into
prior to the effective date.  It shall apply to every expenditure of public
funds irrespective of their source.  Nothing in this chapter shall prevent any
city, department or agency from complying with the terms and conditions of any
grant, gift or bequest which are otherwise consistent with law. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-114  Financial interest of officers and employees prohibited.
   No member of city council, nor any officer or employee of the city, shall
contract with or have a financial interest in any contract entered into by the
city, except in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. of 9/19/05)
State Law Reference:  Conflict of interest, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 5-7-130;
municipal officers prohibited from contracting with municipality, S.C. Code
1976, Sec. 5-21-30, et seq.
Sec. 1-5-115  Acceptance of anything of more than nominal value prohibited.
   The administrator and all officers and employees of the city are expressly
prohibited from accepting, directly or indirectly, from any person to which any
purchase order, or contract is, or might be awarded, any rebate, gift, money or
anything of more than nominal value, except where given for the use and benefit
of the city.  For purposes of this section, "nominal" shall mean a value of not
more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00).  (Ord. of 9/19/05)
State Law Reference:  S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 8-13-10, et seq.
Part B.  Definitions
Sec. 1-5-121  Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
given to them herein:
   (1)   Architect, engineer, land surveying, and environmental services. 
Those professional services within the scope of the practice of architecture,
professional engineering, land surveying, landscape architecture, interior
design, and environmental services pertaining to construction, as well as
incidental services that members of these professions and those in their employ
may logically or justifiably perform, including studies, investigations,
surveys, elevations, consultations, planning, programming conceptual designs,
plans, and specifications, cost estimates, inspections, shop drawing reviews,
sample recommendations, preparation or operating and maintenance manuals and
other related services.
   (2)   Business.  Any corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
individual, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture, or any
other private legal entity.
   (3)   Change order (unilateral).  A written order signed and unilaterally
issued by the city administrator, directing the contractor to make changes
which the "changes" clause of the contract authorizes the city administrator to
order without the consent of the contractor.
   (4)   City administrator.  The person holding the position created in this
code as the manager of the city.
   (5)   Construction.  The process of building, altering, repairing,
remodeling, improving, or demolishing any public structure or building, or
other public improvements of any kind to any public real property.  It does not
include the routine operation, routine repair, or routine maintenance of
existing structures, buildings or real property.
   (6)   Construction management services.  Those professional services
associated with a system in which the city directly contracts with a
professional construction manager to provide that group of management
activities required to plan, schedule, coordinate, and manage the design and
construction plan of a project in a manner that contributes to the control of
time, cost and quality of construction as specified in the construction
management contract.
   (7)   Contract.  All types of city agreements, regardless of what they may
be called, for the procurement of supplies, services, or construction.
   (8)   Contract modification.  Any written alteration in specifications,
delivery point, rate of delivery, period of performance, price, quantity, or
other provisions of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties
to the contract.
   (9)   Contractor.  Any person having a contract with the city.
   (10)   Cooperative purchasing.  Procurement conducted by, or on behalf of,
more than one (1) public procurement unit.
   (11)   Cost-reimbursement contract.  A contract under which a contractor is
reimbursed for costs which are allowable and allocable in accordance with the
contract terms and the provisions of this chapter, and a fee, if any.
   (12)   Employee.  An individual drawing a salary from this city, whether
elected or not, and any noncompensated individual performing personal services
for the city.
   (13)   Excess supplies.  Any supplies other than expendable supplies having
a remaining useful life but which are no longer required by the using agency in
possession of the supplies.
   (14)   Expendable supplies.  All tangible supplies other than nonexpendable
supplies.
   (15)   Grant.  The furnishing of assistance, whether financial or otherwise,
to any person to support a program authorized by law.  It does not include an
award whose primary purpose is to procure an end product, whether in the form
of supplies, services, or construction; a contract resulting from such an award
is not a grant but a procurement contract.
   (16)   Invitation for bids.  All documents, whether attached or incorporated
by reference, utilized for soliciting bids.
   (17)   Nonexpendable supplies.  All tangible supplies having an original
acquisition cost of over one hundred dollars ($100.00) per unit and a probable
useful life of more than one (1) year.
   (18)   Person.  Any business, individual, union, committee, club, other
organization, or group of individuals.
   (19)   Procurement.  Buying, purchasing, renting, leasing, or otherwise
acquiring any supplies, services, or construction.  It also includes all
functions that pertain to the obtaining of any supply, service, or
construction, including description of requirements, selection and solicitation
of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract
administration.
   (20)   Procurement officer.  Any person duly authorized to enter into and
administer contracts and make written determinations with respect thereto.  The
term also includes an authorized representative acting within the limits of
authority.
   (21)   Public procurement unit.  Any county, city, and any other subdivision
of the state or public agency of any such subdivision, public authority,
educational, health, or other institution, any other entity which expends
public funds for procurement of supplies, services, or construction.
   (22)   Purchase description.  The words used in a solicitation to describe
the supplies, services, or construction to be purchased, and includes
specifications attached to, or made a part of, the solicitation.
   (23)   Real estate development services.  Those professional services
associated with a system in which the city directly contracts with a
professional real estate developer to provide that group of management
activities for the development of real estate.  Such services include, but are
not limited to, providing assistance to the city with all environmental
studies; development of a potential marketing strategy; development of a
potential marketing plan; identification of companies, entities, or other
groups capable of developing the property consistent with the marketing plan,
and/or strategy; and limited representation of the city in negotiations.  These
statutes are exclusive of purchasing and selling of real estate otherwise
controlled by this procurement code.
   (24)   Request for proposals.  Same as "Invitation for bids."
   (25)   Responsible bidder or offeror.  A person who, in the discretion of
the procurement officer, has the capability in all respects to perform fully
the contract requirements, and the integrity and reliability which will assure
good faith performance.
   (26)   Responsive bidder.  A person who has submitted a bid which conforms
in all material respects to the invitation for bids.
   (27)   Service.  The furnishing of labor, time, or effort by a contractor,
not involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports which
are merely incidental to the required performance.  This term shall not include
employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements.
   (28)   Specifications.  Any description of the physical or functional
characteristics, or of the nature of a supply, service, or construction item. 
It may include a description of any requirement for inspection, testing, or
preparing a supply, service, or construction item for delivery.
   (29)   Subcontractor.  Any person having a contract with the general
contractor on any city project.  Any subcontractor must be approved by the city
administrator before work begins.
   (30)   Supplies.  All property including, but not limited to, equipment,
materials, printing, insurance, information technology equipment and software
packages, and leases of real property, excluding land or a permanent interest
in land.
   (31)   Surplus supplies.  Any supplies other than expendable supplies no
longer having any use to the city.  This includes obsolete supplies, scrap
materials, and nonexpendable supplies that have completed their useful life
cycle. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02, as amended by Ord. of 3/8/04)
Part C.  Compliance with State and Federal Requirements
Sec. 1-5-131  Public access to procurement information.
   Procurement information shall be public record to the extent required by
chapter 3 of title 30, South Carolina Code of Laws, 1976, with the exception
that commercial or financial information obtained in response to a request for
proposals which is privileged and confidential is not to be disclosed. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-132  Compliance with federal requirements.
   Where a procurement involves the expenditure of federal assistance or
contract funds, the city administrator shall comply with such federal law and
authorized regulations which are mandatorily applicable and which are not
presently reflected in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-133  Standards of conduct.
   In all actions involving the procurement of supplies, services, or
construction for this city, the provisions of chapter 13 of title 8, South
Carolina Code of Laws, (1976, as amended), shall be complied with. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Article 2.  Procurement Organization
Part A.  Director of Procurement
Sec. 1-5-211  Establishment, authorities and duties.
   (a)   The city administrator shall serve as the principal public procurement
official of the city, and shall be responsible for the procurement of supplies,
services, and construction in accordance with this chapter, as well as the
management and disposal of supplies.
   (b)   In accordance with this chapter, the city administrator shall:
   (1)   Procure or supervise the procurement of all supplies, services, and
construction needed by the city;
   (2)   Exercise general supervision and control over all inventories and
supplies belonging to the city;
   (3)   Sell, trade, or otherwise dispose of surplus supplies belonging to the
city; and
   (4)   Establish and maintain programs for the inspection, testing, and
acceptance of supplies, services, and construction.
   (c)   The city administrator shall have the authority to award contracts
within the purview of this article; provided, however, that contracts in excess
of seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) shall not be awarded without
prior approval of city council.  (See previous section 1-5-21(a) of this
chapter (repealed by Ord. of 10/1/02)).
   The city administrator shall have the authority to require chemical and
physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which
are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with the
specifications.  In the performance of such tests, the administrator shall have
the authority to make use of laboratory facilities of any agency of the city
government or any outside laboratory.  The administrator may also require
bidders on equipment contracts to demonstrate their equipment for the city. 
(See previous section 1-5-30 of this chapter (repealed by Ord. of 10/1/02)).
   (e)   The city administrator shall have the authority to sell all supplies
which have become unsuitable for public use, or to exchange or trade in the
same for new supplies.  Sales shall be made to the highest bidder and in
conformance with section
1-5-310 of this chapter.  All moneys received from such sales shall be paid
into the appropriate funds of the city.  (See previous section 1-5-34 of this
chapter (repealed by Ord. of 10/1/02)). 
(Ord. of 10/1/02, as amended by Ord. of 9/19/05)
Sec. 1-5-212  Delegation of authority by the city administrator.
   The city administrator may delegate authority to designees.  Any delegation
shall be in writing to be effective. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Part B.  Organization of Public Procurement
Sec. 1-5-221  Authority to contract for certain services.
   The city administrator may enter into contracts for the purposes of
procuring professional services normally obtained on a fee basis, e.g., clergy,
physicians, architects, engineers, accountants, and real estate development
services.  No contract for the services of legal counsel or auditor may be
awarded without approval of city council.  No contract for real estate
development services is valid without approval of city council. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02, as amended by Ord. of 3/8/04)
Part C.  Coordination, Training and Education
Sec. 1-5-231  Collection of data concerning public procurement.
   The city administrator shall cooperate with city auditors in the preparation
of statistical data concerning the procurement, usage, and disposition of all
supplies, services and construction, and employ such trained personnel as may
be necessary to carry out this function.  All departments shall furnish such
reports as the city administrator may require concerning usage, needs, and
stocks on hand.  The city administrator shall have authority to prescribe forms
to be used by the departments in requisitioning, ordering, and reporting of
supplies, services, and construction. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-232  Advisory groups.
   The city administrator may appoint advisory groups to assist with respect to
specifications or procurement in specific areas, and with respect to any other
matters within the authority of the city administrator. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Article 3.  Source Selection and Contract Formation
Part A.  Methods of Source Selection
Sec. 1-5-310  Bid procedures.
   (a)   Purchases not in excess of one thousand five hundred dollars.  Small
purchases not in excess of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) may be
accomplished without securing competitive quotations if the prices are
considered to be reasonable.  The purchasing officer shall annotate the
purchase requisition:  "Price is fair and reasonable" and sign.  The purchases
must be distributed equally among qualified suppliers.  When practical, a
quotation must be solicited from other than the previous supplier before
placing a repeat order.  The administrative cost of verifying the
reasonableness of the price of purchase "not in excess of" may more than offset
potential savings in detecting instances of overpricing.  Action to verify the
reasonableness of the price need be taken only when the procurement officer
suspects that the price may not be reasonable, comparison to previous price
paid, or personal knowledge of the item involved.
   (b)   Purchases from one thousand five hundred one dollars to five thousand
dollars.  Solicitations of verbal or written quotes from a minimum of three (3)
qualified sources of supply must be made and documentation of the quotes
attached to the purchase requisition.  For items of equal quality, the award
shall be made to the lowest responsive and responsible source or, when a
request for proposal process is used, the highest ranking offeror.
   (c)   Purchases from five thousand one dollars to ten thousand dollars. 
Solicitation of written quotes from a minimum of three (3) qualified sources of
supply must be made and documentation of the quotes attached to the purchase
requisition.  The award must be made to the lowest responsive and responsible
sources or, when a request for proposal process is used, the highest ranking
offeror.
   (d)   Purchases in excess of ten thousand dollars.  Written solicitation of
written quotes, bids, or proposals shall be made.  The procurement must be
advertised in a newspaper of general circulation.  A copy of the written
solicitation and written quotes must be attached to the purchase requisition. 
The award shall be made to the lowest responsive and responsible source or,
when a request for proposal process is used, the highest ranking offeror.
   (e)   The city administrator shall have the authority to require a bid bond,
performance bond, a payment bond and/or a labor and material bond before
entering into a contract in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in such
a form and amount as the administrator shall find reasonably necessary to
protect the best interest of the city.  (See previous section 1-5-29 of this
chapter (repealed by Ord. of 10/1/02)).
   (f)   Protest rights.  The provisions of section
1-5-711 do not apply to contracts awarded under the procedures set forth in
subsections (a) through (c) of this section. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02, as amended by Ord. of 9/19/05)
Sec. 1-5-311  Generally.
   (a)   Unless otherwise required by law, all city contracts shall be awarded
by competitive sealed bidding, pursuant to section
1-5-312 (Competitive sealed bidding), except as provided in:
   (1)   Section
1-5-313 (Competitive fixed priced bidding);
   (2)   Section
1-5-314 (Competitive best value bidding);
   (3)   Section
1-5-315 (Competitive sealed proposals);
   (4)   Section
1-5-316 (Negotiations after Unsuccessful Competitive Sealed Bidding);
   (5)   Section
1-5-317 (Small purchases);
   (6)   Section
1-5-318 (Sole source procurement);
   (7)   Section
1-5-319 (Emergency procurement); or
   (8)   Section
1-5-541 (Architect, engineer and land surveying services).
   (b)   Notwithstanding any provision relating to awards contained herein, any
bid in excess of seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) must be
approved by council prior to being reduced to contract. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-312  Competitive sealed bidding.
   (a)   Conditions for use.  Contracts shall be awarded by competitive sealed
bidding except as otherwise provided in methods of source selection.
   (b)   Invitation for bids.  An invitation for bids shall be issued and shall
include a purchase description, and all contractual terms and conditions
applicable to the procurement.
   (c)   Public notice.  Public notice of the invitation for bids shall be
given not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the date set forth therein for
the opening of bids.  Such notice may include publication in a newspaper of
general circulation a reasonable time prior to bid opening.
   (d)   Bid opening.  Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or
more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. 
The amount of each bid, and such other relevant information as may be specified
in the invitations for bid, together with the name of each bidder shall be
recorded; the record and each bid shall be open to the public inspection after
award.
   (e)   Bid acceptance and bid evaluation.  Bids shall be unconditionally
accepted without alteration or correction, except as authorized in this
chapter.  Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the
invitation for bids, which may include criteria to determine acceptability such
as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery, and suitability for a
particular purpose.  Those criteria that will affect the bid price and be
considered in evaluation for award shall be objectively measurable, such as
discounts, transportation costs, and total or life cycle costs.  The invitation
for bids shall set forth the evaluation criteria to be used.  No criteria may
be used in bid evaluation that are not set forth in the invitation for bids.
   (f)   Correction or withdrawal of bids; cancellation of awards.  Corrections
or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after award, or
cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes, may be
permitted where appropriate.  After bid opening no changes in bid prices or
other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest of the city or fair
competition shall be permitted.  All decisions to permit the correction or
withdrawal of bids, or to cancel awards or contracts based on bid mistakes,
shall be supported by a written determination made by the city administrator.
   (g)   Discussion with bidder.  As provided in the invitation for bids,
discussions may be conducted with apparent responsive bidders for the purpose
of clarification to assure full understanding of the requirements of the
invitation for bids.  All bids, in the procuring agent's sole judgment, needing
clarification shall be accorded such opportunity.  Clarification of any
bidder's bid must be documented in writing and shall be included with the bid.
   (h)   Award.  The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by
written notice to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid meets
the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids.  In the
event all bids for a construction project exceed available funds as certified
by the fiscal officer, and the low responsive and responsible bid does not
exceed such funds by more than five (5) percent, the city administrator is
authorized in situations where time or economic considerations preclude re-
solicitation of work of a reduced scope to negotiate an adjustment in the bid
price, including changes in the bid requirements, with the low responsive and
responsible bidder, in order to bring the bid within the amount of available
funds.  In the event that there is a tie low responsive and responsible bid
with two (2) vendors, the city administrator shall select the local vendor.  If
either both or neither of the tied vendors are local, the administrator shall
be resolved by drawing lots in public.
   (i)   Request for qualifications.  Prior to soliciting bids, the city may
issue a request for qualifications from prospective bidders.  Such request
shall contain at a minimum a description of the goods or services to be
solicited by the invitation for bids, the general scope of the work, the
deadline for submission of information, and how prospective bidders may apply
for consideration.  The request shall require information concerning the
prospective bidders' product specifications, qualifications, experience, and
ability to perform the requirements of the contract.  Adequate public notice of
the request for qualifications shall be given in the manner provided in section
1-5-312(c).  After receipt of the responses to the request for qualifications
from prospective bidders, the prospective bidders shall be ranked from most
qualified to least qualified on the basis of the information provided.  Bids
shall then be solicited from at least the top two (2) prospective bidders by
means of an invitation for bids.  The failure of a prospective bidder to be
selected to receive the invitation for bids shall not be grounds for protest
under section
1-5-711 or any other section herein. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-313  Competitive fixed price bidding.
   (a)   Conditions for use.  When the city administrator determines in writing
that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not
advantageous to the city, a contract may be entered into by competitive fixed
price bidding subject to the provisions of section
1-5-312, unless otherwise provided for in this section.
   (b)   Fixed price bidding.  The purpose of fixed price bidding is to provide
multiple sources of supply for specific goods or services based upon a preset
maximum price which the city will pay for such goods or services.
   (c)   Public notice.  Public notice of the fixed price bidding shall be
given in the same manner as provided in the section on competitive sealed
bidding, public notice section
1-5-112(c).
   (d)   Pricing.  The city shall establish, prior to the issuance of the fixed
price bid, the maximum amount the city will pay for the goods or services
desired.
   (e)   Evaluation.  Vendors' responses to the fixed price will be reviewed to
determine if they are responsive and responsible.
   (f)   Discussion with responsive bidders.  Discussions may be conducted with
apparent responsive bidders to assure understanding of the requirements of the
fixed price bid.  All bidders whose bids, in the city administrator's sole
judgment, need clarification shall be afforded such an opportunity.
   (g)   Award.  Award must be made to all responsive and responsible bidders
to the city's request for competitive fixed price bidding.
   (h)   Bidders received after award.  Bidders not responding to the initial
fixed price bid may be added to the awarded vendors' list provided the bidder
furnishes evidence of responsibility and responsiveness to the city's original
fixed price bid as authorized by the solicitation.
   (i)   Remedies.  The failure of a specific offeror to receive business, once
it has been added to the awarded vendors list, shall not be grounds for a
contract controversy. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-314  Competitive best value bidding.
   (a)   Conditions for use.  When the city administrator determines in writing
that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not
advantageous to the city, a contract may be entered into by competitive best
value bidding subject to the provisions of section
1-5-312, unless otherwise provided for in this section.
   (b)   Best value bidding.  The purpose of best value bidding is to allow
factors other than price to be considered in the determination of award for
specific goods or services based on predetermined criteria identified by the
city.
   (c)   Public notice.  Public notice of the best value bidding shall be given
in the same manner as provided in the section on competitive sealed bidding,
public notice section
1-5-112(c).
   (d)   Bid opening.  At bid opening, the only information that will be
released is the names of the participating bidders.  Cost information will be
provided after the ranking of bidders and the issuance of award.
   (e)   Evaluation factors.  The best value bid shall state the factors to be
used in determination of award and the numerical weighting for each factor. 
Cost must be a factor in determination of award and cannot be weighted at less
than sixty (60) percent.  Best value bid evaluation factors may include, but
are not limited to, any of the following as determined by the purchasing agency
in its sole discretion and not subject to protest:
   (1)   Operational costs that the city would incur if the bid is accepted;
   (2)   Quality of the product or service, or its technical competency;
   (3)   Reliability of delivery and implementation schedules;
   (4)   Maximum facilitation of data exchange and systems integration;
   (5)   Warranties, guarantees, and return policy;
   (6)   Vendor financial stability;
   (7)   Consistency of the proposed solution with the state's planning
documents and announced strategic program direction;
   (8)   Quality and effectiveness of business solution and approach;
   (9)   Industry and program experience;
   (10)   Prior record of vendor performance;
   (11)   Vendor expertise with engagement of similar scope and complexity;
   (12)   Extent and quality of the proposed participation and acceptance by
all user groups;
   (13)   Proven development methodologies and tools; and
   (14)   Innovative use of current technologies and quality results.
   (f)   Discussion with responsive bidders.  Discussions may be conducted with
apparent responsive bidders to assure understanding of the best value bid.  All
bidders whose bids, in the procuring agency's sole judgment, need clarification
shall be accorded such an opportunity.
   (g)   Selection and ranking.  Bids shall be evaluated by using only the
criteria stated in the best value bid and by adhering to the weighting as
assigned.  All evaluation factors, other than cost, will be considered prior to
determining the effect of cost on the score for each participating bidder. 
Once the evaluation is complete, all responsive bidders shall be ranked from
most advantageous to least advantageous to the city, considering only the
evaluation factors stated in the best value bid.
   (h)   Award.  Award must be made to the responsive and responsible bidder
whose bid is determined, in writing, to be most advantageous to the city,
taking into consideration all evaluation factors set forth in the best value
bid.  The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is made and
must be sufficient to satisfy external audit. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-315  Competitive sealed proposals.
   (a)   Conditions for use.  When the city administrator determines in writing
that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not
advantageous to the city, a contract may be entered into by competitive sealed
proposals.
   (b)   Request for proposals.  Proposals shall be solicited through a request
for proposals.
   (c)   Public notice.  Public notice of the request for proposals shall be
given in the same manner as provided in the section on competitive sealed
bidding, public notice.
   (d)   Proposal opening.  Proposals shall be publicly opened and only the
names of the offerors disclosed at the proposal opening.  Contents of competing
offerors' proposals shall not be disclosed during the process of negotiation. 
Proposals shall be open for public inspection after contract award. 
Proprietary or confidential information marked as such in each proposal shall
not be disclosed without written consent of the offeror.
   (e)   Discussion with responsible offerors and revisions to proposals.  As
provided in the request for proposals, discussions may be conducted with
responsible offerors who submit proposals determined to be reasonably
susceptible of being selected for award for the purpose of clarification to
assure full understanding of, and responsiveness to, the solicitation
requirements.  Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect
to any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals, and such revisions
may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of
obtaining best and final offers.  In conducting discussions, there shall be no
disclosure of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing
offerors.
   (f)   Evaluation factors.  The request for proposals shall state the
evaluation factors in relative order of importance.
   (g)   Award.  Award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal
is determined in writing to be most advantageous to the city taking into
consideration the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. 
The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is made. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-316  Negotiations after unsuccessful competitive sealed bidding.
   When bids received pursuant to an invitation for bids under section
1-5-312 are considered unreasonable by the city, or are not independently
reached in open competition, or the low bid exceeds available funds as
certified by the appropriate fiscal officer, and it is determined in writing by
the city administrator, or his or her designee, that time or other
circumstances will not permit the delay required to re-solicit competitive
sealed bids, a contract may be negotiated pursuant to this section, provided
that:
   (1)   Each responsible bidder who submitted a bid under the original
solicitation is notified of the determination and is given reasonable
opportunity to negotiate;
   (2)   The negotiated price is lower than the lowest rejected bid by any
responsible and responsive bidder under the original solicitation;
   (3)   The negotiated price is the lowest negotiated price offered by any
responsible and responsive offeror. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-317  Small purchases.
   Any procurement not exceeding the amount established by regulations or five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00), whichever is smaller, may be made in accordance
with small purchase procedures promulgated by the city administrator; provided,
however, that procurement requirements shall not be artificially divided so as
to constitute a small purchase under this section. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-318  Sole source procurement.
   (a)   A contract may be awarded for a supply, service or construction item
without competitive sealed bids or competitive sealed proposals when the city
administrator determines, in writing:
   (1)   That there is only one (1) source for the required supply, service or
construction item or that one source for the supply, service or construction
item; or
   (2)   That a particular source for the required supply, service or
construction item has a unique ability or knowledge with respect to the supply,
service or construction.
   (b)   The determination made by the city administrator as described herein
shall state with particularity the factual basis for his or her determination,
and such determination must be accompanied by an explanation as to why no other
vendor will be suitable or acceptable to meet the need. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-319  Emergency procurement.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the city administrator
may make or authorize others to make emergency procurements when there exists a
threat to public health, welfare, or safety under emergency conditions, or
where normal daily operations are affected; provided that such emergency
procurements shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the
circumstances. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-320  Exemptions.
   (a)   Upon passage of an ordinance by two-thirds (2/3) of the members of
council, council may exempt specific supplies or services from the purchasing
and competitive procedures required by this part if a determination is made by
council that purchasing such supplies or services under the provisions of this
part would not be in the best interest of the city or such procedures would be
impossible, impracticable or uneconomical.  The city may not exempt purchases
from the procedures of this article if it would hinder competition between
equally qualified service providers or suppliers with the same products.
   (b)   Any item or service exempted pursuant to this section shall still
receive approval by council by simple majority if council approval is required
by any other provision.  This shall include, but not be limited to, council
approval required as a result of the amount of contract and as contemplated in
section
1-5-211(c) of this chapter.
   (c)   The city clerk shall maintain a list of exemptions and any applicable
revocations or modifications thereto and make such list available for public
inspection.
   (d)   Any amendment to subsection (a) of this section shall be approved by
two-thirds (2/3) of the members of council. 
(Ord. of 9/19/05)
Part B.  Cancellation of Solicitation
Sec. 1-5-320.1   Cancellation of invitation for bids, requests for
qualifications or proposals.
   An invitation for bids, a request for proposals, request for qualifications
or any other solicitation may be canceled, or any or all bids or proposals may
be rejected in whole or in part as may be specified in the solicitation, when
it is in the best interest of the city.  The reason therefor shall be made part
of the contract file. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Part C.  Qualifications and Duties
Sec. 1-5-321  Prequalification of suppliers.
   Prospective vendors may be prequalified for particular types of supplies,
services, and construction.  Distribution of any solicitation for a particular
supply, service or construction may be limited to prequalified vendors. 
Tangible, written criteria for prequalification for each type of supply,
service or construction shall be developed and maintained by the procurement
officer, who shall also maintain the lists of prequalified vendors. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-322  Prequalification of construction bidders.
   The city administrator, with the assistance of any project architects and
engineers, shall develop a procedure and a list of criteria for prequalifying
construction bidders.  The criteria shall include, but not be limited to, prior
performance, recent past references on all aspects of performance, financial
stability, and experience on similar construction projects.  When the
prequalification process is employed, only those bidders who are prequalified
through this procedure are entitled to submit a bid for the project.  The
determination of which bidders are prequalified, and thereby entitled to bid,
is not protestable under section
1-5-711 or any other provision of this code. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Part D.  Types of Contracts
Sec. 1-5-331  To be in city's best interest; prohibited types.
   Subject to the limitations of this section, any type of contract which will
promote the best interest of the city may be used; provided that the use of a
cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost contract is prohibited.  A cost-reimbursement
contract may be used only when a determination by the city administrator is
made in writing that such contract is likely to be less costly to the city than
any other type or that it is impracticable to obtain the supplies, services, or
construction required except under such a contract. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-332  Multi-term contracts.
   (a)   Specified period.  A contract for supplies or services may be entered
into for a period of time not to exceed five (5) years, provided the term of
the contract and the conditions of renewal or extension, if any, are included
in the solicitation and funds are available for the first fiscal period at the
time of contracting.  Payment and performance obligations for succeeding fiscal
periods shall be subject to the availability and appropriation of funds
therefor.
   (b)   Determination prior to use.  Prior to the utilization of a multi-term
contract, it shall be determined in writing:
   (1)   That estimated requirements cover the period of the contract and are
reasonably firm and continuing; and
   (2)   That such a contract will serve the best interest of the city by
encouraging effective competition or otherwise promoting economies in city
procurement.
   (c)   Cancellation due to unavailability of funds in succeeding fiscal
periods.  All multi-term contracts shall contain a clause stating that when
funds are not appropriated or otherwise made available to support continuation
of performance in a subsequent fiscal period, the contract shall be canceled. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Part E.  Inspection of Plant and Audit of Records
Sec. 1-5-341  Right to inspect plant.
   The city may, at reasonable times, inspect the part of the plant or place of
business of a contractor or any subcontractor which is related to the
performance of any contract awarded or to be awarded by the city. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-342  Right to audit records.
   (a)   Audit of cost or pricing data.  The city may, at reasonable times and
places, audit the books and records of any person who has submitted cost or
pricing data pursuant to the section on cost or pricing data to the extent that
such books and records relate to such cost or pricing data.  Any person who
receives a contract, change order, or contract modification for which cost or
pricing data is required, shall maintain such books and records that relate to
such cost or pricing data for five (5) years from the date of final payment
under the contract, unless a shorter period is otherwise authorized in writing.
   (b)   Contract audit.  The city shall be entitled to audit the books and
records of a contractor or subcontractor under any negotiated contract or
subcontract other than a firm fixed-price contract to the extent that such
books and records relate to the performance of such contract or subcontract. 
Such books and records shall be maintained by the contractor for a period of
three (3) years from the date of final payment under the prime contract and by
the subcontractor for a period of three (3) years from the date of final
payment under the subcontract, unless a shorter period is otherwise authorized
in writing. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Part F.  Reports and Records
Sec. 1-5-351  Reporting of anti-competitive practices.
   When for any reason collusion or other anti-competitive practices are
suspected by anyone acting pursuant to this title among any bidder or offerors,
a notice of the relevant facts shall be transmitted to the city attorney. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-352  Procurement records.
   (a)   Contract file.  All determinations and other written records
pertaining to the solicitation, award, or performance of a contract shall be
maintained in a contract file by the city administrator.
   (b)   Retention of procurement records.  All procurement records shall be
retained and disposed of in accordance with records retention guidelines and
schedules approved by the city.  If a contract is being funded in whole or in
part by assistance from a federal agency, then all procurement records
pertaining to that contract shall be maintained for three (3) years from the
closeout date of the assistance agreement or the final disposition of any
controversy arising out of the assistance agreement. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Article 4.  Specifications
Sec. 1-5-411  Duties of the city administrator.
   The city administrator may prepare and issue specifications for supplies,
services, and construction required by the city.  The city administrator may
obtain expert advice and assistance from personnel of any department in the
development of specifications and may delegate to a department the authority to
prepare its own specifications or use specifications for supplies, services and
construction utilized by the South Carolina Budget and Control Board Office of
General Services. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-412  Maximum practicable competition.
   All specifications shall be drafted so as to promote overall economy for the
purpose intended and encourage maximum free and open competition in satisfying
the city needs, and shall not be unduly restrictive. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Article 5.  Procurement of Construction, Architect-Engineer Construction
Management and Land Surveying Services
Part A.  Management of Construction Contracting
Sec. 1-5-511   Responsibility for selection of method of construction contract
management.
   The city administrator shall have discretion to select the appropriate
method of construction contracting management for a particular project that is
acceptable under the South Carolina Consolidated Procurement Code.  In
determining which method to use, the city administrator shall consider the
city's requirements, its resources, and the potential contractors'
capabilities. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-512  Contract administration.
   The city administrator shall maintain a contract administration system
designed to ensure that a contractor is performing in accordance with the
solicitation under which the contract was awarded, and the terms and conditions
of the contract.  When it is not feasible or economical to maintain such a
system, the city administrator, or his designee, shall be responsible for
contract administration. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Part B.  Bonds
Sec. 1-5-521  Bid security.
   (a)   Requirement for bid and contract security.  The procurement agent
shall have the authority to require bid bonds, contract performance and payment
bonds, and labor and material bonds in such form and amount as he or she deems
appropriate to protect the best interest of the city.
   (b)   Reduction of bond amounts.  The city administrator is authorized to
reduce the amount of performance and payment bonds to fifty (50) percent of the
contract price for each bond, when it has been determined in writing such
reduction is necessary or warranted or when labor and materials have been
judged to be fifty (50) percent complete by an authorized inspector. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Part C.  Construction Contract Clauses and Fiscal Responsibility
Sec. 1-5-531  Contract clauses and their administration.
   (a)   Contract clauses.  All contracts for supplies, services, and
construction shall include provisions necessary to define the responsibilities
and rights of the parties to the contract.  The city administrator may issue
clauses appropriate for supply, service, or construction contracts, addressing
at least the following subjects:
   (1)   The unilateral right of the city to order in writing changes in the
work within the scope of the contract;
   (2)   The unilateral right of the city to order in writing temporary
stoppage of the work or delaying performance that does not alter the scope of
the contract;
   (3)   Variations occurring between estimated quantities of work in a
contract and actual quantities;
   (4)   Defective pricing;
   (5)   Liquidated damages;
   (6)   Specified excuses for delay or nonperformance;
   (7)   Termination of the contract for default;
   (8)   Termination of the contract in whole or in part for the convenience of
the city;
   (9)   Suspension of work on a construction project ordered by the city; and
   (10)   Site conditions differing from those indicated in the contract, or
ordinarily encountered, except that differing site conditions clauses need not
be included in a contract:
   a.   When the contract is negotiated;
   b.   When the contract provides the site or design; or
   c.   When the parties have otherwise agreed with respect to the risk of
differing site conditions.
   (b)   Price adjustments.
   (1)   Adjustments in price resulting from the use of contract clauses
required in subsection (a) of this section shall be computed in one or more of
the following ways:
   a.   By agreement on a fixed price adjustment before commencement of the
pertinent performance or as soon thereafter as practicable;
   b.   By unit prices specified in the contract or subsequently agreed upon;
   c.   By the cost attributable to the events or situations under such clauses
with adjustment of profit or fee, all as specified in the contract or
subsequently agreed upon;
   d.   In such other manner as the contracting parties may mutually agree; or
   e.   In the absence of agreement by the parties, by unilateral determination
by the city of the reasonable costs allocable, either directly or indirectly,
to the events or situations under such clauses as accounted for in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles, and with adjustment of profit or
fee, as appropriate, and subject to the provisions of Article 7.
   (c)   Standard clauses and their modifications.  The city administrator may
establish standard contract clauses for use in city contracts.  If the city
administrator establishes any standard clauses addressing the subjects set
forth in subsection (a) of this section, such clauses may be varied provided
that any variations are supported by a written determination that states the
circumstances justifying such variations, and provided that notice of any such
material variation be stated in the invitation for bids or request for
proposals. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Part D.  Architect-Engineer and Land Surveying Services
Sec. 1-5-541  Public announcement and selection process.
   (a)   Public announcement.  It is the policy of the city to publicly
announce all requirements for architect-engineer and land surveying services
and to negotiate such contracts on the basis of demonstrated competence and
qualification at fair and reasonable prices.  In the procurement of architect-
engineer and land surveying services, the city administrator shall request
firms to submit a statement of qualifications and performance data.
   (b)   Selection process.  The city administrator shall conduct discussions
with no less than three (3) firms regarding the contract and shall select from
among them no less than three (3) of the firms deemed most qualified to provide
the required services.  The selection shall be made in order of preference,
based on criteria established and published by the city administrator.
   (c)   Negotiation.  The city administrator shall negotiate a contract with
the highest qualified firm for architect-engineer or land surveying services at
a compensation which is considered to be fair and reasonable to the city.  In
making this decision, the city administrator shall take into account the
established value, the scope, the complexity, and the professional nature of
the services to be rendered.  Should the city administrator be unable to
negotiate a satisfactory contract with the firm considered to be most
qualified, negotiations with that firm shall be formally terminated.  The city
administrator shall then undertake negotiations with the second most qualified
firm.  Failing accord with the second most qualified firm, the city
administrator shall then undertake negotiations with the third most qualified
firm.  Should the city administrator be unable to negotiate a contract with any
of the selected firms, the city administrator shall select additional firms in
order of their competence and qualifications, and the city administrator shall
continue negotiations in accordance with this section until an agreement is
reached.  The duties of the city administrator in regards to this section shall
not be delegated. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Article 6.  Supply Management
Part A.  Regulations Required
Sec. 1-5-611  Promulgation of supply management regulations.
   The city administrator may promulgate regulations governing:
   (1)   The management of supplies during their entire life cycle;
   (2)   The sale, lease, or disposal of surplus supplies by public auction,
competitive sealed bidding, or other appropriate method designated by
regulation, and find sale of surplus property;
   (3)   Transfer of excess supplies.
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Article 7.  Legal and Contractual Remedies
Part A.  Pre-litigation Resolution of Controversies
Sec. 1-5-711  Authority to resolve protested solicitations and awards.
   (a)   Right to protest.  Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror, or
contractor who is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of a
contract may protest to the city administrator.  The protest shall be submitted
in writing within fifteen (15) days of the date of issuance of the invitation
for bids, requests for proposals or other solicitation documents, whichever is
applicable, or any amendment thereto, if the amendment is at issue.  Any actual
bidder, offeror, contractor or subcontractor who is aggrieved in connection
with the intended award or award of a contract shall protest to the city
administrator in a manner stated in subsection (2) below within fifteen (15)
days of the date notification of award is posted in accordance with this
ordinance.
   (b)   Authority to resolve protests.  The city administrator shall have
authority, prior to the commencement of an action in court concerning the
controversy, to settle and resolve a protest of an aggrieved bidder, offeror,
or contractor, actual or prospective, concerning the solicitation or award of a
contract.
   (c)   Decision.  If the protest is not resolved by mutual agreement, the
city administrator shall issue a decision in writing within ten (10) days.  The
decision shall:
   (1)   State the reasons for the action taken; and
   (2)   Inform the protestant of its right to administrative review as
provided in this article.
   (d)   Notice of decision.  A copy of the decision under subsection (c) of
this section shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the
protestant and any other party intervening.
   (e)   Finality of decision.  A decision under subsection (c) of this section
shall be final and conclusive, unless fraudulent, or any person adversely
affected by the decision appeals administratively to the city council in
accordance with this article. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-712  Authority to debar or suspend.
   (a)   Authority.  After reasonable notice to the person involved and
reasonable opportunity for that person to be heard, the city administrator,
after consultation with the city attorney, shall have authority to debar a
person for cause from consideration for award of contracts.  The debarment
shall not be for a period of more than three (3) years.  The same officer,
after consultation with the city attorney, shall have authority to suspend a
person from consideration for award of contracts if there is probable cause for
debarment.  The suspension shall not be for a period exceeding three (3)
months.  The authority to debar or suspend shall be exercised in accordance
with regulations.
   (b)   Causes for debarment or suspension.  The causes for debarment or
suspension include the following:
   (1)   Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an incident to
obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract,
or in the performance of such contract or subcontract.
   (2)   Conviction under state or federal statutes of embezzlement, theft,
forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen
property, or any other offense indicating a lack of business integrity or
business honesty which currently, seriously, and directly affects
responsibility as a city contractor.
   (3)   Conviction under state or federal antitrust statutes arising out of
the submission of bids or proposals.
   (4)   Violation of contract provisions, as set forth below, of a character
which is regarded by the city administrator to be so serious as to justify
debarment action:
   a.   Deliberate failure without good cause to perform in accordance with the
specifications or within the time limit provided in the contract; or
   b.   A recent record of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory performance
in accordance with the terms of one or more contracts; provided that failure to
perform or unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond the control of the
contractor shall not be considered to be a basis for debarment.
   (5)   Any other cause the city administrator determines to be so serious and
compelling as to affect responsibility as a city contractor, including
debarment by another government entity for cause.
   (6)   For violation of the ethical standards set forth in South Carolina
State Ethics Act.
   (c)   Decision.  The city administrator shall issue a written decision
within thirty (30) days to debar or suspend.  The decision shall:
   (1)   State the reasons for the action taken; and
   (2)   Inform the debarred or suspended person involved of its rights to
administrative review as provided in this article.
   (d)   Notice of decision.  A copy of the decision under subsection (c) of
this section shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the debarred
or suspended person and any other party intervening.
   (e)   Finality of decision.  A decision under subsection (c) of this section
shall be final and conclusive, unless fraudulent, or the debarred or suspended
person appeals administratively to the city council in accordance with this
article. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-713   Authority to resolve contract and breach of contract
controversies.
   (a)   Applicability.  This section applies to controversies between the city
and a contractor and which arise under, or by virtue of, a contract between
them.  This includes without limitation controversies based upon breach of
contract, mistake, misrepresentation, or other cause for contract modification
or recession.
   (b)   Authority.  The city administrator is authorized, prior to
commencement of an action in a court concerning the controversy, to settle and
resolve a controversy described in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Part B.  Solicitations or Awards in Violation of Law
Sec. 1-5-721  Applicability of this part.
   The provisions of this part apply where it is determined administratively,
or upon administrative review, that a solicitation or award of a contract is in
violation of law. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-722  Remedies prior to an award.
   If prior to award it is determined that a solicitation or proposed award of
a contract is in violation of law, then the solicitation or proposed award
shall be:
   (1)   Cancelled; or
   (2)   Revised to comply with the law.
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-723  Remedies after an award.
   If after an award it is determined that a solicitation or award of a
contract is violation of law, then:
   (1)   If the person awarded the contract has not acted fraudulently or in
bad faith:
   a.   The contract may be ratified and affirmed, provided it is determined
that doing so is in the best interest of the city; or
   b.   The contract may be terminated and the person awarded the contract
shall be compensated for the actual expenses reasonably incurred under the
contract, plus a reasonable profit, prior to the termination;
   (2)   If the person awarded the contract has acted fraudulently or in bad
faith:
   a.   The contract may be declared null and void; or
   b.   The contract may be ratified and affirmed if such action is in the best
interests of the city, without prejudice to the city's right to such damages as
may be appropriate. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Part C.  Procurement Appeals
Sec. 1-5-731  Jurisdiction of procurement appeals.
   Unless an action has been initiated previously in the courts for essentially
the same cause of action, the city council shall have authority to review and
determine:
   (1)   Any protest of a solicitation or award of a contract addressed to the
council by an aggrieved actual or prospective bidder or offeror, or a
contractor; and
   (2)   Any appeal by an aggrieved party from a determination by the city
administrator. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-732  Time limit for filing an appeal.
   For an appeal under this section, the aggrieved person shall file an appeal
with the city council within thirty (30) days of the receipt of decision. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-733  Decision.
   Upon receipt of an appeal from an aggrieved party, the mayor shall convene
the council within ten (10) days to conduct a review of the appeal.  The
council within ten (10) days of hearing such appeal shall affirm, alter, or
deny the decisions rendered by the city administrator.  The council shall
promptly decide whether the:
   (1)   Solicitation or award being appealed was in accordance with
regulations, and the terms and conditions of the solicitation;
   (2)   Debarment or suspension being appealed was in accordance with
regulations, and in the best interest of the city, and was fair;
   (3)   Contract and breach of contract controversy settlement being appealed
was in accordance with regulations, and in the best interest of the city, and
was proper. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-734  Standard of review for factual issues.
   A determination of an issue of fact by the council shall be final and
conclusive unless arbitrary, capricious, fraudulent, or clearly erroneous. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-735  Finality of decision of procurement appeals board.
   (a)   Appeals board not conclusive.  No determination by the city council
concerning an issue of law shall be final or conclusive.
   (b)   Further appeal.  Any person receiving an adverse decision, the city,
or both may appeal from a decision by the city council to a court of competent
jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Article 8.  Intergovernmental Relations
Sec. 1-5-811  Cooperative purchasing authorized.
   The city administrator may either participate in, sponsor, conduct, or
administer a cooperative purchasing agreement for the procurement of supplies,
services, or construction with one or more public procurement units in
accordance with an agreement entered into between the participants.  Such
cooperative purchasing may include, but is not limited to, joint or multiparty
contracts between public procurement units. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-812  Sale, acquisition, or use of supplies.
   The city administrator may sell to, acquire from, or use any supplies
belonging to another public procurement unit independent of the requirements of
this code. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
   The city administrator may enter into an agreement, independent of the
requirements of this code, with any public procurement unit for the cooperative
use of supplies or services under the terms agreed upon between the parties. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-814  Joint use of facilities.
   The city administrator may enter into agreements for the common use or lease
of warehousing facilities, capital equipment, and other facilities with another
public procurement unit under the terms agreed upon between the parties. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Sec. 1-5-815  Use of state contracts.
   The city administrator may, independent of this code, procure supplies,
services, or construction items through the contracts established by the
purchasing division of the state as provided in chapter 35 of title 11, South
Carolina Code of Laws, 1976, or through any comparable regional, county or
other governmental public procurement unit. 
(Ord. of 10/1/02)
Chapter 6 MUNICIPAL COURT
State Law Reference: Municipal courts, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 14-25-5 et seq. 
Historical Note: The provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise indicated,
are derived from an ordinance adopted 12/8/80.
1-6-1   Court established.
   There is hereby established a municipal court for the city, which shall be a
part of the unified judicial system of the State of South Carolina, pursuant to
Act. No. 480 of 1980, for the trial and determination of all cases within its
jurisdiction.
1-6-2   Municipal judge; term; compensation.
   The court shall be presided over by one (1) or more full-time or part-time
judges, at the discretion of council. The municipal judge shall be appointed by
council for a term fixed by council not to exceed four (4) years. The
compensation of the municipal judge shall be as council may determine from time
to time.
1-6-3   Clerk of court.
   The council shall designate a clerk of municipal court who shall keep such
records and make such reports as may be required by the municipal judge or the
state court administrator. Council may designate the municipal clerk or other
municipal employee to serve as clerk of the court.
1-6-4   Jurisdiction.
   The municipal court shall have jurisdiction to try all cases arising under
the ordinances of the city. The court shall also have all such powers, duties
and jurisdiction in criminal cases made under state law and conferred upon
magistrates. The court shall have the power to punish for contempt of court by
imposition of sentences up to the limits imposed on municipal courts. The court
shall have no jurisdiction in civil matters.
1-6-5   Penalty authorized.
   Whenever the municipal judge finds a party guilty of violating a municipal
ordinance or a state law within the jurisdiction of the court, he may impose a
fine or imprisonment, or both, not to exceed $500 or 30 days. In addition to
the fine, all court costs shall be imposed on and paid by the offender. (Ord.
of 10/5/93)
1-6-6   Suspended sentences.
   The municipal judge may suspend sentences imposed by him upon such terms and
conditions as he deems proper including, without limitation, restitution or
public service employment.
1-6-7   Disposition of fines.
   All fines and penalties collected by the municipal court shall be turned
over to the clerk-treasurer for deposit to the general fund of the city.
1-6-8   Appeal.
   Any party shall have the right to appeals from the sentence or judgment of
the municipal court to the Court of General Sessions. Notice of intention to
appeal, setting forth the grounds for appeal, shall be given in writing and
served on the municipal judge or the clerk of the municipal court within 10
days after sentence is passed or judgment rendered, or the appeal shall be
deemed waived. The party appealing shall enter into a bond, payable to the city
to appear and defend such appeal at the next term of the Court of General
Sessions or shall pay the fine assessed.
1-6-9   Right to jury trial.
   Any person to be tried in the municipal court may, prior to trial, demand a
jury trial, and such jury when demanded, shall be composed of six (6) persons
drawn from the qualified electors of the municipality in the manner prescribed
by law. The right to a jury trial shall be deemed to have been waived unless
demand is made prior to trial.
1-6-10   Jury commissioners.
   The city council shall serve as jury commissioners for the municipal court.
Chapter 7 Elections
State Law Reference: Nominations and elections for municipal offices, S.C. Code
1976, Sec. 5-15-10 et seq.
1-7-1   Terms of office.
   (a)   The mayor shall be elected for a term of four (4) years.
   (b)   The members of city council shall be elected for a term of four (4)
years; provided, however, that in the 1993 election implementing the single-
member district method of election, the member of council from District 6 shall
be elected for an initial term of two (2) years in order to provide for
staggered terms as provided for in subsection (c).
   (c)   The terms of office of councilmembers shall be staggered, so that one-
half (½) of the membership shall be elected every two (2) years. (Ord. of 5/4/
93) State Law Reference: Terms of office of mayor and council members, S.C.
Code 1976, Sec. 5-15-40.
1-7-2   Method of election.
   The mayor shall be elected at-large and the council shall consist of eight
(8) members elected from single-member districts established as shown on the
map attached to the ordinance codified in this section bearing the designation
"Plan 1E" attested by the city clerk, and made a part hereof by reference. One
(1) member residing in each district shall be elected by the electors
registered in that district. A member of council must continue to reside in the
district from which elected as a condition of holding office. (Ord. of 6/7/77,
as amended by Ord. of 5/4/93) State Law Reference: Methods of election, S.C.
Code 1976, Sec. 5-15-20.
1-7-3   Regular election date.
   Regular elections for the offices of mayor and council shall be held on the
first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in odd-numbered years.
(Amended by Ord. of 4/7/09)
State Law Reference: Establishing time for elections, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 5-
15-50.
1-7-4   Method of election; nomination; procedure.
   (a)   All regular and special elections for the offices of mayor and council
shall be held using the non-partisan plurality method pursuant to section 5-15-
61 of the 1976 Code of Laws of South Carolina.
   (b)   Candidates must qualify to have their names placed upon the ballot by
filing a statement of candidacy with the municipal election commission and
paying a filing fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the office of
mayor and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the office of council member, at
least sixty (60) days prior to the election in which he or she wishes to be a
candidate. Such statement shall contain the candidate's signature as he or she
wishes his or her name to appear on the ballot, the office for which he or she
is qualifying, his or her residence address and the precinct and number of his
or her registration certificate.
   (c)   No political party affiliation shall be placed on any ballot for any
candidate.
(Amended by Ord. of 6/14/99, as amended by Ord. of 4/3/07)
State Law Reference: Non-partisan plurality method of election, S.C. Code 1976,
Sec. 5-15-61; municipality to enact ordinances relating to nominations, S.C.
Code 1976, Sec. 5-15-70; municipal election commission, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 5-
15-90; electors of the city.
Sec. 1-7-5   Transfer of authority to conduct municipal elections to Lexington
County Registration and Election Commission.
   (A)   By ordinance, the city has transferred all authority for the
conducting of municipal election to the County Election Commission. The
Lexington County Voter Registration and Election Commission (“County Election
Commission”) previously agreed to accept such transfer by operation of
Lexington County Ordinance 06-04. This transfer includes the following duties:
      (1)   The County Election Commission shall advertise municipal elections,
prepare and distribute ballots and election materials, appoint managers of
election for each polling place, and otherwise supervise and conduct all
municipal elections within the city.
      (2)   Immediately upon the closing of the polls at any municipal election
in the city, the County Election Commission shall begin to count and
continuously count the votes cast and make a statement of the whole number of
votes cast in such election together with the number of votes cast for each
candidate for mayor and councilperson, canvass the cote and publicly display
the unofficial results.
      (3)   The County Election Commission shall thereafter certify the results
of the elections and transmit the certified results to the City Council or an
appointed authority representing the city government as soon as practicable
following the certification.
      (4)   The County Election Commission shall accept candidate filings, and
filing fees, including, but not limited to notices of candidacy, candidacy
pledges, hear and decide protests and certify the results of municipal
elections.
      (5)   Utilize an automated election system and computer counting with the
count publicly conducted.
   (B)   The City Election Commission shall continue to exist with its duties
to be prescribed by the City Council as they may arise until further notice.
(Ord. of - -)
Chapter 8 FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE ACT
Historical Note: Unless otherwise indicated, the provisions of this chapter are
derived from an ordinance adopted 4/5/94.
1-8-1   Military leave.
   Employees are entitled to such leave of absence and reinstatement upon
return from leave of absence for military service (including Reserve and
National Guard duty) as may be provided by applicable state and federal law.
The provisions of such laws change from time to time and for that reason no
effort is made to set forth the law in this policy.
1-8-2   Physical disability and personal leave (applies only to employees
employed less than 12 months and to employees who have worked fewer than 1250
in preceding 12 months).
   (a)   An employee who has completed his initial probation (and any extension
thereof) is entitled to a leave of absence for up to six (6) months when unable
to work because of sickness, pregnancy or injury on or off the job. Such an
employee may also apply for leave of absence for personal reasons. Personal
leaves are granted only in the discretion of the city administrator upon
recommendation by the employee's department head. Employees still in their
probation periods who are absent for more than five (5) consecutive scheduled
workdays because of any physical disability will be automatically terminated,
but will be eligible for rehire.
   (b)   Employees are requested to apply for leaves of absence as far in
advance of need as is possible, but an employee may be placed on leave status
without application when the circumstances warrant such action.
   (c)   Physical disability leaves will begin on the first day of absence.
   (d)   After the employee has exhausted his vacation and/or sick leave, as a
general rule, an employee on leave of absence is not entitled to wages or
fringe benefits and does not accrue fringe benefits. Certain exceptions may be
established by law.
   (e)   Employees desiring to return to work from an unpaid leave of absence
should notify the city administrator in writing at least ten (10) days prior to
their desired date of return. If the City of West Columbia finds that the
employee is fit to resume his duties, the employee shall be recalled to his
former job if a vacancy exists which is to be filled. If no such vacancy
exists, the employee shall be recalled to any job in which there is a vacancy
which is to be filled and for which he is qualified. If no such vacancy exists
at the time the employee desires to return to work, the employee's leave of
absence shall be continued. Any employee who has not been reinstated within six
(6) months following the commencement of a leave of absence shall be
terminated. This action shall not affect the employee's eligibility to be
considered for hire as a new employee at some future time.
1-8-3   Family and medical leave act (applies only to employees employed 12
months or longer and who have worked 1250 hours or more in the preceding 12
months, both prior to commencement of leave).
   (a)   General. Employees who meet the length of service and hours worked
requirement described above have rights under the Family and Medical Leave Act.
As a general rule, employees must request leaves of absence under this law and
policy, but in appropriate situations, employees may be placed on leave status
without application.
   (b)   Reason for Leave of Absence. An eligible employee will be granted a
leave of absence under this law and policy if a serious health condition
prevents the employee from being able to perform his job, or the employee's
spouse, child or parent has a serious health condition and the employee must be
absent from work in order to care for that relative, or to care for a natural
child, adopted child or formally placed foster child, provided that entitlement
to leave to care for a child who is newly born or newly received in the
employee's household shall end 12 months after a natural child is born or 12
months after an adopted or foster child is received in the employee's
household. Proof of need for leave of absence may be required.
   (c)   Length of Leave. An eligible employee is entitled to the equivalent of
a total of 12 work weeks of leave during any 12 consecutive months. Leave to
care for a newly born or newly received child must be taken consecutively.
Leave re-quired because of the employee's own serious health condition or that
of a spouse, child or parent, may be taken intermittently or by means of a
modified work schedule when necessary.
   (d)   Effect of Leave on Paid Time Off. An employee who must be absent due
to his own disability will be paid for time lost from work first from accrued
sick leave balances and then from accrued annual leave balances and similar
balances. An employee who takes leave for any other reason will be paid for
time lost from work from his annual leave balance and similar balances.
   (e)   Effect of Leave on Accrual of Fringe Benefits.
   (1)   Health benefit plan. Employees taking leave under this policy must
continue to pay their portion of health benefit plan premiums on the same date
that such portion of premiums would be deducted from the employee's wages.
   (2)   Unpaid time lost from work due to leave granted under this policy is
not considered time worked for the purpose of accrual of paid time off.
   (f)   Employee Responsibility. Employees who request leave under this policy
must give 30 days advance notice or such lesser amount of notice as is possible
in the particular circumstances.
   (g)   Termination of Leave of Absence. A leave of absence under this policy
will end when the need for the leave of absence ends, or when the maximum leave
described above has been taken, whichever occurs sooner.
   (h)   Reinstatement. At the conclusion of the leave of absence, the employee
is entitled to reinstatement to his former position or to a position equivalent
to his former position. The employee must demonstrate that he is fit for duty
and must give reasonable notice of intent to return to work.
   (i)   Extension of Leave Without Benefits. An employee who has been
completely unable to perform the duties of his position due to his own
disability and who has exhausted his entitlement to leave under the Family and
Medical Leave Act by taking 12 consecutive weeks of leave will, upon written
application, be granted an additional 14 weeks of leave. This additional leave
of absence does not entitle the employee to reinstatement nor to payment of any
portion of his health benefit plan premiums. If the employee is able to return
to work prior to the exhaustion of his extended leave, he will be returned to
his previous position if there is a vacancy in it which is to be filled, or to
some other position of equal or lesser compensation for which he is qualified
and in which there exists a vacancy which is to be filled. If the employee is
not returned to active employment, he will be continued on extended leave of
absence status until he is returned to active duty status or his extended leave
of absence expires, whichever occurs sooner.
   (j)   Automatic Termination of Employment. An employee's employment will
automatically terminate if he does not return to full active employment status
at the conclusion of his leave of absence or extended leave of absence.
   (k)   Special Situations.
   (1)   Spouses. When both a husband and a wife are employed, their combined
right to a leave of absence to care for a child or parent is 12 weeks in a 12-
month period.
   (2)   Key employees (salaried employee in highest paid 10% of all
employees). Such employees may be denied reinstatement rights if reinstatement
would cause substantial and grievous economic injury to operations.
1-8-4   Policy not a contract.
   (a)   This policy does not create contract rights.
   (b)   In no case will an employee have a greater right to a job than he
would have had if he had not taken leave under this policy.
TITLE 2 PUBLIC SAFETY
Chapter 1 LAW ENFORCEMENT
State Law Reference: Municipal police officers, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 5-7-110.
Cross Reference: Crime watch areas, Sec.
9-1-1.
2-1-1   Composition of department; appointment.
   The police department of the city shall consist of a chief, appointed by
council, and such other officers as the chief shall deem necessary for the
safety and good order of the city. (Ord. of 3/7/00)
2-1-2   Duties of chief.
   The chief shall carry out such instructions as may be given him by the city
council, enforce the ordinances of the city, and serve any papers, warrants or
other process as directed by the city council or municipal judge.
2-1-3   Special police officers; appointment.
   The chief of police or mayor, upon any emergency or apprehension of riot, or
tumult, or mob, and during any of the public celebrations, may appoint as many
special police officers as he may deem necessary.
2-1-4   Record of items taken from prisoners.
   It shall be the duty of the chief of police to take an account of every
article, including money, that may be taken from any person committed to the
city jail. (Code 1965, Sec. 15-4)
2-1-5   False alarms - unlawful.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to give or aid or abet in the giving of
a false fire alarm by any means whatsoever.
   (1)   Definitions.
   Falsealarm. The activation of a fire alarm system through mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation, improper maintenance, or the
negligence of the owner or lessee of the fire alarm system or of his or her
employees or agents. This does not include alarms caused by unauthorized
tampering with a fire alarm system by anyone other than the fire alarm user or
his or her agent.
   Firealarmsystem.  Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical,
installed by a fire alarm business, arranged to signal the occurrence of a
fire, smoke, water flow or other condition to which the fire department may be
expected to respond.
   Firealarmuser.  A person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind that is in control of any building
structure, or facility where a fire alarm system is present.
   Year. A twelve (12)-month period beginning with the first day of January and
ending on the last day of December of each year.
   (2)   User fee, penalty. 
   a.   When four (4) false alarms have occurred at one (1) location within a
year, a user fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for service for false alarm
response shall be billed to the property owner. Each additional false alarm
within the same year shall require the billing of an additional one hundred
dollar ($100.00) user fee.
   b.   The fee established by this section affords only partial recovery of
the expenses incurred in responding to the false alarm. If payment of the fee,
in full, has not been received within thirty (30) days of billing, the fee
shall increase to three hundred dollars ($300.00).
   (3)   Evidence of repair in lieu of user fee.
   a.   An alarm user may submit evidence that a malfunctioning system has been
repaired in lieu of paying the user fee, provided, that the evidence is
submitted within ten (10) days of the date of notification of the user fee.
Evidence, such as a receipt from a licensed alarm business with a statement of
repairs made to the system, is acceptable.
   b.   For a repeated problem with a system after a repair is alleged to have
been made, the city administrator or his or her designee may decide to accept
an alternative to paying the fee.  (Amended by Ord. of 3/15/10)
Chapter 2 FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
State Law Reference: Interference with fire alarm boxes; false alarms, S.C.
Code 1976, Sec. 16-17-570; driving over fire hoses prohibited, S.C. Code 1976,
Sec. 56-5-3850; parking or standing near fire hydrants, stations, S.C. Code
1976, Sec. 56-5-2530(2); following distance for fire apparatus, S.C. Code 1976,
Sec. 56-5-1960.
Article A
Fire Department
State Law Reference: Authority to establish and equip fire department, S.C.
Code 1976, Sec. 5-25-20; chief, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 5-25-110.
2-2-1   Composition; appointment.
   The fire department of the city shall consist of a fire chief, appointed by
council, and such other fire personnel as the chief shall deem necessary for
the safety and good order of the city. (Ord. of 4/4/00)
2-2-2   through 2-2-10 reserved.
Article B
Fire Prevention and Protection
2-2-11   Code adopted.
   There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or
explosion, that certain code known as the Standard Fire Prevention Code, 1988
edition, as amended and published by the Southern Building Code Congress
International Inc. and the whole thereof, except such portions as are
hereinafter amended, deleted, or modified, of which copy one (1) has been filed
in the office of the city clerk, and the code is hereby adopted and
incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions
thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city.
2-2-12   Additions, insertions, deletions and changes.
   (a)   Sections 2.01, 2.02 and 2.03 of the Standard Fire Prevention Code are
deleted.
   (b)   In interpretation of the fire prevention code, the following
definitions shall apply:
   (1)   "Applicable governing body" shall mean the city council.
   (2)   "Municipality" shall mean the City of West Columbia, South Carolina.
2-2-13   Enforcement of code.
   The code hereby adopted shall be enforced by the chief of the fire
department.
2-2-14   Modifications in code.
   The chief of the fire department shall have power to modify any of the
provisions of the code hereby adopted upon application in writing by the owner
or lessee, or his fully authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties
in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the
spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial
justice done. The particulars of the modification when granted or allowed and
the decision of the chief of the fire department thereon shall be entered upon
the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished to the
applicant.
2-2-15   Appeals from decisions under code.
   Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or
refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions
of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have
been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the
decision of the chief of the fire department to the council within 30 days from
the date of the decision appealed.
2-2-16   Violation of fire prevention code.
   (a)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby
adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply
with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed
statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been
taken, or who shall fail to comply with an order as affirmed or modified by the
council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein,
shall severally for each and every violation and noncompliance respectively, be
guilty of a misdemeanor. The imposition of a penalty for any violation shall
not excuse the violation or permit it to continue and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy any violations or defects within a reasonable
time; and when not otherwise specified, each 10 days that prohibited conditions
are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
   (b)   The application of a penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced
removal of prohibited conditions.
2-2-17   Burning of trash prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any trash or refuse in the city.
Chapter 3 EMERGENCY PROCEDURES
Historical Note: Unless otherwise indicated, the provisions of this chapter are
derived from an ordinance adopted 2/4/69.
2-3-l State of emergency defined.
   A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times of
great public crisis, disaster, rioting, civil disturbance, catastrophe or for
any other reason, municipal public safety authorities are unable to maintain
public order or afford adequate protection for lives, safety, health, welfare
or property.
2-3-2   Curfew authorized.
   In the event of a state of emergency threatening or endangering the lives,
safety, health and welfare of the people within the city or threatening damage
to or destruction of property, the mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to
issue a public proclamation declaring to all persons the existence of such a
state of emergency, and, in order to more effectively protect the lives, safety
and property of people within the city, to define and impose a curfew
applicable to all persons within the jurisdiction of the city.
2-3-3   Terms of curfew.
   The mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to limit the application of
such a curfew to any area specifically designated and described within the
jurisdiction of the city and to specific hours of the day or night; and to
exempt from the curfew police officers, firefighters, doctors, nurses, and such
other classes of persons as may be essential to the preservation of public
order and immediately necessary to serve the safety, health and welfare needs
of the people within the city.
2-3-4   City council.
   City council shall be called into session within 24 hours after a state of
emergency has been proclaimed by the mayor.
2-3-5   Duration of state of emergency.
   The mayor shall proclaim the end of such state of emergency and curfew as
soon as circumstances warrant or when directed to do so by city council.
2-3-6   Prohibited activities.
   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency when a curfew has
been defined and imposed, it shall be unlawful for anyone subject to curfew to:
   (1)   Be or travel upon any public street, alley or roadway or upon public
property unless such travel is necessary to obtain medical assistance;
   (2)   Possess off one's own premises, buy, sell, give away or otherwise
transfer or dispose of any explosives, firearms, ammunition or dangerous weapon
of any kind;
   (3)   Sell beer, wines or intoxicating beverages of any kind; or possess or
consume the same off one's own premises; or
   (4)   Sell gasoline or any other similar petroleum products or any other
combustible or inflammable substances, except as expressly authorized by the
provisions of the curfew imposed.
2-3-7   Penalty.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
Chapter 4 FIREWORKS
Sec. 2-4-1  Discharge of Fireworks.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, fire, shoot, or discharge any
fireworks within the corporate limits of the city, except as provided by Sec.
2-4-2 . For the purposes of this section, "fireworks" shall mean fireworks as
defined by state statutory law including S.C. Code Sec. 23-35-175 and ICC Class
C common fireworks as described therein.
(Ord. of 6/15/15)
Sec. 2-4-2  Exceptions.
   (1)   All city sponsored events are exempt from the provisions of this
section including pyrotechnic companies hired by the city for enjoyment
purposes. All pyrotechnic companies shall comply with any and all Federal,
state and municipal regulations as far as licensing, insurance and permits.
   (2)   The discharging or shooting of fireworks on the Fourth of July between
the hours of 9:00 am and 11:00 pm.
   (3)   The discharging or shooting of fireworks between the hours of 9:00 am
on December 31 and 1:30 am on January 1.
   (4)   The discharging or shooting of fireworks in conjunction with a special
event to the extent allowed under the terms of the permit issued by the Fire
Chief and approved by City Council.
   (5)   The provisions of this chapter shall not include nor prevent the
possession or use of toy cap pistols and toy pistol paper caps which contain
not more than twenty hundredths (0.20) of a grain of explosive mixture and
fireworks known as sparklers. The use and possession of such toy cap pistols,
toy pistol paper caps and sparklers shall be permitted at all times.
(Ord. of 6/15/15)
Sec. 2-4-3  Use of signal fireworks.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the use
of signals necessary for the safe operation of buses, trucks or boats within
the city.
(Ord. of 6/15/15)
Sec. 2-4-4  Jurisdiction, enforcement and penalties.
   (1)   A person who uses, fires, shoots, or discharge any fireworks within
the corporate limits of the city or fails to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction for each occurrence of
noncompliance.
   (2)   An infraction is punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars
($100.00). Each occurrence of a violation of this chapter shall be considered a
separate and distinct infraction. A violation of this chapter is further
declared to be a public nuisance.
(Ord. of 6/15/15)
TITLE 3 PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter 1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Article A
General Provisions
3-1-1   Control over maintenance and construction.
   The city administrator shall superintend the maintenance of streets and
shall employ the number of persons to work on the streets as needed.
3-1-2   Approval of names of new streets.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to lay out any new street within the
city without first procuring approval of the name to be assigned to the new
street. State Law Reference: Planning commission must approve new streets, S.C.
Code 1976, Sec. 6-7-570; planning commission must approve new street names in
subdivisions, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 6-7-1110.
3-1-3   Street and roadway acceptance.
   No street or roadway shall be accepted from a developer until it has been
paved or surface-treated in a manner acceptable to the city.
Sec. 3-1-4 Requirements for lots draining toward sidewalk.
   Every person owning any lot, which drains toward a sidewalk, shall provide
suitable and proper drainage under the sidewalk such as will deliver the gutter
and drainage water from the lot to the drainage system of the adjoining
streets.
Sec. 3-1-5 Permit required to change streets, sidewalks, trees.
   No change in the streets, sidewalks, shade or ornamental trees of the city
shall be made by any person without a permit for that purpose from the council.
(Code 1965, Sec. 16-4)
Sec. 3-1-6 Numbering of properties.
   (a)   When each dwelling or building has been assigned its respective
number, the owner, occupant or agent shall be required to display the assigned
number or numbers in accordance with the following provisions. The cost of the
numbers will be paid for by the property owner.
   (b)   Numbers shall not be less than three (3) inches in height, and shall
be made of a durable and clearly visible material which is in a contrasting
color to the building.
   (c)   The numbers will be conspicuously placed immediately above, on or at
the side of the proper door of each building so that the number can be seen
plainly from the street line. Whenever the building is more than seventy-five
(75) feet from the street line, or when the numbers at the door are not clearly
visible from the street line, the number must be placed near the walk,
driveway, or common entrance to the building, and upon a mailbox, gatepost,
fence, or other appropriate place so as to be easily read from the street line.
(Ord. of 1/3/06)
Sec. 3-1-7 Assignment of addresses to new principal buildings.
   Whenever any principal dwelling or building is erected or located in the
city, it will be the duty of the owner to obtain the correct address, as
designated by the city zoning administrator for the property, and to
immediately attach the number to the buildings, as provided by this article. No
building permit will be issued for any dwelling or building until the owner has
obtained the official address from the city zoning administrator. (Ord. of 1/3/
06)
Sec. 3-1-8 Posting of addresses on existing principal buildings.
   All owners of existing principal dwellings or buildings shall post the
assigned address numbers in the manner outlined in section
3-1-6 of this chapter within six (6) months from the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. of 1/3/06)
Sec. 3-1-9 Posting of addresses at existing collective developments.
   All existing mobilehome parks, apartment developments, office parks, and
condominium developments shall post the assigned address numbers in the manner
outlined in section
3-1-6 of this chapter within six (6) months from the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. of 1/3/06)
Sec. 3-1-10 Penalty.
   Any person or entity who violates any of the provisions of sections
3-1-6,
3-1-7 through
3-1-9 shall be punished in accordance with section
1-3-49 of this code. (Ord. of 1/3/06)
Secs. 3-1-11 through 3-1-20 reserved.
Article B
Excavation and Obstruction
3-1-21   Excavation permit required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, mutilate or make an
excavation in any paved or unpaved street or sidewalk for any purpose without
first obtaining a permit from the city.
3-1-22   Backfilling and resurfacing.
   It shall be the duty of the person making any excavation hereunder to fill
the excavation and restore the surface to a condition at least equal to the
surface prior to the excavation. If so required by the council, the person
making an excavation shall furnish a bond, deposit or other security sufficient
to assure compliance with this section; provided, however, that the city may
elect to fill and resurface the excavation and charge the cost thereof against
the person making the excavation.
3-1-23   Danger signals required at excavations.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any trench, ditch or excavation
in any street, sidewalk or public place to remain open between sunset and
sunrise, unless the trench, ditch or excavation has a sufficient number of
lights properly displayed around it as danger signals to prevent accidents to
persons or property.
3-1-24   Removing danger signals at excavations.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or extinguish any light which
may be placed as a signal at night to warn persons of danger from ditches,
trenches, building materials, scaffolds, excavations, impediments or obstacles
of any description whatsoever.
3-1-25   Obstructions.
   (a)   Prohibited without permit. It shall be unlawful to place or maintain
any obstruction on any street or sidewalk that tends to impede the passage of
vehicles or pedestrians, without first having obtained a permit from the city.
   (b)   Issuance of permit; regulations. The city shall issue permits for
temporary obstructions of streets or sidewalks upon finding that such
obstruction will not greatly inconvenience or endanger the public. The permit
may be conditioned upon compliance with reasonable regulation, such as but not
limited to:
   (1)   Nature of the obstruction;
   (2)   Size and extent of the obstruction;
   (3)   Required safety precautions, such as lights, warning signs,
barricades, etc.
   (c)   Liabilities not affected. Nothing contained herein, or the issuance of
a permit hereunder, shall be construed as enlarging or affecting the liability
of the city in any way. (Code 1965, Sec. 16-8)
3-1-26   through 3-1-30 reserved.
Article C
Unlawful Acts
3-1-31   Damaging city property.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to mutilate, deface or injure any public
property within the corporate limits, any trees, buildings or other property,
or to obstruct any street, alleyway, avenue, bridge, ditch or public road
within the corporate limits.
3-1-32   Vehicles leaking or scattering load prohibited.
   The owner or operator of every vehicle employed in removing or carrying any
dirt, sawdust, sand, coal or materials liable to be blown by the wind, or any
manure, filth or offensive matter of any kind or description, along or over any
of the streets, shall have and keep the vehicle in such a tight and secure
condition that the matter shall not be scattered or suffered to fall on any of
the streets.
3-1-33   Vehicles prohibited on sidewalk.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, propel or park any automobile,
motorcycle or other vehicle upon any sidewalk, except as may be necessary in
entering or leaving the premises or buildings.
3-1-34   Breaking, removing street lights.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to break any lamp or electric light or
to remove any electric light bulb or otherwise to tamper with the street
lights.
3-1-35   Breaking, destroying, curbing prohibited; permit required for entrance
to property.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to break, deface or destroy the curbing
of any street, or to construct any entrance into property on any of the paved
streets, unless the person shall have first obtained a permit in writing from
the city administrator.
TITLE 4 PUBLIC UTILITIES
Chapter 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
State Law Reference: Electricity, water, natural gas and sewer systems, S.C.
Code 1976, Sec. 5-31-10 et seq.
4-1-1   Sewer and water bills consolidated.
   Charges for water and sewerage service furnished shall be billed on the same
bill. (Code 1965, Sec. 20-1)
4-1-2   Delinquency penalty.
   If water and sewer bills are not paid within 30 days of the billing date, a
penalty as fixed from time to time by the council will be added.
4-1-3   Discontinuing service for delinquency.
   If water and sewer bills are not paid in full, including penalties, within
35 days from the billing date, service will be discontinued; provided, however,
that a delinquent notice will be given by the city prior to discontinuance.
4-1-4   Resuming discontinued service.
   Sewer and water service which has been discontinued for nonpayment of
charges may be resumed upon payment of all sums owed the city and upon the
payment of a reconnection fee as fixed from time to time by council. (Code
1965, Sec. 20-4)
4-1-5   Water and sewer fees and charges constitute lien.
   Any and all water and/or sewer charges by the city shall be, and constitute,
a lien upon the property served by such utility and in the event such charges
are not paid when due the city may proceed to enforce the lien for such charges
in the same manner as provided for the enforcement of liens for taxes. (Ord. of
4/1/86)
Chapter 2 WATER SYSTEM
Article A
General Provisions
4-2-1   Application for service.
   Any person desiring water service from the city shall make application
therefor to the city clerk-treasurer. (Code 1965, Sec. 20-15)
4-2-2   Deposit required.
   Any person seeking water service from the city shall make a deposit as fixed
from time to time by council.
4-2-3   Use of deposit.
   The deposit required for water service shall be retained by the city until
such time as service to the premises is discontinued, at which time any water
or sewer charges then due from the customer will be deducted from the balance
of the deposit refunded. In the event such charges due exceed the amount of the
deposit, the customer will be billed for the difference. (Code 1965, Sec. 20-
17)
4-2-4   Connecting two buildings to one meter.
   Each separate building or premises shall be separately and independently
tapped to its own water meter; provided that where one building or premises is
located on the same lot as and to the rear of another, both may be tapped to
the same meter. In the latter case, the minimum water bill shall be twice the
usual minimum. (Code 1965, Sec. 20-18)
4-2-5   Unlawfully turning water on; tampering with meters.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to turn the water on to any premises or
tamper with or disturb any water meter or meter box except with authority from
the city. (Code 1965, Sec. 20-19)
State Law Reference: Unauthorized use of municipal water system, S.C. Code
1976, Sec. 5-31-1110 et seq.
4-2-6   Charge when meter cut back on by customer.
   An additional charge as fixed from time to time by council shall be levied
against water customers who cut their meters back on when they have been cut
off for non-payment of a bill.
4-2-7   Contractors using water from hydrants.
   All contractors using water from city hydrants must get a permit therefor
from the city and must pay for all water used. (Code 1965, Sec. 20-21)
4-2-8   Selling city water.
   Provided that wholesale customers including investor-owned or publically-
owned utilities may purchase water for resale to retail customers but ay not
resell that water to other sale-for-resale customers to actual or to potential
customers of the city without the express written permission of the city. (Code
1965, Sec. 20-22 as amended by Ord. of 12/19/16)
4-2-9   Water tapping charges.
   Water tapping charges shall be as prescribed from time to time by the
council. (Code 1965, Sec. 20-23)
4-2-10   Meter required.
   No water shall be furnished to any person other than through a water meter,
except by approval of council.
4-2-11   Water rates.
   Water rates shall be as established from time to time by the council. (Code
19 65, Sec. 20-25)
4-2-12   Charge when meter stopped or defective.
   Whenever any meter is stopped, or inaccurately measures the quantity of
water, the customer shall be charged an amount equal to the average monthly
consumption for the most recent three (3) billing periods in which the meter
was in proper working order.
4-2-13   Development fees availability charges.
   Owners of properties within the city, which properties do not presently
receive water or sewer services from the city, and which properties are
improved with dwellings, commercial buildings or other structures that would
ordinarily require water or sewer service, will be charged availability fees if
their properties either are contiguous to tappable water or sewer pipes or can
be connected to such water or sewer pipes using existing easements or public
rights-of-way which are available for that purpose. The availability charge for
water and sewer service shall equal the minimum monthly charge for water and
sewer service as established by the city from time to time for the number of
residential, commercial or other units in question.
(Ord. of 7/5/88, as amended by Ord. of 11/1/11)
4-2-14   Extending in-city water rates to designated out-of-city customers.
   By resolution duly adopted by City Council, the city may extend in-city
water and sewer rates to designated out-of-city customers for an initial period
not to exceed twenty-four (24) months when the city determines that doings so
will encourage the annexation of specific areas into the city section. The
extension shall take place under the following terms:
   (a)   The resolution shall specify the specific accounts subject to the in-
city rates and shall designate the billing cycle at the beginning of which the
new rates will take effect.
   (b)   City Council may revoke the extension of in-city rates at any time by
adopting a resolution to that effect.
   (c)   The extension will expire automatically upon failure of an initiative
to annex the area into the city or a decision by residents in the area to annex
into another municipality.
   (d)   The revocation, termination or expiration of the extension of in-city
rates will take effect at the beginning of the next billing cycle following the
triggering event.
   (e)   By resolution, City Council may reauthorize a revoked, terminated or
expired extension of in-city rates at any time if it determines a valid  public
purpose would be served.
(Ord. by 5/5/15)
Sec. 4-2-15   Backflow prevention valve installation charge.
   (A)   Is required by the cross-connection control/backflow prevention
program, as mandated by South Carolina Code of Regulations 61-58.7(F) (the
“Program”).
   (B)   When the city determines that a backflow prevention valve is required
at a service location but has not been installed, or where an installed valve
is not longer functioning, the city shall notify the customer of the
opportunity to contract with a private backflow installer/tester to install and
inspect, or repair the required valve and certify to the city that the required
backflow prevention valve has been installed or repaired and is functioning
properly. Customers who fail to do so are subject to termination of water
service. 
   (C)   For purposes of such notification, written or electronic notice given
to the last known billing address contained in the city’s customer records
shall be deemed to be sufficient notice and shall be deemed to have been given
as of the date of mailing or transmission.
   (D)   should a customer fail to submit documentation from a licensed
backflow installer/tester establishing that the required backflow prevention
valve has been installed or is functioning within the timeframe set forth in
the city cross-connection policy, the city may have a functioning valve
installed and charge the customer for the installation. The city will do so in
its discretion when it determines it is not unduly burdensome to do so. The
customer shall be liable for the backflow prevention valve installation fee
regardless of any attempts by the customer to comply after the timeframe has
expired.
   (E)   To ensure that the costs of the installation are not recovered from
other customers through the rates that they pay for their water service, the
city will charge a backflow prevention valve installation to customers for whom
it must install backflow prevention valves to avoid disconnection. That fee
will be set by the city as needed to recover the cost of installation by a
private contractor or city personnel and will include notice and inspection
costs, and a portion of the city’s overhead in administering the program.
   (F)   The backflow prevention valve installation fee is hereby established
in the city cross-connection control policy set forth in Appendix 3 and shall
be changed from time to time without notice as needed by the city.
   (G)   The city may contract with an independent backflow installer to
install or repair a required valve on behalf of a customer or may install the
backflow valves using city personnel when trained personnel are available.
   (H)   The backflow prevention valve installation fee shall be imposed as
part of the customer’s water bill and will be billed and collected as a charge
for water service. Late penalties and interest shall be assessed on unpaid fees
under terms and conditions that apply to water service generally. Failure to
pay the entire water bill, including the check valve installation fee and
associated interest and penalties, shall be grounds for termination of service.
(Ord. of 5-2-17)
Sec. 4-2-16    Backflow prevention valve inspection and testing fee.
   (A)   Water customers who have installed backflow prevention valves on their
systems are required annually to submit documentation certifying the
satisfactory inspection and testing of such valves by a licensed backflow
tester. Customers who fail to do so are subject to non-compliance enforcement
per the city cross-connection policy.
   (B)   Should a customer fail to submit a satisfactory inspection and testing
report within the timeframe set forth in the city cross-connection policy, the
city may conduct or cause to be conducted the required inspection and
certification.
   (C)   The city shall be under no obligation to undertake to provide
inspection or testing on the customer’s behalf but may do so in its discretion
and where it determines it is not unduly burdensome to do.
   (D)   For purposes of notification to customers of the need to comply with
testing and inspection requirements related to backflow prevention valves,
written or electronic notice given to the last known billing address contained
in the city’s customer records shall be deemed to be sufficient notice and
shall be deemed to have been given as of the date of mailing or transmission.
   (E)   If a proper certification of inspection and testing of backflow
prevention valves is not received within the timeframe set forth in the city
cross-connection control policy, the city may then proceed to obtain the
required inspection and testing without further notice to the customer. The
customer shall be liable for the backflow prevention valve inspection and
testing fee regardless of any attempts by the customer to comply after the
timeframe has expired.
   (F)   To ensure that the costs of inspections and tests are not recovered
from other customers of the city’s waster system through the rates that they
pay for their water service, the city will charge a backflow prevention valve
inspection and testing fee for each valve inspected and tested. The charge will
be sufficient to recover the cost to the city of obtaining the testing and
inspection through a private contractor and will include a portion of the
city’s overhead in administering the program. The city may contract with
independent parties to perform the inspections, although the city reserves the
right to conduct the inspection itself when qualified personnel are available.
   (G)   The backflow prevention valve inspection and testing fee is hereby set
forth in Appendix 3 in the city cross-connection control policy and shall be
changed from time to time without notice as required by the city.
   (H)   The backflow prevention valve inspection and testing fee shall be
imposed as part of the customer’s water bill and will be billed and collected
as a charge for water service. Late penalties and interest shall be assessed on
uncollected backflow prevention valve inspection and testing fees under terms
and conditions that apply to water service generally. Failure to pay the entire
water bill, including the backflow prevention valve inspection and testing fee
and associated interest and penalties, shall be grounds for termination of
service.
(Ord. of 5/2/17)
4-2-17   through 4-2-20 reserved.
Article B
Drought Management Plan and Response Ordinance
State Law Reference:  Drought Response Act of 2000 (Code of Laws of South
Carolina, 1976, Section 49-23-10, et seq., as amended)
4-2-21   Purpose and intent.
   The City of West Columbia (city) understands the fundamental need to make
efficient use of the limited and valuable water resource under its stewardship
in order to protect the public's health and environmental integrity. The
purpose of this document is to establish a plan and procedures for managing
water demand and evaluating supply options before and during a drought-related
water shortage. The intent is to satisfy the requirements of the Drought
Response Act of 2000 (Code of Laws of South Carolina, 1976, Section 49-23-10,
et seq., as amended) with the goal of achieving the greatest public benefit
from domestic water use, sanitation, fire protection and to provide water for
other purposes in an equitable manner. Therefore, the city has adopted this
Drought Management Plan and Drought Response ordinance that provide the
policies and the authority to fulfill this obligation. The Drought Management
Plan outlines the framework by which the city will internally prepare for water
shortages. The ordinance provides the regulations by which the city will manage
and control its customer water usage during various levels of a drought. (Ord.
of 9/2/03)
4-2-22   Definitions of terms.
   For the purposes of this article the following definitions will apply:
   (1)   Aesthetic water use. Water use for ornamental or decorative purposes
such as fountains, reflecting pools and waterfalls.
   (2)   City. The City of West Columbia.
   (3)   Commercial and industrial use. Water uses integral to the production
of goods and/or services by any establishment having profit as its primary aim.
   (4)   Conservation. Reduction in water use to prevent depletion or waste of
the resource.
   (5)   Customer. Any person, company or organization using finished water
owned or supplied by the city.
   (6)   Domestic water use. Water use for personal needs or for household
purposes such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation, or for
cleaning a residence, business, industry or institution.
   (7)   Drought alert phases. There are four drought alert phases to be
determined by the Drought Response Committee for the State of South Carolina.
The four (4) phases are:
      (a)   Incipient drought;
      (b)   Moderate drought;
      (c)   Severe drought;
      (d)   Extreme drought;
   (8)   Drought response management areas. There are four drought management
areas corresponding to the major river basins in South Carolina. The four (4)
areas are:
      (a)   West or Savannah;
      (b)   Central or Santee;
      (c)   Northeast or Pee Dee;
      (d)   Southern or Ashepoo, Combahee and Edisto; In order to prevent
overly broad response to drought conditions, drought response measures shall be
considered within individual drought management areas or within individual
counties, as applicable.
   (9)   Drought response committee. A committee composed of state and local
representatives created for the purpose of coordinating responses to water
supply shortages within drought management areas, making recommendations for
action to the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources and/or the
Governor. The committee is composed of state agency representations from the
South Carolina Emergency Management Division of the Office of the Adjutant
General, South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control, South
Carolina Department of Agriculture, South Carolina Forestry Commission, South
Carolina Department of Natural Resources, as well as, local committees
representing counties, municipalities, public service districts, private water
suppliers, agriculture, industry, domestic users, regional councils of
government, commissions of public works, power generation facilities, special
purpose districts and Soil and Water Conservation Districts.
   (10)   Essential water use. Water used specifically for fire fighting,
maintaining instream flow requirements and to satisfy federal, state or local
public health and safety requirements.
   (11)   Even-numbered addresses. Street addresses ending in 0, 2, 4, 6, 8 or
letters A-M and locations without addresses.
   (12)   Finished water. Water distributed for use after treatment. The terms
"water use", "water user" and "water customer" refer to finished water use
unless otherwise defined.
   (13)   Institutional water use. Water used by government, public and private
educational institutions, churches, other places of worship, water utilities
and organizations within the public domain.
   (14)   Irrigation water use. Water used to maintain gardens, trees, lawns,
shrubs, flowers, athletic fields, rights-of-way and medians.
   (15)   Non-essential water use. Categories of water use other than essential
water use. Examples of non-essential water use include landscape irrigation and
the washing of buildings, parking lots, automobiles, etc.
   (16)   Odd-numbered addresses. Street addresses ending in 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 or
letters N-Z.
   (17)   Residential equivalent unit (REU). An equivalency unit defined to be
equal to one single-family residence. The city's allocated water capacity
equals three hundred (300) gallons per day per REU.
   (18)   SC Dept. of natural resources. The state agency with primacy to
implement the provisions of the Drought Response Act.
   (19)   Water supply shortage. Lack of adequate, available water caused by
drought to meet normal demands. (Ord. of 9/2/03)
4-2-23   Drought management plan.
   To ensure that the City of West Columbia adequately manages its water system
during drought-related conditions, an organized plan is necessary for system
operation and reliability, proper communications, effective coordination and
ultimate allocation of water use. Prior planning will compliment the City of
West Columbia's ability to respond to drought conditions and to enforce the
enclosed ordinances.
   (1)   Designation of water system drought response representation.
Administrating a Drought Plan requires the skills needed to undertake a
comprehensive public information program and the judgement required dealing
with equality issues arising from enforcement of a mandatory program. The
Drought Response Representative for the City of West Columbia is Mrs. Jennifer
Cunningham, City Administrator, P.O. Box 4044, West Columbia, SC 29171 - 803-
791-1880 Ext. 300, email address: jcunningham@cityofwestcolumbiasc.org.
   (2)   Description of water service areas, water sources and capacities. The
City of West Columbia is located in the Central Drought Response Management
area of South Carolina. The water system services the northeastern portion of
Lexington County. The system has two (2) large wholesale customers, the Town of
Lexington and the Lexington County Joint Municipal Water and Sewer Commission.
The City of West Columbia has two (2) water treatment plants. The water supply
sources are Lake Murray and the Saluda River. The Lake Murray water plant has a
treatment permitted capacity of 13.5 mgd and the Sunset Water Plant (Saluda
River) has a treatment permitted capacity of six (6) mgd.
   (3)   Identification of water system specific drought or water shortage
indicators.
      (a)   Moderate Drought Phase - Average daily usage is greater than 14 mgd
for 30 consecutive days.
      (b)   Severe Drought Phase - Average daily usage is greater than 16 mgd
for 14 - 21 consecutive days.
      (c)   Extreme Drought Phase - Average daily usage is greater than 18 mgd
for 7 - 10 consecutive days.
   (4)   Cooperative water agreements. Successful drought management requires a
comprehensive program by the water utility. In many situations administrative
agreements are required with other agencies to fully implement the plan. The
City of West Columbia identifies the following agreements with wholesalers that
are in place to facilitate the implementation of this plan:
      (a)   Water agreement between the City of West Columbia and the Town of
Lexington.
      (b)   Water agreement between the City of West Columbia and the Lexington
County Joint Municipal Water and Sewer Authority.
   (5)   Description of pre-drought planning efforts. Before the occurrence of
a water supply shortage and the need to implement the emergency provisions of
the ordinance, it is important that certain pre-response measures be taken with
the aim of conserving the system's source water, as well as the water
distributed to the customer. In regards to the conservation measures listed
below, the City of West Columbia has taken the following actions:
      (a)   Identification of all major water users of the system: Lexington
County Joint Municipal Water and Sewer Commission, Town of Lexington, Carolina
Water Service and Lexington Medical Center.
      (b)   Identification of those users with whom there are conservation
agreements: Lexington County Joint Municipal Water and Sewer Commission, Town
of Lexington and Carolina Water Service.
      (c)    A vigorous public education program is critical for achieving
substantial water use reductions. An effective public outreach program will
keep the public informed about the water supply situation, what actions will
mitigate drought emergency problems and how well the public is doing in terms
of meeting the program goals. The City of West Columbia utilizes the public
newspapers and local television stations to keep the public informed about
drought emergency problems.
   (6)   Description of capital planning, investment for system reliability and
demand forecasting. The City of West Columbia is proposing to upgrade the Lake
Murray water plant by 9.0 mgd in the near future. Other proposed improvements
planned are updating the mapping of the water distribution system utilizing
Auto Cad Mapping. Once this is close to completion, a long-term capital
improvement program will be developed. This will enhance the city's water
distribution system to prepare for future droughts and increasing water
demands. (Ord. of 9/2/03)
4-2-24   Drought response ordinances.
   The objective of the drought response ordinance is to establish authority,
policy and procedure by which the city will take the proper actions to manage
water demand during a drought-related shortage. The ordinance satisfies the
requirements of the Drought Response Act of 2000 and has the goal of achieving
the greatest public benefit from limited supplies of water needed for domestic
water use, sanitation, fire protection and of allocating water for other
purposes in an equitable manner. This ordinance outlines the actions to be
taken for the conservation of water supplied by the city. These actions are
directed both towards an overall reduction in water usage and optimization of
supply. To satisfy these goals the city hereby adopts the following regulations
and restrictions on the delivery and consumption of water. This ordinance is
hereby declared necessary for the protection of the public health, safe and
welfare and shall take effect upon its adoption by the city. If it becomes
necessary to conserve water in its service area due to drought, the city is
authorized to issue a proclamation that existing conditions prevent fulfillment
of the usual water-use demands. The proclamation is an attempt to prevent
depleting the water supply to the extent that water-use for consumption,
sanitation, fire protection and other essential needs becomes endangered.
Immediately upon issuance of such a proclamation, regulations and restrictions
set forth under the ordinance shall become effective and remain in effect until
the water supply shortage has ended and the proclamation rescinded. Water uses
that are regulated and prohibited under this ordinance are considered to be
non-essential and continuation of such uses during times of water supply
shortages is deemed to constitute a waste of water, subjecting the offender(s)
to penalties. The Drought Management Plan as outlined in section 4-2-23 are
hereby approved.
   I. Moderate drought phase. Upon notification by the drought response
committee that a moderate drought condition is present and is expected to
persist and/or upon determination by the city that a moderate water supply
shortage exists based on trigger levels, the city will seek voluntary
reductions from its customers in the use of water for purposes and voluntary
reductions on using water during peak water demand periods. Specifically, the
goal during this phase is to achieve a reduction of twenty (20) percent in
residential water use and fifteen (15) percent in other water uses such as
commercial, industrial, institutional and irrigation; and a reduction in
overall water use of fifteen (15) percent. To accomplish this, the city will
take the following actions:
   (1)   Issue a proclamation to be released to local media, to the city's
customers and to the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Drought
Information Center that moderate drought conditions are present.
   (2)   Provide written notification to the South Carolina Department of
Natural Resources Drought Information Center and routinely publish in a
newspaper of general circulation in the service area of the water system the
voluntary conservation measures that the customers are requested to follow
during moderate drought conditions, including:
   (a)   Reduce residential water use to sixty-five (65) gallons per person per
day and a maximum of two hundred (200) gallons per household per day.
   (b)   Eliminate the washing down of sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking
lots, tennis courts and other hard surface areas.
      I.   Eliminate washing down buildings for purposes other than immediate
fire protection.
      II.   Eliminate flushing of gutters.
      III.   Eliminate domestic washing of motorbikes, boats, cars etc.
      IV.   Eliminate uses of water to maintain fountains, reflection ponds and
decorative water bodies for aesthetic or scenic purposes, except where
necessary to support aquatic life.
      V.   Reduce watering of lawn, plants, trees, gardens, shrubbery and flora
on privately or public property to the minimum necessary. Encourage outdoor
watering to be done during off-peak hours.
      VI.   Reduce the amount of water obtained from fire hydrants for
construction purposes, fire drills or for any purpose other than fire fighting
or flushing necessary to maintain water quality.
   (c)   Control landscape irrigation by the utility's customer by staggering
watering times and/or issue voluntary restrictions on the use of water supplied
by the utility.
   (d)    Limit normal water use by commercial and individual customers
including, but not limited to, the following:
      I.   Stop maintaining water levels in scenic and recreational ponds and
lakes, except for the minimum amount required to support aquatic life.
      II.   Cease water service to customers who have been given a ten (10) day
notice to repair one or more leaks and have failed to do so.
   (3)   Intensify maintenance efforts to identify and correct water leaks in
the distribution system.
   (4)   Cease to install new irrigation taps on the water system.
   (5)   Continue to encourage and educate customers to comply with voluntary
water conservation.
   II.   Severe drought phase. Upon notification by the drought response
committee that a severe drought condition is present and is expected to persist
and/or upon determination by the city that a severe water supply shortage
exists, based on the trigger levels, the city will see voluntary reduction in
the use of water for all purposes and mandatory restrictions on non-essential
usage and restrictions on times when certain water usage is allowed.
Specifically, the goal during this phase is to achieve a reduction of twenty-
five (25) percent in residential water use, twenty (20) percent in all other
water use categories and a reduction in overall water use of twenty (20)
percent. To accomplish these goals, the city will take the following actions:
   (1)   Issue a proclamation to be released to local media, to the city's
customers and to the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Drought
Information Center that Severe drought conditions are present.
   (2)   Provide written notification to the South Carolina Department of
Natural Resources Drought Information Center and routinely publish in a
newspaper of general circulation in the service area of the water system the
voluntary conservation measures and mandatory restrictions to be placed on the
use of water supplied by the utility, including:
   (a)   Voluntary reduction of residential water use by the utility's
customers to fifty-five (55) gallons per person per day and a maximum of one
hundred seventy (170) gallons per household or REU per day.
   (b)   Control landscape irrigation by the utility's customers by staggering
watering times or issuing mandatory restrictions on the use of water supplied
by the utility for activities including:
      I.   Eliminate the washing down of sidewalks, walkways, driveways,
parking lots, tennis courts and other hard surface areas.
      II.   Eliminate washing down buildings for purposes other than immediate
fire protection.
      III.   Eliminate flushing of gutters.
      IV.   Eliminate domestic washing of motorbikes, boats, cars etc.
      V.    Eliminate uses of water to maintain fountains, reflection ponds and
decorative water bodies for aesthetic or scenic purposes except, where
necessary to support aquatic life.
      VI.   Eliminate filling or maintaining public or private swimming pools.
      VII.   Eliminate obtaining water from fire hydrants for construction
purposes, fire drills or any purpose other than fire fighting or flushing
necessary to maintain water quality.
   (c)   Limit use of water by commercial and individual customers including,
but not limited to, the following:
      I.   Stop maintaining water levels in scenic and recreational ponds and
lakes except, for the minimum amount required to support aquatic life.
      II.   Limit irrigating golf courses and any portion of its grounds.
      III.   Cease water service to customers who have been given a ten (10)
day notice to repair one or more leaks and have failed to do so; and
      IV.   Limit expanding commercial nursery facilities, placing new
irrigated agricultural land in production or planting/landscaping when required
by site design review process.
   (3)   Intensify maintenance efforts to identify and correct water leaks in
the distribution system.
   (4)   Continue to cease installation of new irrigation taps on the water
system.
   (5)   Publicize widely the penalties to be imposed for violations of
mandatory restrictions and the procedures to be followed if a variance in the
restrictions is requested.
   (6)   Expand the use of education and public relations efforts and emphasize
the penalties associated with violating the mandatory restrictions.
   (7)   Provide written notification monthly to the South Carolina Department
of Natural Resources Drought Information Center regarding the success of the
voluntary and mandatory restrictions.
   III.   Extreme drought phase. Upon notification by the drought response
committee that an extreme drought condition is present and is expected to
persist and/or upon determination by the city that an extreme water supply
shortage exists, based on the trigger levels, the city will impose mandatory
restrictions in the use of water for all purposes and on the times when certain
water usage is allowed. Specifically, the goal during this phase is to achieve
a reduction of thirty (30) percent in residential water use, twenty-five (25)
percent in all other water use categories of water uses and a reduction in
overall water use of twenty-five (25) percent. To accomplish these goals, the
city will take the following actions:
   (1)   Issue a proclamation to be released to local media, to the city's
customers and to the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources Drought
Information Center that extreme drought conditions are present.
   (2)   Provide written notification to the South Carolina Department of
Natural Resources Drought Information Center and routinely publish in a
newspaper of general circulation in the service area of the water system. The
mandatory restrictions to be placed on the use of water supplied by the utility
shall include the following:
   (a)   Limiting residential water use to forty-five (45) gallons per person
per day and a maximum of one hundred forty (140) gallons per household or REU
per day.
   (b)   Either restrict landscape watering to Wednesday and Saturday for odd
numbered addresses and Thursday and Sunday for even numbered addresses or
completely eliminate landscape irrigation by the utility's customers.
   (c)   The mandatory restrictions on the use of water supplied by the utility
for activities would include:
      I.   Elimination of the washing down of sidewalks, walkways, driveways,
parking lots, tennis courts and other hard surface areas.
      II.   Eliminate washing down buildings for purposes other than immediate
fire protection.
      III.   Eliminate flushing of gutters.
      IV.   Eliminate domestic washing of motorbikes, boats, cars etc.
      V.   Eliminate uses of water to maintain fountains, reflection ponds and
decorative water bodies for aesthetic or scenic purposes except, where
necessary to support aquatic life.
      VI.   Eliminate filling or maintaining public or private swimming pools.
      VII.   Eliminate obtaining water from fire hydrants for construction
purposes, fire drills or any purpose other than fire fighting or flushing
necessary to maintain water quality.
   (d)   Limit normal water use by commercial and individual customers
including, but not limited to, the following:
      I.   Stop maintaining water levels in scenic and recreational ponds and
lakes except, for the minimum amount required to support aquatic life.
      II.   Limit irrigating golf courses and any portion of its grounds.
      III.   Cease water service to customers who have been given a ten (10)
day notice to repair one or more leaks and have failed to do so; and
      IV.   Limit expanding commercial nursery facilities, placing new
irrigated agricultural land in production or planting/landscaping when required
by site design review process.
   (3)   Intensify maintenance efforts to identify and correct water leaks in
the distribution system.
   (4)   Continue to cease installation of new irrigation taps on the water
system.
   (5)   Publicize widely the penalties to be imposed for violations of
mandatory restrictions and the procedures to be followed if a variance in the
restrictions is requested.
   (6)   Expand the use of education and public relation's efforts as conducted
under the moderate and severe drought phases and emphasizes the penalties
associated with violating the mandatory restrictions.
   (7)   Provide written notification monthly to the South Carolina Department
of Natural Resources Drought Information Center regarding the success of the
mandatory restrictions.
   IV.   Rationing. If a drought threatens the protection of public health and
safety, the city is hereby authorized to ration water.
   V.   Enforcement of restrictions. If any customer of the city fails to
comply with the mandatory water use restrictions of this ordinance, the
customer shall be given a written notice of such failure to comply, which cites
the date of said violation and shall be assessed a penalty as follows:
 
Violation                      Classification Penalty 
1st offense                    Infraction     $100 or 15 days in jail 
2nd offense                    Infraction     $500 or 30 days in jail 
3rd and subsequent offense     Misdemeanor    $500 or 30 days in jail or both 
within the same drought period
 
   The fines and penalties set forth in this section may be in lieu of, or in
addition to, any other penalty provided by law. In addition to the fine, all
court costs shall be imposed on and paid by the offender. After issuing one
warning by certified mail, the city may disconnect the water service of any
person or customer whenever it is determined that he/she has failed to comply
with the provisions of this article. Services disconnected under such
circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of a reconnection charge and
any other costs incurred by the city in disconnecting service. In addition,
suitable assurances must be given to the city that the same action shall not be
repeated during the drought or water shortage. (Ord. Of 10/5/93)
Law enforcement agencies and other authorized agencies or designated employees
in the respective jurisdiction, which is being supplied water by the city,
shall diligently enforce the provisions of the drought response ordinance.
   VI. Variances. Customers, who in their belief, are unable to comply with the
mandatory water use restrictions of the drought response ordinance, may
petition for a variance from restrictions by filing a petition with the city
within ten (10) working days after the issuance of the proclamation requiring
water use restrictions. All petitions for variance shall contain the following
information:
   (1)   Name and address of the petitioner;
   (2)   Purpose of water usage;
   (3)   Special provision from which the petitioner is requesting relief;
   (4)   Detailed statement as to how the curtailment declaration adversely
affects the petitioner;
   (5)   Description of the relief desired;
   (6)   Period of time for which the variance is sought;
   (7)   Economic value of the water use;
   (8)   Damage or harm to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with
the ordinance;
   (9)   Restrictions with which the petitioner is expected to comply and the
compliance date;
   (10)   Steps the petitioner is taking to meet the restrictions from which
the variance is sought and the expected date of compliance; and
   (11)   Other information as needed. In order for the variance to be granted,
the petitioner must demonstrate clearly that compliance with the ordinance
cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water supply
shortage without having an adverse impact upon the best interests of the
community. The city is authorized to grant the request for variance. In
addition, the city is authorized to grant temporary variances for existing
water uses otherwise prohibited under the ordinance if it is determined that
failure to grant such variances could cause an emergency condition adversely
affecting health, sanitation and fire protection for the public. No such
variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of the
ordinance occurring prior to the issuance of the variance. Variances granted by
the city shall include a timetable for compliance and shall expire when the
water supply shortage no longer exists, unless the petitioner has failed to
meet specified requirements.
   VII. State of the ordinance. If any portion of the ordinance is held to be
unconstitutional for any reason, the remaining portions of the drought response
ordinance shall not be affected. The provisions of the ordinance shall prevail
and control in the event of any inconsistency between this ordinance and other
rules and regulations of the city. Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to
invalidate or be interpreted in a manner inconsistent with any covenants now in
effect and given as security to holders of bonds secured by revenues of the
system. (Ord. of 9/2/03)
Chapter 3 SEWERAGE SYSTEM
Historical Note: Unless otherwise indicated, the provisions of this chapter are
derived from an ordinance adopted 2/6/79.
Article A
General Provisions
4-3-1   Definitions.
   (a)   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of
terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
      (1)   Building drain. Part of lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil waste and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
      (2)   Building sewer. The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
      (3)   Discharger. Includes any person or entity owning, controlling, or
operating any real property or sewer collection system which directly or
indirectly discharges waste into the sewers or sewage works operated by the
city and includes employees, officers, directors, partners, members,
contractors, or other persons who participate in or are legally or factually
responsible for any act or omission which would constitute a violation of this
chapter. This definition of discharger shall be interpreted broadly to include
any person or entity regardless of their formal legal relationship with an
entity using the sewer system who participates in, directs or has authority in
fact related to an act or admission that results in a violation of this
chapter.
      (4)   EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
      (5)   Garbage. Solid wastes from domestic and commercial preparation of
cooking and dispensing of food from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
      (6)   Natural outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or groundwater.
      (7)   Public sewer. A sewer which is controlled by public authority and
generally available to the public for connection of laterals.
      (8)   Sewage. A combination of water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
such ground, surface and stormwaters as may be present.
      (9)   Sewage treatment plant. Any arrangement of the device and
structures used for treating sewage.
      (10)   Sewage works. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage or industrial wastewaters.
      (11)   Sewer. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
      (12)   Sewer surcharge. A charge for sewer service and treatment service
for wastes having characteristics different from sanitary wastes and for which
additional charges must be assessed in order to make compensation for
additional expenses incurred.
      (13)   Slug. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five (5) times the average
24-hour concentration occurring during normal operation.
      (14)   Standard methods. The most recent edition of Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater published jointly by the American
Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and Water
Pollution Control Federation.
      (15)   Storm drain. Sometimes termed “storm sewer,” shall mean a sewer
which carries storm and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and
industrial wastes.
      (16)   Street. Streets, avenues, drives, boulevards, roads, alleys,
lanes, and viaducts and all other public highways in the sanitary area.
      (17)   Total solids. The sum of suspended matter, settleable matter and
dissolved matter, both volatile and nonvolatile, and as further defined in
standard methods.
      (18)   Treatment works. All facilities for collection, pumping, treating
and disposing of sewage or industrial wastewaters.
      (19)   Watercourse. A channel in which flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
   (b)   All other words shall be construed as having the meaning defined in
the glossary of Water and Sewage Control Engineering, published by the Water
Pollution Control Federation, Washington, D.C.
(Amended by Ord. of 3/7/95, as amended by Ord. of 9/18/06, as amended by Ord.
2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-2   Use of public sewers required.
   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purpose situated within the city and abutting
on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there shall be located a public
sanitary sewer of the city is required, at his expense, to install suitable
toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer in accordance with provisions of this chapter within 60
days after written notice from the city to the property owner requiring such
connection, provided that the public sewer shall be within 200 feet of the
property line.
(Amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-3   Prohibited acts.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner
on public or private property within the city, or in any area under its
jurisdiction, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable
waste;
      (2)   Discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area
under its jurisdiction, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter; or
      (3)   Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool
or other facility intended or used for disposal of sewage, where public sewers
are available.
   (b)   The discharge of wastewaters to storm sewers is, without exception,
prohibited.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any entity operating a sewer collection
system connected to sewage or sewage works operated by the city:
      (1)   To continue a discharge waste into said sewer or sewage treatment
works without a valid wastewater discharge permit issued under Sec.
4-3-43 of this chapter;
      (2)   To continue to discharge sewage into said sewers or sewage
treatment works when more than ninety (90) days in arrears in its payment to
the city for sewage treatment services;
      (3)   To fail to take reasonable steps to maintain and repair its system
and to prevent the intrusion of storm water runoff into said sewers or sewage
treatment works.
   (d)   The terms of this chapter, including liability for civil penalties,
shall apply to all persons who are dischargers as that terms is defined in Sec.
4-3-1.
(Amended by Ord. of 9/18/06, as amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-4   Private sewage disposal.
   (a)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under provisions of
Sec.
4-3-2, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system complying with the provisions of this section.
   (b)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, other than a septic tank, privy, privy vault or cesspool, for a single
family dwelling, the owner shall first obtain written approval from the city;
the application for such permit shall be made in writing and shall include any
plans, specifications, and other information as deemed necessary by the city at
the time application for the permit is tiled.
   (c)   A permit for a private sewage system shall not become effective until
the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city. The city shall
be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and in any event,
the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when the work is ready for
final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The
inspection shall be made within two (2) working days of the receipt of notice
by the city.
   (d)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage system
shall comply with all recommendations of the South Carolina Department of
Health and Environmental Control. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted
to discharge to any natural outlet.
   (e)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city.
   (f)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in Sec.
4-3-2, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with
this chapter and any septic tank, cesspools, and similar private sewage
disposal facilities shall be abandoned, cleaned of sludge and filled with clean
bank-run gravel or dirt within sixty (60) days of notification to do so by the
city.
   (g)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to nullify any
additional requirements that may be imposed by the appropriate state or county
health officer.
(Amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-5   Sewer charges.
   The sewer service charge for sewage wastes shall be as fixed from time to
time by council.
(Amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
Cross Reference: Sewer and water bills combined, Sec.
4-1-1.
4-3-6 through 4-3-20 reserved.
Article B
Building Sewers and Connections
4-3-21   Connections; permit required.
   No person not authorized by the city shall uncover, make any connections
with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. A violation of
this section shall be a misdemeanor. Any person discharging or proposing to
discharge industrial wastes into the city's sewers shall obtain a permit
pursuant to Article E of this Chapter and shall comply with all terms of that
permit and Article E.
(Amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-22   Permit classes; fees.
   (a)   There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits:
      (1)   For residential and commercial service; and
      (2)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes, which
are also subject to the provisions in Article E.
   (b)   In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application in
writing to the city. A sewer permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the
city at the time the application is filed. Such fee shall be established from
time to time by the city in adopting its annual budget or otherwise.
Specifications for a permit for persons proposing to discharge industrial waste
are detailed further in Article E of this chapter.
(Amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-23   Costs; indemnification.
   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer from the point of connection to the owner’s premises to the
property line shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city
for any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer.
(Amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-24   Separate connections required.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building. Where one building stands to the rear of another on a single lot and
no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building
through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the city may grant
permission for the building sewer from the front building to be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but only upon a
showing by the applicant that it is not feasible that the two (2) buildings so
connected will ultimately be on separate lots.
(Amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-25   Use of old building sewers.
   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and tested by the city, to meet all of the
requirements of this chapter.
(Amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-26   Specifications.
   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer
and the methods to be used in excavation, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the
appropriate specifications of the ASTM or WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9, all
installation to be subject to the express written approval of the city and in
no cases shall the size of the pipe installed be less than four (4) inches in
nominal diameter.
(Amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-27   Elevation; grade.
   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement or first floor. No building sewer shall be
installed parallel to or within three (3) feet of any bearing wall, which might
thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from
live loads (automobile, etc.) which may be superimposed. The building sewer
shall be made at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible.
The building sewer shall be constructed to such point as directed by the city.
(Amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-28   Connection to groundwater and surface runoff prohibited.
   No person shall maintain or make a connection of roof, downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(Amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-29   Licensed contractors to perform work.
   The installation and connection of the building sewer to the property line
should be completed by a person properly licensed by the city to perform such
services.
(Amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-30   Inspections.
   Before any underground portions thereof are covered, the applicant for the
building sewer permit shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready
for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The inspection shall be made
within two (2) working days of the receipt of notice by the city. Connection
may then be made to the public sewer by a licensed plumber.
(Amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-31   Excavations.
   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazards. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(Amended by Ord. 2016- of  4/5/16)
Cross Reference: Excavations and obstruction, Sec.
3-1-21 et seq.
4-3-32   Records kept by city.
   The city shall keep a permanent and accurate record of the location, depth
and direction of all new sewer connections, including landmarks as may be
necessary to make an adequate description.
(Amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-33   Compliance with OSHA requirements.
   All pertinent OSHA requirements must be met during the construction of any
portion of the treatment works.
(Amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-34   through 4-3-39 reserved.
Article C
Use of Public Sewers
4-3-40   Questionnaire required.
   In order for the city to properly evaluate the effect of the waste on the
system, an industry must submit, along with its plans, an industrial waste
questionnaire summary describing maximum, minimum and average wastewater
characteristics. Further details of this questionnaire are provided in Article
E of this chapter.
(Ord. of 3/7/95, as amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-41   Prohibited discharges.
   (a)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any uncontaminated
storm water, surface water, uncontaminated groundwater, roof runoff, or
subsurface drainage to any public sewer.
   (b)   No person shall discharge solids or viscous substances in quantities
or of such size capable of causing obstruction in the flow of sewage or other
interference to the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, hair and fleshing or entrails, either whole or
ground by garbage grinders.
(Ord. of 2/6/79, as amended by Ord. of 1/7/85, and Ord. of 3/7/95, as amended
by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-42   Substances admitted conditionally.
   (a)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely, in the
opinion of the city, that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream
or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance.
In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the city will
give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows, and velocities in the sewers, material of construction of
the sewers, nature of sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage
treatment plant, and other treatment factors. Furthermore, any person seeking
to discharge industrial waste shall additionally fully comply with Article E of
this chapter. The substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) hp. or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the city.4
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes
or concentrated plating solution, whether neutralized or not.
      (3)   Any substances discharged in excess of the amount set forth in
their discharge permit.
      (4)   Any water or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-
producing substances in such concentration exceeding limits which may be
established by the city as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage to
meet requirements of the state, Federal, or other public agencies of
jurisdiction of such discharge of the receiving waters.
      (5)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the city.
      (6)   Materials which exert or cause:
         a.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as, but
not limited to, earth, lime, slurries, and lime residues or of dissolved
solids, such as, but not limited to sodium, chloride and sodium sulfate,
provided concentrations of suspended solids in the waste in excess of three
hundred (300) milligrams per liter shall be subject to charges set forth in
this chapter.
         b.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
slugs as defined herein.
      (7)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
cannot meet the requirements of other state or federal agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to tile receiving waters.
   (b)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in this section, which in the judgment of the
city may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment,
or receiving water, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the city may:
      (1)   Reject the waste and/or suspend sewage service;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to reduce the waste to an acceptable condition
in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403 or amendments thereto prior to discharge to
the public sewers, in which case the design and installation of the
pretreatment plant and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of
the city and to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastewater not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the
provisions of this chapter.
   (c)   In no case will a waste be permitted in the sewage system which will
cause a violation of the city’s NPDES permit or that of its provider of
wastewater treatment services or which does not comply with local, state or
federal pretreatment requirements.
(Ord. of 2/6/79, as amended by Ord. of 1/7/85, and Ord. of 3/7/95, as amended
by  Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
Editorial Note: The CFR reference in the above section was updated by the
codifier.
4-3-43   Wastewater discharge permit.
   Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of
this chapter and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees
established by the city. Permits may contain the following:
   (a)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a public sewer;
   (b)   Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
   (c)   Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge and sampling
facilities;
   (d)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities;
   (e)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling
locations, frequency of samplings number, types and standards for tests and
reporting schedule;
   (f)   Compliance schedules;
   (g)   Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports;
   (h)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to
wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording the city access
thereto;
   (i)   Requirements for notification of the city of any new introduction of
wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of
the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment
system, provided notice is given to the city in advance of such changes and
with the understanding that an amended permit must be obtained;
   (j)   Requirements for notification of slug discharges;
   (k)   Pretreatment of industrial wastewater before discharge and provisions
for emergency bypass for any intentional diversion of waste streams from any
portion of the pretreatment facility as described further in Article E of this
chapter;
   (l)   Schedule of the maximum amounts of all industrial processing waste
flows produced both before and after pretreatment, if any, at said premises,
including the daily volume, and wastewater constituents and characteristics in
accordance with 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto as described further in
Article E of this chapter;
   (m)   Other conditions deemed appropriate by the city to ensure proper
compliance, including restrictions that are more stringent than requirements
and limitations set forth in this section, in which case such restrictions
shall apply.
   (n)   Requirements that the user cooperate fully with the city or its
delegated agents in any requests for inspections, production of records, or
required testing of waste flows as described further in subsequent articles.
(Ord. of 1/7/85, as amended by Ord. of 3/7/95, as amended by Ord. of 2016- of
4/5/16)
4-3-44   Wastewater discharge permit; transfer; change in operations.
   Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific
operation and shall not be reassigned, transferred or sold to a new owner, new
user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of
the city. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and
conditions of the existing permit. The owner or user shall inform the city in
advance of any changes in the nature of the operations or waste stream that
would materially change the nature of the discharge so as to impact the system.
The city may amend the discharge permit whenever such changes or other
circumstances require it to do so. Specifics regarding discharge permits for
industrial waste are described in Article E of this chapter.
(Ord. of 1/7/85, as amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-45   When interceptors required.
   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand, or other
harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the city and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All interceptors shall be
supplied and properly maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his expense. Article D of this chapter sets forth the
provisions of the city's fats, oils and grease program, compliance with which
is required.
(Amended by Ord. of 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-46   Maintenance of treatment facilities.
   Where preliminary treatment for flow equalizing facilities is provided for
any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his expense.
(Amended by Ord. of 3/7/95, as amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-47   Pretreatment standards.
   Upon the promulgation of any Federal or state categorical pretreatment
standards or individual standard, that standard, if more stringent than
limitations imposed under this chapter, shall immediately supersede the
limitations imposed under this chapter. The city shall notify all affected
users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12 or
amendments thereto or other requirements.
(Amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-48   Pretreatment standards; reporting requirements.
   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement
of the introduction of wastewater into the city sewer, any user subject to
pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city a report
indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from
the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and
requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in
the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or
requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what
additional operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring
the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of
the industrial user, and certified by a qualified professional. Specifics
regarding pretreatment standards and reporting requirements for industrial
waste are described in Article E of this chapter.
(Amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-49   Pretreatment standards; compliance schedule.
   (a)   If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, a schedule by which the user will
provide such additional pretreatment shall be developed by the city. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard.
   (b)   The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major
components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.).
   (c)   Specifics regarding pretreatment standards and compliance schedules
for industrial waste are described in Article E of this chapter.
(Amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-50   Confidential information.
   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit
applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be
available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction
unless the user specifically requests that it not be released and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. When requested by the
person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade
secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the
public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental
agencies for uses related to this chapter, the national pollutant discharge
elimination system (NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit and/or the
pretreatment programs. Additionally, such portions of a report shall be
available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
(Amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-51 through 4-3-70 reserved.
Article D
Fats, Oils, and Grease (FOG) Management Program
4-3-71   Purpose.
   This section will be enforced in conjunction with the City of West Columbia,
South Carolina, Code of Ordinances, Title 4, Chapter 3 (hereinafter Chapter 3),
and establishes uniform registration, operating, maintenance, cleaning, and
inspection requirements designed to limit and control the discharge of fats,
oils, and grease from Food Service Establishments (FSEs) into the city's
wastewater collection system. The objectives of this chapter include the
following:
   (a)   To reduce the introduction of excessive amounts of fats, oils, and
grease into the City of West Columbia (City) wastewater collection system;
   (b)   To reduce fats, oils, and grease related build-up to the city’s
wastewater collection system that could lead to clogging or blocking of the
sewer lines, causing backup and flooding of streets, residences, and commercial
buildings, resulting in potential property damage and public health threats to
the city and its citizens;
   (c)   To establish uniform identification numbers along with registration
procedures and Global Positioning System Coordinates to be input into GIS to
identify food service establishments located within the city wastewater service
area;
   (d)   To establish operation, cleaning, and maintenance requirements for
food service establishments with grease traps and/or grease interceptors;
   (e)   To establish inspection procedures and requirements for food service
establishments with grease traps and/or grease interceptors;
   (f)   To establish review procedures and reporting requirements for food
service establishments installing new grease traps and/or grease interceptors;
and
   (g)   To establish enforcement procedures for violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-72   Definitions.
   The following terms shall be defined as follows unless context indicates or
requires a different meaning:
   (a)   Director. The city's Director of Planning, Engineering and Water
Plants.
   (b)   Fats, Oils, and Grease (FOG). Any material, either liquid or solid,
composed primarily of fats, oils, and grease from animal or vegetable sources.
   (c)   Food Service Establishment (FSE). Any commercial facility, including,
by way of example and without limitation, restaurants, motels, hotels,
cafeterias, hospitals, schools, bars, and any other facility which might in the
course of its operations discharge kitchen or food preparation wastewater into
the city's wastewater collection system or any other customer, other than a
residential customer, who otherwise might be likely in its operations to
discharge waste streams containing FOG into that system. This definition
includes, but is not limited to, any establishment which is required to have a
South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control (SCDHEC) food
service license and/or permit. All FSEs shall be required to install a grease
trap or grease interceptor.
   (d)   FSE Owner or Owner. In the case of an individually owned FSE, the
owner(s) and/or proprietor(s) of the FSE. Where the FSE is a franchise
operation, the owner of the franchisee is the responsible person and/or entity
and is considered the FSE owner. Where the FSE is owned by a corporation, the
corporate representative, as designated on the FOG registration form, is deemed
to be authorized to act on behalf of the corporation. Where two (2) or more
FSEs share a common grease interceptor, the FSE owner is each individual and/or
entity who in whole or in part owns and/or assumes, maintains, or exercises
control of the grease interceptor or the property on which the grease
interceptor is located, as well as any individual and/or entity who utilizes or
will utilize the shared grease interceptor.
   (e)   Gray Water. All of the liquid contained in a grease trap or grease
interceptor that lies below the floating grease layer and above the bottom
solids layer.
   (f)   Grease. A material, either liquid or solid, composed primarily of
fats, oils, and grease from animal or vegetable sources. The terms "FOG," "oil
and grease,-" and "oil and grease substances" shall all be included within this
definition and these terms may be used interchangeably.
   (g)   Grease Hauler. A person or entity that collects the contents of grease
traps and/or grease interceptors and transports the contents to an approved
recycling or disposal facility. A grease hauler may also provide other services
to FSEs related to grease trap and/or grease interceptor cleaning and
maintenance.
   (h)   Grease Interceptor. A large underground concrete vault located outside
of an FSE designed to collect, contain, or remove grease from the waste stream
while allowing the sub-straight or gray water to discharge to the wastewater
collection system by gravity.
   (i)   Grease trap. A device located within an FSE designed to collect,
contain, separate, or remove grease from the waste stream while allowing the
gray water to discharge to the wastewater collection system by gravity.
   (j)   Inspector or city staff. An employee of the city, who under the
authority of the Director, has responsibility for implementing and who does
implement any FOG management ordinances.
   (k)   Program. The contents of this chapter as implemented by the Director,
inspectors, and city staff.
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-73   Grease Traps and Grease Interceptors.
   (a)   Requirements. All FSEs located within the City of West Columbia
wastewater service area are required to have a grease trap and/or grease
interceptor properly installed and maintained in accordance with the following:
this chapter, fats, oils, and grease management, specifications for grease
traps and grease interceptors and ail applicable requirements of the most
recent version of the International Plumbing Code.
   (b)   New FSEs. FSEs which are proposed or newly constructed, and existing
FSEs undergoing a change of use which necessitates the issuance of a new SCDHEC
food service permit for expansion, or renovation to provide food services, are
considered New FSEs. All New FSEs are required to install grease traps and/or
grease interceptors, as appropriate, in compliance with the City of West
Columbia Grease Trap and Interceptor Sizing Guide (Attachment C), New FSEs are
required to operate, maintain, clean, and repair their grease traps and grease
interceptors according to and in compliance with all applicable provisions
contained in this chapter. In situations where it is not feasible for a New FSE
to install an underground grease interceptor, the New FSE is required to
install adequate and approved grease traps for use on individual fixtures,
including, but not limited to: pot sinks, mop sinks, pre-rinse sinks, wok
ovens, floor drains, and any other drains where the potential for introduction
of grease exists. In such cases. Grease traps will be considered adequate and
will be approved by the city only if a flow control device is placed on the
inlet that prevents overloading and a sample port is placed on the outlet of
each grease trap.
   (c)   Existing FSEs. Except as provided in division (d) below. Existing
FSEs, which are those FSEs already operating with grease traps and/or grease
interceptors that were installed prior to the effective date of this chapter,
will generally be permitted to operate and maintain existing grease traps and
grease interceptors provided they are in proper operating condition, are
determined by the city in its reasonable discretion and given the circumstances
and history of the FSE's operations to he sufficiently effective in reducing
the levels of FOG discharges into the city’s wastewater collection system, and
are maintained, cleaned, and repaired in accordance with all applicable
provisions contained in this chapter. In the event of noncompliance with this
Chapter 3, the city may, in its sole discretion:
      (1)   Allow modifications to be made by the FSE, at the FSE’s own
expense, to the existing grease trap or grease interceptor in order to bring it
into compliance; or
      (2)   Require that the existing FSE install, at its own expense, a new
grease trap and/or grease interceptor that meets the requirements of this and
all other applicable laws and regulations.
   (d)   Grease traps and grease interceptors installed prior to the effective
date of this chapter. if a grease trap or grease interceptor installed prior to
the effective date of this chapter does not allow for measurement and sampling
to demonstrate that the grease trap or grease interceptor is in compliance with
this chapter, the FSE must modify or replace the grease trap or grease
interceptor as provided below no later than December 31, 2018:
      (1)   The city, in its sole discretion, may approve a proposed
modification of an existing grease trap or grease interceptor provided that in
consideration of all relevant engineering and design factors, the city
determines that the proposed modification allows for the effective measurement
and sampling of the existing grease trap or grease interceptor to demonstrate
that the grease trap or grease interceptor is in compliance with this Chapter
3. Requests for modifications are considered only as part of the transition to
the compliance with the current regulations and are not an ongoing feature of
this FOG Article. Any proposed modification to meet this requirement must be
submitted to the city for review no later than June 30, 2018; or
      (2)   If not modified pursuant to (a) above, the existing grease trap or
grease interceptor must be replaced with a new grease trap or grease
interceptor, as appropriate, in compliance with the City of West Columbia
Grease Trap and Interceptor Sizing Guide (Attachment C).
   (e)   Plumbing connections. Grease traps and grease interceptors shall be
installed in accordance with the requirements contained in all applicable local
plumbing codes. Any grease trap and/or grease interceptor shall be located in
the FSE's lateral sewer line between all fixtures which may introduce grease
into the city's wastewater collection system and that system. Wastewater from
domestic facilities and other similar fixtures shall not be introduced into a
grease trap and/or grease interceptor by the FSE under any circumstances.
   (f)   Grease trap. All grease traps shall be installed in accordance with
the most recent version of the International Plumbing Code. Each FSE shall
operate and maintain its grease trap in accordance with the following criteria:
   (g)   Sizing. All grease traps shall be sized in accordance with the City of
West Columbia grease trap and interceptor sizing guide (Attachment C).
   (h)   Flow control device and sample port. FSEs are responsible for
equipping grease traps with a device on the inlet side to control the rate of
flow through the grease trap. The rate of flow shall not exceed the
manufacturer's rated capacity in gallons per minute for each grease trap. FSEs
are also responsible for equipping grease traps with a sample port on the
outlet side.
   (i)   Installation, inspection, cleaning, and maintenance. Each FSE shall be
solely responsible for the cost of grease trap installation, inspection,
cleaning, and maintenance. Each FSE must either contract with a grease hauler
cleaning service or develop a written protocol for and perform its own grease
trap cleaning and maintenance procedures that meet the requirements of this
program. Cleaning shall include the complete removal of all floating materials.
Gray water, and bottom solids from the grease trap. The return of gray water
back into the grease trap or into the city's wastewater collection system is
prohibited. Grease trap cleaning must include removing/scraping excess solids
from walls, floors, baffles, and inlet and outlet piping. It is the
responsibility of each FSE to inspect its grease trap during and after the
pumping and cleaning procedure to ensure that the grease trap is properly
cleaned out, that the structure is sound and all fittings and fixtures inside
the grease trap are in working condition and are functioning properly. The FSE
owner must maintain documentation consisting of signed and witnessed
inspection, cleaning, and maintenance logs on site demonstrating compliance
with this chapter and must be able to produce such documentation immediately
upon request of the inspector and/or city staff.
   (j)   Grease trap cleaning frequency. At minimum, cleaning and maintenance
of grease traps should be performed in accordance with the grease trap
manufacturer's recommendations. However, it is the independent responsibility
of the FSE to ensure that cleaning and maintenance is performed as often as and
in such manner as is necessary to achieve full compliance with Chapter 3 and
this chapter, even if such cleaning and maintenance exceeds that recommended by
the manufacturer.
   (k)   Inspection. Grease traps shall be inspected by the inspector as often
as necessary in the city's sole discretion to ensure compliance with Chapter 3,
and this chapter, and to determine if necessary cleaning and maintenance is
being performed by the FSE. During any inspection, FSEs are responsible for
having qualified personnel on hand to open and close the grease trap.
   (l)   Repairs and replacement. Each FSE shall be solely responsible for the
cost, scheduling, and performance of all repairs and replacements to its grease
trap(s), including, without limitation, any and all repairs and replacements
that may be required by the inspector and/or city staff under this program.
   (m)   Grease Interceptors. Grease Interceptors shall be designed and
installed in accordance with the City of West Columbia Grease Trap and Grease
Interceptor Sizing Guide and the most recent version of the International
Plumbing Code. In the event of a conflict between the two, the most stringent
requirements shall apply. Each FSE shall operate and maintain its grease
interceptor in accordance with the following criteria.
   (n)   Installation, inspection, cleaning, and maintenance. Each FSE shall be
solely responsible for the costs of installing, inspecting, pumping, cleaning,
and maintaining its grease interceptor(s). All FSEs that have grease
interceptors shall utilize a grease hauler to properly dispose of grease
interceptor contents. Cleaning shall include the complete removal of all grease
interceptor contents including floating materials, gray water, and bottom
solids. The return of gray water back into the grease interceptor or into the
city's wastewater collection system is prohibited. Grease interceptor cleaning
must be performed as often and in such manner as is necessary to achieve
compliance with Chapter 3 and this chapter. Such cleaning shall include as
necessary removing/scraping and/or hydroscrubbing excessive solids from the
walls, floors, baffles and all interior plumbing. It shall be the
responsibility of each FSE to inspect its grease interceptor during the pumping
and cleaning procedure to ensure that the grease interceptor is properly
cleaned out, that the structure is sound and all fittings and fixtures inside
the grease interceptor are in working condition and functioning properly. The
FSE owner must maintain documentation on site consisting of signed and
witnessed logs documenting inspection, cleaning, and maintenance and
demonstrating compliance with this chapter. The FSE owner and must be able to
produce such documentation immediately upon request of the inspector and/or
city staff.
   (o)   Grease interceptor cleaning frequency. Each FSE shall have its grease
interceptor(s) cleaned at a minimum frequency of twice per year. In addition to
this required cleaning, each FSE shall determine an additional frequency at
which its Grease Interceptor(s) shall be cleaned in accordance and in
compliance with each of the following criteria:
      (1)   When the floatable grease layer exceeds six (6) inches in depth as
measured with an approved dipping method;
      (2)   When the settleable solids layer exceeds eight (8) inches in depth
as measured with an approved dipping method;
      (3)   When the total volume of captured Grease and solid material
displaces more than twenty-five percent(25%) of the capacity of the grease
interceptor as calculated with an approved dipping method; or
      (4)   When the grease interceptor is not retaining/capturing FOG so as to
comply with the requirements of Chapter 3 and this chapter.
      (5)   An approved dipping method is a method of sampling the contents of
a grease interceptor that is approved for the intended use by the inspector.
The inspector shall maintain a list of approved dipping methods in writing,
which shall be available to FSEs upon request.
   (p)   Inspection. Grease interceptors may be inspected by the Inspector as
often as necessary in the city's sole discretion to ensure compliance with this
program, including, without limitation, to determine if proper cleaning and
maintenance schedules are being adhered to by the FSE. FSEs with grease
interceptors that are inaccessible to the inspector are responsible for having
personnel readily available during any inspection to provide access to and to
open and close the grease interceptor for the Inspector. It is the sole
responsibility of the FSE to provide the city with access to any inaccessible
grease interceptor.
   (q)   Repairs and replacement. Each FSE shall be responsible for the cost,
scheduling, and performance of all repairs and replacements to its grease
interceptor(s), including, without limitation, any and all repairs and
replacements that may be required by the inspector and/or city staff under the
program.
   (r)   Additives. The introduction of chemicals, enzymes, emulsifiers, live
bacteria or other grease cutters or other additives (collectively, "additives")
into the wastewater collection system is prohibited by the city without written
approval, in advance, for the specific use proposed. On very rare occasions,
the city may, in its sole discretion, approve an FSE's use of additives. FSEs
seeking to introduce additives must, prior to their introduction into grease
traps or grease interceptors, submit the following information to the Director
of Planning, Engineering and Water Plants for review and consideration:
Material Safety Data Sheets and any other applicable information concerning the
composition, frequency of use, mode of action of the proposed additive(s), and
a written statement outlining the FSE's proposed use of the additive(s) (the
"parameters"). The FSE may only use the additives if and when the city grants
the FSE permission to do so in writing and then may only do so in accordance
with the specific parameters proposed by the FSE as approved, with any
modifications, by the city. Permission to use any specific additive may be
withdrawn by the city at any time, upon the city providing written notice to
the FSE. The city will evaluate the request considering all relevant factors
including, without limitations, the risks of failure of such additives to
perform as intended, the maintenance and monitoring requirements associated
with approving such an approach, and the city's interest in consistency and
uniformity in the administration of these requirements.
   (s)   Alternative grease removal devices or technologies. The use of
alternative grease removal devices and technologies, such as automatic grease
removal systems, are generally prohibited by the city. On rare occasions, the
city may, in its sole discretion, approve the use of this technology and these
devices on a case-by-case basis. The city will evaluate the request considering
all relevant factors including, without limitations, the risks of failure of
such devices to perform as intended, the maintenance and monitoring
requirements associated with approving such an approach, and the city's
interest in consistency and uniformity in the administration of these
requirements. An FSE may only use alternative grease removal devices or
technologies after receiving permission to do so in writing from the city and
then may only do so in accordance with the specific parameters set forth by the
city therein. Permission to use any alternative grease removal devices or
technologies may be withdrawn by the city at any time, upon the city providing
written notice to the FSE.
   (t)   Recordkeeping.
      (1)   Each FSE shall maintain records required hereunder in a bound
logbook kept on site at the FSE describing and documenting all cleaning,
maintenance, and repairs performed for each grease trap and grease interceptor
including the date and time of each pump out or cleaning and details regarding
same; records documenting and detailing any maintenance and/or repairs, and the
dates on which such maintenance and/or repairs were performed and completed;
and any other records documenting and related to the cleaning, maintenance,
and/or repairs for each grease trap or grease interceptor. All entries must be
signed and dated by the individual supervising the work and witnessed by one
other person present when the work was done. The logbook must be made
immediately available by the FSE for review by the Inspector and/or city staff
upon request during an inspection. In addition to the records specified above,
each FSE shall also maintain a file on-site which contains the following
information:
         a.   A copy of the FSE’s FOG Registration form submitted to the city
pursuant to Sec. 4-3-74 below; and
         b.   Receipts evidencing and identifying (by name, address, and
service(s) provided) any individuals and/or entities performing cleaning,
maintenance, and/or repairs on each grease trap and/or grease interceptor
including, without limitation, grease pumpers, grease haulers, plumbers, and
parts suppliers.
      (2)   Failure to maintain complete records in accordance with the program
as specified herein or to provide such records to the Inspector and/or city
staff immediately upon request, or falsification of any record, constitutes a
violation of this chapter. All records required of an FSE under this chapter
must be maintained for the time period consisting of the two (2) years
immediately preceding the date of the most recent inspection of the FSE by the
city, and for any time period thereafter.
   (u)   Disposal. It is the responsibility of each FSE owner to ensure that
wastes removed from each of its grease traps and/or grease interceptors are
properly disposed of at a facility permitted to receive such wastes. (Ord.
2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-74   FOG registration and new grease trap/grease interceptor construction
inspection procedure.
   (a)   Registration requirements for FSEs. Each FSE shall be subject to the
FOG registration requirements in this section. This FOG registration is
required in addition to any other permits, registrations, or business license
(s) which may be required of the FSE by Federal, state, or local law or
regulation.
   (b)   Registration form. The city shall provide or make available a FOG
registration form for all FSEs located within the city's wastewater service
area. All existing FSEs are required to submit a completed FOG registration to
the city at the address shown on the form no later than thirty (30) calendar
days after receiving notification by the city that registration is required.
Failure to do so will constitute a violation of this chapter. New FSEs are
required to submit a completed FOG registration to the city at the address
shown on the form prior to beginning construction. Each FOG registration form
submitted shall include the following information:
      (1)   FSE owner's name, title, and contact information; FSE contact name,
title, and contact information, if different from the FSE owner; FSE water and
sewer account holder contact information; name of FSE; physical address of FSE;
telephone number of FSE; and business mailing address of FSE if different from
physical address;
      (2)   A description of the type of food service activities to be
performed at the FSE;
      (3)   Seating capacity of the FSE;
      (4)   A copy of calculations demonstrating how the size of each grease
trap and/or grease interceptor was determined; a set of plumbing drawings or
sketches, including floor plans and riser diagrams; and a site plan showing the
location of the sewer discharge(s) and the location of any exterior grease
interceptors, where applicable (drawings or sketches must have sufficient
enough detail to show the location of all kitchen equipment and plumbing
fixtures with drains, floor drains, sewer connections, and all grease traps and
grease interceptors);
      (5)   For FSEs with grease traps, documentation demonstrating that:
         a.   The grease trap is equipped with a device on the inlet side to
control the rate of flow through the grease trap such that the rate of flow
does not exceed the manufacturer's rated capacity in gallons per minute for
each grease trap; and
         b.   The grease trap is equipped with a sample port on the outlet
side;
      (6)   Total hours of operation each day;
      (7)   Executed statement of the FSE Owner certifying that the FSE owner
has received, read, understands, and agrees to abide by Chapter 3, as well as
any other applicable Federal, state, and local laws and regulations governing
the FSE; that the information provided in the FOG registration form is
accurate; that the FOG registration form was completed at the FSE owner's
direction and with the FSE owner's approval; that the FSE owner understands
that providing false information or violating the provisions of the above-
stated laws and/or regulations may result in termination of the FSE's water
and/or sewer service, and/or revocation of the FSE's permitted water and/or
sewer capacity and/or other permits and licenses provided by the city for the
FSE's operations; and that if the FSE's water and/or sewer service is
terminated, the FSE will have to submit a new FOG registration form and/or
reapply for water and/or sewer service with the city and bear all associated
costs; and
      (8)   All other information regarding the description of the FSE’s
operations, including, without limitation, information regarding the FSE’s
grease traps and grease interceptors, and treatment of same, as identified on
the FOG registration form.
   (c)   FSEs with shared grease interceptor(s). In situations where FSEs share
one (1) or more grease interceptors, the owner of each grease interceptor and
any FSE and FSE owner who utilizes or will utilize the shared grease
interceptor are collectively responsible for completion and submission of the
FOG registration form to the city within the time period required in this
chapter, for identifying all FSEs connected to each grease interceptor in the
FOG registration form, and for ensuring that all FSEs connected to that grease
interceptor comply with this Chapter 3. All FSEs connected to the shared grease
interceptor shall be subject to inspections under this chapter. In the event
the identity of an FSE connected to the shared grease interceptor changes or in
the event that an additional FSE connects to the shared grease interceptor, the
owner of the shared grease interceptor, the FSE owner, and any FSE utilizing or
who will utilize the shared grease interceptor must submit an updated FOG
registration form identifying the change or the additional FSE to the city at
least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the change and prior to the additional
FSE connecting to the shared grease interceptor.
   (d)   New grease trap/grease interceptor inspection procedure.
      (1)   FSE - New Facilities. After a completed and satisfactory FOG
registration form has been submitted to the city, the FSE may proceed with
installation and/or construction of the grease trap and/or grease interceptor.
When installation and/or construction of the grease trap and/or grease
interceptor is completed, the FSE owner shall notify the city that the FSE is
ready for inspection. The FSE owner shall notify the city prior to covering any
exterior grease interceptors. During the inspection, the information contained
in the FOG Registration form will be verified and the FSE’s grease traps and/or
grease interceptors will be inspected. If any grease trap or grease interceptor
requires maintenance or repairs, if any incorrect information has been given,
or in the event of noncompliance with any portion of this chapter, the
Inspector will issue a written notice requiring that the FSE correct any
deficiencies, including a required time schedule for repairs to be effected
prior to a second inspection. Second inspections will be performed after a
minimum of ten (10) calendar days have elapsed to allow the FSE to implement
appropriate and necessary corrective action(s) to correct the deficiencies. If
the FSE is not in compliance at the second inspection, the FSE owner must
complete any additional maintenance and/or repairs or take whatever other
action may be required for compliance, and resubmit the FOG Registration form.
Failure to comply with any portion of this chapter after resubmission of the
FOG registration form may result in enforcement action pursuant to Chapter 3,
including, but not limited to, termination or denial of the FSE's water and/or
sewer service.
      (2)   FSE - Existing Facilities. All existing FSEs are required to submit
a completed FOG Registration form to the city at the address shown on the form
no later than thirty (30) calendar days after receiving notification by the
city that registration is required. Failure to do so will constitute a
violation of this chapter. A new FOG registration form must be submitted upon
change in ownership of the FSE or changes in operations, changes in plumbing
configurations or additions, if such changes could result in a potential change
in the FOG discharge into the city's collection system or could change the
functioning or maintenance requirements of the FSE's existing facilities and
shall include, without limitation, a change of use which necessitates the
issuance of a new SCDHEC food service permit; remodeling or expansion of the
food preparation area; and/or modifications to the kitchen waste plumbing
system. No new grease trap or grease interceptor may be placed into service
until the city has conducted an inspection pursuant to the procedures set forth
in division (1) above.
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-75   Inspection procedure.
   All FSEs are subject to inspection as follows:
   (a)   Inspections. The Inspector and city staff may inspect FSEs at any time
during business hours in order to verify continued compliance with all
applicable laws and regulations, including, without limitation, requirements of
this Chapter 3. All FSEs which have submitted a FOG registration form should
expect to be inspected on a regular basis. Inspections shall include, without
limitation, all equipment, food processing and storage areas that discharge
into the grease traps and/or grease interceptors at the FSE. The Inspector and/
or city staff shall also inspect the FSE's logbook and other records and data
required to be kept hereunder; grease trap(s) and/or grease interceptor(s); and
may check the level of the grease trap and/or grease interceptor contents and
take samples and/or photographs as deemed necessary in the Inspector's sole
discretion. If noncompliance is identified by the Inspector and/or city staff
during an inspection, the Inspector will, after the inspection, issue the FSE a
written notice of violation directing the FSE to correct any deficiency. The
FSE will be scheduled for re-inspection at the time denoted in the notice of
violation.
   4-41   2017 S-5
   (b)   Re-inspections. The Inspector and city staff will re-inspect FSEs that
are issued a notice of violation within the time period specified in the notice
of violation. The Inspector shall inspect, without limitation, any repairs made
or other corrective measures taken by the FSE with regard to any noted
violations and will subsequently provide written notice of compliance or non-
compliance to the FSE as the case may be. If, upon re-inspection, the FSE has
corrected all of the deficiencies which resulted in the issuance of the notice
of violation and the FSE is in full compliance with all other requirements of
the program, the FSE will be notified by the city that it is in compliance.
   (c)   Access and cooperation during inspections. Upon the request of the
Inspector and other duly authorized employees or agents of the city, each FSE
shall allow the Inspector and other duly authorized employees or agents of the
city, including, without limitation, city staff, access to all parts of the FSE
premises for inspection, observation, records examination, measurement,
sampling, testing and for other purposes in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. The refusal of any FSE to allow the Inspector and/or city staff
entry to or upon the FSE’s premises, or an FSE's failure to cooperate in any
manner during the course of an inspection, shall constitute an immediate
violation of this chapter, which may result in an immediate enforcement action
pursuant to this chapter without further notice.
   (d)   Non-compliance. In the event of continuing non-compliance after re-
inspection, the FSE owner will be notified that continued failure to comply
within the time period designated by the city may result in enforcement action
pursuant to Chapter 3, including, but not limited to, termination of water and/
or sewer service.
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-76   Violations.
   (a)   Notices of violation. Deficiencies that will result in a finding of
noncompliance and issuance of a notice of violation under this program include
the following:
      (1)   Failure of the FSE to allow the Inspector or city staff access to
all parts of the FSE premises for inspection, observation, records examination,
measurement, sampling, testing and for other purposes in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter shall constitute an immediate violation, as stated
above;
      (2)   Failure of the FSE to properly operate, maintain, clean, and/or
repair a grease interceptor and/or grease trap in accordance with this
ordinance;
      (3)   Failure of the FSE to report changes in operations or plumbing
changes or additions, as indicated above, which could affect the operations or
loading of the grease trap or grease interceptor and including, without
limitation, a change of use which necessitates the issuance of a new SCDHEC
food service permit; remodeling or expansion of the food preparation area; and/
or modifications to the kitchen waste plumbing system;
      (4)   Where the FSE is operating an irreparable, non-functioning or
defective grease trap and/or grease interceptor that is in need of replacement;
      (5)   Failure by the FSE or successor owner to report a sale or change in
ownership of the FSE by submitting a new FOG registration form within the
thirty (30) days and in accordance with the procedures set forth in this
chapter;
      (6)   Failure of the FSE to have or maintain plumbing connections to a
grease trap or grease interceptor in compliance with the requirements of this
chapter;
      (7)   Failure of the FSE to submit a completed FOG registration within
thirty (30) days after the date of notification by the city that such an
application is required to be submitted;
      (8)   Failure of the FSE to promptly report to the city that it is
contributing FOG to the city's wastewater collection system in quantities in
excess of the allowable limits as established in Chapter 3;
      (9)   Failure of the FSE to maintain and/or retain, or to produce upon
the Inspector or city staffs request, records as required under this chapter
for the time period delineated in this program;
      (10)   Failure of the FSE owner to maintain a grease management program
in place;
      (11)   Failure of the FSE owner and/or any user of a shared grease
interceptor to identify to the city all FSEs connected to the shared grease
interceptor in the FOG registration form in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter;
      (12)   Failure by an FSE which previously received a notice of violation
under this program to achieve compliance upon re-inspection;
      (13)   Bad-faith failure or refusal to comply with a notice of violation
issued under this program by an FTE or failure to otherwise cooperate with the
Inspector and/or city staff as required by this ordinance as determined by the
Inspector of city staff; and
      (14)   Any other failure to comply or noncompliance with the Program, of
this Chapter 3.
   (b)   Schedules of compliance. Failure to comply with this ordinance may
result in the following notices of violation with the compliance schedules
noted. However, nothing in this section precludes the city from taking
immediate enforcement against an FSE in violation of this Chapter 3 where such
action is indicated in light of the reckless or willful nature of the
violation.
      (1)   A notice of violation may be issued to the FSE by the city with the
following compliance schedule in situations where an Inspector determines:
         a.   That the FSE's grease trap and/or grease interceptor is
irreparable or defective and must be replaced;
         b.   That an FSE has no grease management in place;
         c.   That the FSE has undergone a change of use which necessitates the
issuance of a new SCDHEC food service license and/or permit, remodeling,
expansion of the food preparation area, or modifications to the kitchen waste
plumbing system and has failed to comply with the requirements of this chapter;
         d.   That the FSE does not have or does not properly maintain plumbing
connections to a grease trap or grease interceptor in compliance with this
chapter.
      (2)   FSEs receiving a notice of violation for any deficiency identified
above will be required, within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice of
violation, to submit a corrective action plan to the city for consideration,
outlining and detailing the scope of work, including a timeline for completion,
that meets the requirements set forth in this program, and Chapter 3. If the
city approves the corrective action plan, the FSE must construct the
improvements at its own expense. Construction must be complete within forty-
five (45) days of the date of the city's written approval of the corrective
action plan. A pre-construction inspection will be scheduled by the city, and
the FSE is responsible for notifying the city at least twenty-four (24) hours
in advance of the start of construction in order for this inspection to be
scheduled.
      (3)   A notice of violation may be issued to the FSE by the city with a
fifteen (15) day compliance schedule in situations where an Inspector
determines:
         a.   That the FSE has failed to adequately clean, maintain, repair, or
replace a grease trap or grease interceptor as determined by the city in
accordance with this program;
         b.   That the FSE is contributing FOG to the city’s wastewater
collection system in quantities in excess of the allowable limits as
established by the city in Chapter 3;
         c.   That the FSE has been sold or undergoes a change of ownership or
in operations and a new FOG registration form is not submitted by the new FSE
owner in accordance with the requirements of this chapter;
         d.   That the FSE has been notified by the city that it must submit a
completed FOG registration form and the FSE has failed to do so within thirty
(30) days of the date of notification;
         e.   That the FSE owner and/or any user of a shared grease interceptor
has failed to identify to the city all FSEs connected to the shared grease
interceptor in the FOG registration form in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter;
         f.   That the FSE has failed to produce, maintain, or retain
maintenance logs, files, or other records required to be kept under this
chapter for the time period consisting of the two (2) years immediately
preceding the date of the most recent inspection at the FSE and any time period
thereafter; or
         g.   That the FSE has otherwise failed to comply with the program in
any other manner set forth in this chapter.
      (4)   In such cases the FSE has fifteen (15) days from the date of the
issuance of the notice to correct the conditions giving rise to the violation
and achieve compliance.
      (5)   A notice of violation will be issued to the FSE by the city with a
seven (7) day compliance schedule in situations where an Inspector determines:
         a.   That the FSE previously received a notice of violation under this
program and, upon re-inspection, the FSE remained in noncompliance; or
         b.   That the FSE, in the sole discretion of the city, has engaged in
bad-faith failure or has refused to comply with a notice of violation issued
under this program or has failed to otherwise cooperate with the Inspector and/
or city staff as required by this chapter.
      (6)   In such cases the FSE has seven (7) days from the date of the
issuance of the notice to correct the conditions giving rise to the violation
and achieve compliance.
   (c)   Corrective action. Where an FSE receives three (3) notices of
violation within a one-year time period under this program, the FSE will be
automatically placed on a corrective action plan by the city that is designed
to bring the grease trap and/or grease interceptor into compliance within the
period of time specified in the corrective action plan. An FSE may be placed on
a corrective action plan for a single violation or combination of violations
when, in the discretion of the city, such violation(s) are recurring or are of
a nature or severity which warrants the immediate imposition of a corrective
action plan to bring the FSE into compliance with this chapter.
   (d)   Other enforcement action. Any FSE which violates Chapter 3 or this
chapter shall be subject to such other enforcement action as allowed by and in
accordance with Chapter 3 and applicable state law, including, but not limited
to:
      (1)   A civil penalty not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000) for
each day of violation under the terms of Article F of this Title;
      (2)   Termination of water or wastewater service pursuant to Sec. 4-3-95;
      (3)   Immediate revocation of any other permits or licenses granted by
the city related to the activities generating the FOG discharge, and
      (4)   Criminal penalties pursuant to Article F of this title.
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-77  General specifications for grease traps and grease interceptors.
   (a)   This section includes guidelines and requirements for design and
installation of grease traps and grease interceptors. Construction details as
shown in standard grease interceptor and standard grease interceptor in series,
attached hereto as Attachment A and Attachment B, respectively, are part of
these specifications.
   (b)   Grease traps or grease interceptors shall be provided by each FSE for
the proper handling of liquid wastes containing significant amounts of fats,
oils, and grease as specified in FOG management program requirements. All
grease traps and grease interceptors installed by FSEs must be in compliance
with the specifications herein and shall be located so as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All grease traps and grease
interceptors shall be supplied by and properly cleaned and maintained by the
FSE owner at its own expense in accordance with and as provided in this
chapter.
   (c)   All FSEs, new or existing, requesting new or expanded sewer service
from the city, shall submit a FOG registration form in accordance with Part 1
prior to receiving such new or expanded sewer service.
   (d)   It is the intent of this specification to provide specific standards
for the location, design, installation and construction of grease traps and
grease interceptors in accordance with the requirements stated herein. Failure
to comply with this specification shall result in the denial or discontinuance
of water and/or sewer service.
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-78  Design and construction requirements.
   (a)   New FSEs.
      (1)   Non-cooking intensive FSEs, as determined by the city based on the
nature of the FSE's operations, may be allowed to utilize grease traps.
Examples of FSEs which might be determined to be non-cooking intensive FSEs are
identified in City of West Columbia grease trap and grease interceptor sizing
guide (Attachment C); however, these FSEs are provided by way of example only
and for general guidance to the public only. The city will make a determination
on the applicable sizing guide formula for an FSE on a case-by-case basis.
      (2)   All New FSEs as previously defined, with the exception of non-
cooking intensive FSEs as determined by the city, are required to install a
grease interceptor sized in accordance with the City of West Columbia grease
trap and grease interceptor sizing guide (Attachment C).
      (3)   A grease trap or grease interceptor must be sized in accordance
with the formulae set forth in (A), (B), or (C) of the City of West Columbia
Grease Trap and Grease Interceptor Tank Sizing Guide (Attachment C) unless the
city approves sizing calculations signed and sealed by a registered
professional engineer in accordance with the fixture unit calculation method
set forth in (D) of the City of West Columbia Grease Trap and Grease
Interceptor Tank Sizing Guide (Attachment C). No grease interceptor less than
one thousand (1,000) gallons total capacity will be approved for installation
by the city provided that the city may consider granting exceptions on a case
by case basis where it receives engineering calculations sealed by a
professional engineer registered in the State of South Carolina and acceptable
to the city demonstrating that a smaller size has satisfactory capacity from
the FSE owner to the city. The city retains sole discretion to approve or deny
use of a grease interceptor less than one thousand (1,000) gallons total
capacity in all circumstances, even in the event such engineering calculations
are provided. In evaluating a request for such approval, the city shall
consider all relevant factors, including, without limitations, the risk of
failure of such a system to perform as intended, the maintenance and monitoring
requirements associated with such a system, and the city's interest in
consistency and uniformity in the administration of these requirements.
      (4)   All New FSEs must submit, for each grease trap and grease
interceptor, cut sheets, plans, and specifications in form and content
reasonably acceptable to the city. These documents must be submitted to the
city prior to the FSE's installation of the grease trap and/or grease
interceptor. An approval letter for each new grease trap or grease interceptor
must be issued by the city to the FSE prior to construction and/or installation
of the grease trap and/or grease interceptor by the new FSE.
      (5)   The construction and location criteria for grease interceptors must
be in accordance with Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Guidance Document,
“On site Wastewater Treatment and Disposal Systems,” Chapter 8, as currently
issued and as that document may be updated or superseded by similar EPA
guidance documents in the future.
      (6)   No New FSE may initiate operations that potentially discharge FOG
into the city's system until proper grease traps and/or grease interceptors, as
appropriate, are installed by the FSE in accordance with this title and are
inspected as installed and approved by the city.
      (7)   For cases where, in consideration of all relevant design and
engineering factors, the city determines in its sole discretion that
underground-type grease interceptors are appropriate but not feasible to
install, new FSEs must install approved grease traps in accordance with
divisions (1) and (2) for use on individual fixtures, including, without
limitation, pot sinks, mop sinks, pre-rinse sinks, wok ovens, floor drains and
other potentially grease containing drains. In such cases, grease traps will be
considered acceptable by the city only if approved flow control fittings are
placed on the inlet that prevent overloading and a sample port is placed on the
outlet of each grease trap.
      (8)   FSEs shall not connect dishwashers, garbage grinders, or domestic
sewers to any grease trap or grease interceptor.
      (9)   All grease traps and grease interceptors must be installed by a
properly licensed plumbing contractor.
   (b)   Existing FSEs.
      (1)   All existing FSEs, as previously defined, must have grease traps
and grease interceptors approved by the city in accordance with this article.
In cases where existing FSEs do not already have a grease interceptor installed
and where the installation of an outdoor grease interceptor is feasible in the
city’s sole discretion, the grease interceptor must be installed by the FSE in
accordance with this article and must be approved by the city in writing in
advance of installation. The city shall consider exception requests based on
all relevant design and engineering factors including, without limitations, the
risks of failure of such a system to perform as intended, the maintenance and
monitoring requirements associated with such a system, and the city's interest
in consistency and uniformity in the administration of these requirements.
      (2)   Sizing of any grease trap or grease interceptor must be in
accordance with the City of Columbia Grease Trap and Interceptor Sizing Guide
(Attachment C).
      (3)   Grease interceptors must be located as close to the source of the
wastewater service line at the building as physically possible, while remaining
accessible for maintenance.
      (4)   Existing FSEs shall not connect new dishwashers, garbage grinders,
or domestic sewer to any grease trap or grease interceptor. The city, in its
sole discretion, and after due consideration of all relevant design,
engineering and cost factors, as well as the public interest in the services
provided by the FSE's operations, may grant a variance to this requirement in
circumstances in which the city determines that compliance with this
requirement would be unduly burdensome or impractical due to physical condition
or layout of the FSE.
      (5)   New flow control devices, grease traps, or grease interceptors must
be pre-approved prior to installation.
   (c)   Grease traps. Prior to installation, the design and location of all
grease traps must be submitted by the FSE to the city for approval with
supporting calculations, cut sheets, and/or sizing charts, including a sizing
chart similar to requirements set forth in the City of West Columbia Grease
Trap Specification Sheet Example (Attachment D) and all in form and content
reasonably satisfactory to the city and sufficient to show compliance with the
requirements of this chapter. Satisfactory proof of minimum grease trap
capacity, as specified in the City of West Columbia Grease Trap and Interceptor
Sizing Guide (Attachment C) must also be provided to the city by the FSE for
all grease traps prior to installation. A grease trap must be sized in
accordance with the formulae set forth in (A), (B), or (C) of the City of West
Columbia Grease Trap and Grease Interceptor Sizing Guide (Attachment C) unless
the city approves sizing calculations signed and sealed by a registered
professional engineer in accordance with the fixture unit calculation method
set forth in (D) of the City of West Columbia Grease Trap and Grease
Interceptor Sizing Guide (Attachment C).
   (d)   Grease interceptors. All FSE’s grease interceptors must:
      (1)   Be sized in accordance with the formulae set forth in (A), (B), or
(C) of the City of West Columbia Grease Trap and Grease Interceptor Sizing
Guide (Attachment C) unless the city approves sizing calculations signed and
sealed by a registered professional engineer in accordance with the fixture
unit calculation method set forth in (D) of the City of West Columbia Grease
Trap and Grease Interceptor Sizing Guide (Attachment C).
      (2)   Provide precast or cast in place minimum four thousand (4,000) psi
concrete vaults. The city, in its sole discretion, may allow the use of other
materials upon written request for approval prior to installation and
considering all relevant design, engineering and other factors demonstrating
the need and acceptability of the use of alternative construction techniques or
materials.
      (3)   Provide an open top inlet tee that extends to twenty-four (24)
inches from the bottom of the vault;
      (4)   Provide a vault with a baffle wall with a minimum three (3) inches
air gap for venting at the top and an open top tee extending to twelve (12)
inches from the bottom of the vault;
      (5)   Provide an outlet tee that extends to twelve (12) inches from the
bottom of the vault;
      (6)   Provide access manholes to be maintained by the FSE directly above
all three (3) tees for inspection and maintenance;
      (7)   Provide two-way cleanouts to be maintained by the FSEs on the inlet
and outlet lines;
      (8)   Demonstrate an anti-flotation design with proper base course and
compacted sub-grade to prevent settling where conditions warrant;
      (9)   Provide vault top and manhole covers for HS-20 rated loading where
applicable; and
      (10)   As to all grease interceptors, provide that they are located where
they are easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and maintenance.
   (e)   Standard grease interceptors details.
      (1)   FSEs must comply with standard details as illustrated in standard
grease interceptor (Attachment A) and standard grease interceptor in series
(Attachment E) for standard grease interceptor installation.
      (2)   Grease interceptors may be installed in series if volume required
is more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons. When installed in
series, the first tank shall not have a baffle or center tee (see standard
grease interceptor in series (Attachment B)).
   (f)   Access manholes.
      (1)   The minimum access opening dimensions for access manholes shall be
a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches in diameter.
      (2)   An access opening shall be provided by the FSE above the inlet,
baffle wall, and outlet tees and shall be easily removable by one person.
      (3)   A minimum six (6) inches diameter traffic rated clean out with a
concrete collar extending down through the vault top may be provided by the FSE
above the baffle wall tee in lieu of an access manhole.
         a.   Manhole frames and covers:
         b.   Shall provide grey iron castings, ASTM A48, Class 2 Iron;
         c.   All bearing surfaces shall be machined;
         d.   Acceptable manufacturer: US Foundry Model 680; and
         e.   Shall provide HS-20 rated frame and cover where applicable.
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-79  Inspection for Acceptance.
   (a)   The FSE must notify the city 48 hours in advance, during the normal
work week, when the grease interceptor is ready for final inspection by the
city, and the city must give final approval prior to the FSE covering any
grease interceptor.
   (b)   Where the city denies approval of the grease trap and/or grease
interceptor for a new FSE, the city may elect to submit a request to the
appropriate building official requesting that certificates of occupancy be
withheld until the grease trap and/or grease interceptor is constructed in
accordance with this specification and is approved by the city.
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-80  Diagram A: Standard grease inspector.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86bbc0c240ae58e92f7fc29dd1a27492b9107e74/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1291.jpg]
 
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-81  Diagram B:  Standard grease interceptor in series.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86bbc0c240ae58e92f7fc29dd1a27492b9107e74/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1295.jpg]
 
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-82  Diagram C: Grease trap and grease interceptor sizing guide.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86bbc0c240ae58e92f7fc29dd1a27492b9107e74/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1299.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86bbc0c240ae58e92f7fc29dd1a27492b9107e74/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1301.jpg]
 
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-83  Diagram D:  Grease trap specification sheet example.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/86bbc0c240ae58e92f7fc29dd1a27492b9107e74/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1305.jpg]
 
 
Total Gallon Capacity Dimension in inches
                      Length (A) Height (B) Width (C)
9.2                   19         8          14
19.4                  24         11         17
49.8                  30         16         24
74.2                  34         18         28
98.7                  38         20         30
 
   Formula for Calculating Total Grease Trap Capacity:
   [Length(A) x Height(B) x Width(C) x 7.48 = Total Gallon Capacity]
   Notes:
   1.   All proposed grease trap plans to be submitted and approved by City of
Columbia Department of Utilities and Engineering prior to installation.
   2.   Grease trap installed, owned and maintained by property owner.
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
ARTICLE E
Industrial Wastewater Pre-Treatment and Service
4-3-84  Introduction.
   (a)   This Article E of Title 4, Chapter 3 of the City of West Columbia
ordinances governs the City of West Columbia's industrial pre-treatment
programs and requirements and sets forth the regulation of discharges of
industrial waste, as defined below, into the City's sewer systems. Persons
discharging industrial wastes into the City of West Columbia's system are
subject both to the obligations set forth in this Article E, and all applicable
provisions of the other chapters and articles of these ordinances. The
determination that a person is subject to the requirements of this Article E is
based on the nature of the waste discharged regardless of whether or not the
person is conducting industrial or other commercial activities.
   (b)   The City receives bulk wastewater treatment services from the City of
Columbia through facilities owned by the City of Columbia. The city may from
time to time by agreement delegate the power to administer and enforce its
industrial pretreatment program to the City of Columbia. In such cases, the
City of Columbia, as agent for the city, and subject to its supervision and
oversight, may do all things reasonably necessary, lawful and appropriate in
carrying out the purposes and intents of this section.
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-85  Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   (a)   Approving authority. The City Engineer, Director of Planning and
Engineering or his duly authorized representative. When the application to
discharge involves industrial waste, the permit must be approved by the
approving authority and the Director of Planning and Engineering or his
representative. The City of West Columbia acts through the approving authority
in issuing and supervising permits for purposes of this section.
   (b)   BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of
organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty
(20) degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   (c)   Color. The color of the light transmitted by the waste solution after
removing the suspended material, including the pseudo-colloidal particles.
   (d)   Domestic waste. That liquid from bathrooms, shower rooms, toilet
rooms, sinks, kitchens, laundry facilities located in residences, apartments,
hotels, motels, restaurants, cafeterias, office buildings, schools and
commercial establishments.
   (e)   Industrial user. Any user of the publicly owned treatment works that
discharges nondomestic waste.
   (f)   Industrial waste and other pollutants. Any of the following:
      (1)   Liquid wastes, other than domestic wastes, resulting from processes
or operations employed in industrial establishments;
      (2)   Liquid wastes, other than domestic wastes, that are discharged from
establishments providing special services; and/or
      (3)   Contaminated groundwater.
   (g)   Normal waste. Waste having a BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand)
concentration of two hundred (200) milligrams per liter or less and suspended
solids concentration of two hundred (200) milligrams per liter or less.
   (h)   Person. Any individual, firm, company, association, corporation, or
municipal corporation other than the city.
   (i)   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution. The stabilized pH of waste will be considered to
be a pH which is within the specified pH limits after a sample of the waste has
been subjected to aeration.
   (j)   Properly shredded waste. The organic wastes resulting from the
preparation, cooking and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle being greater than one-
half inch in any dimension.
   (k)   Receiving stream and waters of the state. All streams, lakes, ponds,
marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers,
irrigation systems, drainage systems and other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which
are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion
thereof and which receive the discharge from a wastewater treatment plant or
are formed by the effluent from a wastewater treatment plant.
   (l)   Sanitary sewer. A sewer intended to receive domestic waste, industrial
waste and other waterborne pollutants, except that of the type expressly
prohibited by this article.
   (m)   Sanitary sewerage system. All or any part of the lateral sewers,
collecting sewers, district sewers, intercepting sewers, wastewater pumping
stations, waste treatment facilities and outfall sewers owned by the city and/
or administered by the city.
   (n)   Significant industrial user. Any industrial user subject to national
categorical pretreatment standards, or any noncategorical industrial user
which:
      (1)   Discharges twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of
process wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewaters);
      (2)   Contributes a process wastewater which makes up five percent (5%)
or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity (BOD, TSS,
etc.) of the treatment facilities; or
      (3)   Has a reasonable potential in the opinion of the approving
authority to adversely affect the treatment facilities (inhibition, pass-
through of pollutants, sludge contamination or endangerment of treatment
personnel).
      (4)   Significant noncompliance means any of the following:
         a.   Chronic violations in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of
the measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit or the same average limit
in a six-month period (any magnitude of exceedance);
         b.   Technical review criteria violations in which thirty-three
percent (33%) or more of the measurements exceed the same daily maximum limit
or the same average limit by more than one and four tenths (1.4) or forty
percent (40%) for conventional pollutants (BOD, TSS, and fat, oil and grease)
or more than one and two tenths (1.2) or twenty percent (20%) for all other
pollutants, in a six (6)-month period;
         c.   Any other violation of an effluent limit (average or daily
maximum) that the approving authority believes has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference (e.g., slug loads) or pass-
through or endangered the health of sewage treatment personnel or the public;
         d.   Any discharge of a public pollutant which has caused imminent
endangerment to human health or welfare or to the environment and resulted in
action by the approving authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
         e.   Violations of compliance schedule milestones contained in an
enforcement order or similar city-issued documentation for starting
construction, completing construction and attaining compliance by ninety (90)
days or more after the schedule date;
         f.   Failure to provide reports for compliance schedules, self-
monitoring data or categorical standards (baseline monitoring reports, ninety
(90)-day compliance reports and periodic reports) within thirty (30) days from
the due date;
         g.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
         h.   Any other violation or group of violations which the approving
authority considers to be significant.
   (o)   Strength of waste. The concentration, expressed in milligrams per
liter of BOD, Suspended solids or compounds (substances) contained in the
liquid waste.
   (p)   Suspended solids. Solids that either float on the surface of or are
suspended in water or liquid waste, and which are removable by laboratory
filtration.
   (q)   Testing methods. Shall be as described in 40 CFR 136 or subsequent
amendments thereto.
   (r)   Unpolluted water or waste. Any water or waste containing none of the
following: free or emulsified grease or oil; acids or alkalies; phenols or
other substances imparting taste and odor in receiving waters; toxic or
poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; and noxious or
odorous gases. Unpolluted water or waste shall contain no more than ten
milligrams per liter of BOD. Unpolluted water or waste normally shall include:
      (1)   The discharge from rain downspouts and drains.
      (2)   The discharge from surface water and stormwater drains.
      (3)   The discharge from air conditioning systems.
      (4)   Cooling waters containing no free or emulsified greases or oils, no
acids or alkalies, no phenols or other substances imparting taste and odor in
receiving waters, no toxic or poisonous substances (whether in suspension, in
colloidal state or in solution), and no noxious or odorous gases.
   (s)   Unpolluted water or waste. Any water or waste judged by the bureau of
water pollution control of the state to be admissible to streams and
watercourses under the jurisdiction of the bureau of water pollution control of
the state, and in accordance with the standard of water quality established by
the state Department of Health and Environmental Control for the particular
stream or watercourse into which such unpolluted water or waste is to be
discharged.
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-86  Prohibited discharge.
   (a)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any portion
of the sewerage system, directly or indirectly, any waste which may violate any
law or governmental regulation or have an adverse or harmful effect on the
sewerage system, maintenance personnel, wastewater treatment plant personnel or
equipment, treatment plant effluent quality, or public or private property, or
which may otherwise endanger the public or the local environment or create a
nuisance. Discharges of the following are prohibited:
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, acetone, solvent or fuel oil or any
liquid, solid or gas that would cause flammable or explosive conditions,
including but not limited to waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less
than one hundred and forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty (60) degrees
Celsius) using test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21 or subsequent amendments
thereto.
      (2)   Any quantities of rainwater, stormwater, groundwater, street
drainage, water from yard fountains, ponds or lawn sprays, or any other
unpolluted water, except as provided in this article.
      (3)   Any water added for the purpose of diluting wastes which would
otherwise exceed applicable maximum concentration limitations for any
wastewater constituent.
      (4)   Any wastes containing dissolved sulfides in amounts which would be
hazardous, cause damage to the sewerage system, or create a public nuisance.
      (5)   Any waste, liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one
hundred and fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius).
      (6)   Any waste that will increase the temperature of the treatment plant
influent to greater than one hundred and four (104) degrees Fahrenheit (forty
(40) degrees Celsius).
      (7)   Any wastes requiring the introduction of an excessive quantity of
chlorine or any other chemical compound for sewage treatment purposes.
      (8)   Any quantities of deionized water, steam condensate or distilled
water.
      (9)   Any waste producing discoloration of wastewater or treatment plant
effluent.
      (10)   Any waste containing substances that may precipitate, solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between fifty (50) degrees Fahrenheit (ten (10)
degrees Celsius) and one hundred (100) degrees Fahrenheit (thirty-eight (38)
degrees Celsius).
      (11)   Any quantities of garbage or waste that are not ground
sufficiently to pass through a one-half (1/2) inch screen.
      (12)   Any quantity of blow-down or bleed water from cooling towers or
other evaporative coolers exceeding one-third (1/3) of the makeup water.
      (13)   Any quantity of single pass cooling water.
      (14)   Recognizable portions of the human anatomy.
      (15)   Any water or waste containing more than one hundred (100)
milligrams per liter of fat, oil or grease, exclusive of soap or any amount of
petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin
that will interfere with or pass through the waste treatment facilities.
      (16)   Any waste that has not been properly shredded.
      (17)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, lint, glass, rags,
metals, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, insulation materials,
fibers of any kind, stock or poultry feeds, processed grains, viscera or other
solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to flow in sewers or
interference with proper operation of waste treatment facilities.
      (18)   Any waters or wastes having a stabilized pH lower than 6.0 or
higher than 9.0, or having properties capable of either causing damage or
creating a hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sanitary
sewerage system and waste treatment facilities.
      (19)   Any waters or wastes having a BOD concentration in excess of three
hundred (300) milligrams per liter, except as provided in this article.
      (20)   Any waters or wastes having a suspended solids concentration in
excess of three hundred (300) milligrams per liter, except as provided in this
article.
      (21)   Any waters or wastes containing contaminants, including oxygen-
demanding pollutants, of such character or in such quantity as will not be
amenable to the waste treatment processes, or will injure or interfere with the
waste treatment processes, or will constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or
will create a hazard in the stream or watercourse receiving the effluent from
the waste treatment plant.
      (22)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character
and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required in the handling or
treatment of such waste materials at the waste treatment plant.
      (23)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance, or any substance or compound which, when introduced into a
reducing environment such as might exist in the sewerage system, might cause
the evolution of a malodorous gas and thereby create a public nuisance.
      (24)   Any pollutant which could result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors or fumes within the sanitary sewerage system in a quantity that may
cause acute worker health and safety problems.
      (25)   Any radioactive isotope in a concentration greater than that
permitted by the latest regulations published in the Federal Register (see
United States Atomic Energy Commission Rules and Regulations, Title 10, Atomic
Energy, part 20).
   (b)   No person shall discharge harmful quantities of hazardous substances
as defined in 40 CFR 116 through 119 or subsequent amendments thereto, or in
excess of the amounts set forth in Table 1, Sec. 4-3-79 in this section.
   (c)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing the execution of a contract, special agreement or arrangement
between the city and any person whereby an industrial waste or pollutant of
unusual strength or character may be admitted into the sanitary sewerage system
by the city after approved pretreatment of such waste by the person desiring to
discharge waste into the sanitary sewerage system, or the assessment of special
charges for the use of the sewer system.
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-87  Discharge of industrial waste.
   Generally, it is the desire and intent of the city to cooperate with
industry in the effort to improve quality, prevent impairment of quality, or
maintain quality of streams in the West Columbia area in accordance with water
quality standards established by the state Department of Health and
Environmental Control for the various streams and watercourses in the West
Columbia area. To this end, the city may permit the discharge of industrial
waste into the sanitary sewerage system provided that:
   (a)   Sewerage capacity is available on a basis compatible with the best
overall use of the sewer;
   (b)   The waste being discharged or proposed to be discharged is amenable to
treatment by the processes employed in the waste treatment plants of the city;
   (c)   The waste being discharged or proposed to be discharged will not cause
damage to the sanitary sewerage system and/or waste treatment facilities, and
will not constitute a hazard to humans and animals or be capable of creating a
public nuisance;
   (d)   The concentration of substances, compounds and elements in the waste
being discharged or proposed to be discharged does not exceed the limits
established by the city or Federal pretreatment standards; and
   (e)   Any person now discharging or proposing to discharge waste shall fully
comply with this article. Applications for permits to discharge industrial
waste into the sanitary sewerage system of the city will be reviewed by the
approving authority on this basis.
      (1)   Required information. Any person discharging or any person desiring
to discharge industrial waste into the sanitary sewerage system shall submit
with his application to the approving authority a complete chemical analysis of
the waste being discharged or proposed to be discharged, including
concentrations of BOD and suspended solids contained therein. Such person shall
also submit pertinent flow data, including rates and duration, and a
description of his operations. Should the waste from such person's operations
be deemed to be inadmissible into the sanitary sewerage system because of
objectionable character as defined by this chapter, because of concentration of
elements or substances in excess of the limits established by the approving
authority, or because of flow characteristics incompatible with the best use of
the receiving sewer, the approving authority will not approve the discharge of
such waste into the sanitary sewerage system until such person has employed, at
his own expense, methods and processes of pretreatment as will render the waste
admissible to the sanitary sewerage system in accordance with this chapter.
      (2)   Criteria for approval. The approving authority will not specify,
suggest or recommend equipment, structures or arrangements comprising the
pretreatment processes. Approval of discharge of industrial waste by any person
will be given only on the basis of performance of pretreatment processes (if
pretreatment should be required). Approval given to any person for discharge of
industrial waste, whether pretreated or not, into the sanitary sewerage system
shall in no way relieve such person of the responsibility of full compliance
with this chapter at all times.
      (3)   Flow equalization. To effectively utilize the capacity of the
sanitary sewerage system and to facilitate operation of the waste treatment
facilities, it may be desirable that discharge of industrial waste into the
sanitary sewerage system be done at a uniform rate of flow over a period of 24
hours or by bulk discharge at specific periods of time. In order to accomplish
this purpose, any person discharging or proposing to discharge industrial waste
into the sanitary sewerage system shall provide, at his own expense, a holding
tank from which such waste shall be discharged at a specified rate of flow over
a twenty-four (24)-hour period. This requirement may be waived provided that:
         a.   The total daily waste flow from the establishment of such person
does not exceed fifty thousand (50,000) gallons;
         b.   The maximum rate of discharge from the establishment does not
exceed one hundred (100) gallons per minute; and
         c.   In all other respects, the discharge of such waste is in full
compliance with this article.
      (4)   Holding tank wastes. Any person proposing to discharge any holding
tank industrial wastes into the sewerage system must secure a permit from the
city in accordance with this chapter. A separate permit must be secured for
each separate discharge unless it can be demonstrated that the wastewater is
routinely produced and is of such quantity and quality as to be in compliance
with the permit. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the holding
tank or other similar facility to secure the permit from the city.
      (5)   Septic tank trucks. Owners of septic tank trucks or of other
methods of transportation utilized in the conveyance of wastes into the
sewerage system, or their lessees, shall also secure a permit. The terms and
conditions of the permit may include, but shall not be limited to, the
following:
         a.   Maximum permissible composite concentration of wastewater
constituents.
         b.   Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow
regulation.
         c.   Requirements for inspection and sampling.
         d.   Requirements for recording, maintaining and reporting information
concerning the origin of each tank truck load, and identification of industrial
contributors to the load by permit number.
         e.   Prohibition of discharge of certain wastewater constituents.
         f.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the approving authority
to ensure compliance with this chapter.
      (6)   General guidelines. As stated in this section, the discharge of any
industrial waste or pollutant by any person shall be considered on an
individual basis for each applicant, and individual application shall be made
by any person discharging or proposing to discharge any industrial waste or
pollutant into the sanitary sewerage system. For the general information of
those persons discharging or proposing to discharge any industrial waste or
pollutant into the sanitary sewerage system, the standards as set forth in this
subsection shall apply to such discharge. All requirements as set forth under
the section labeled “Prohibited Discharges,” Sec.
4-3-86  shall also be applicable, except as extended or amplified in this
section.
         a.   Packinghouse waste. All hair, bristle, hides or parts of hides,
bones, animal parts, paunch manure, viscera, grease (in excess of the
concentration specified in this chapter), stock feeds, grit, sand and straw
shall be removed prior to discharge.
         b.   Poultry processing waste. All feathers, parts of birds, bones,
grit, sand, poultry feeds, viscera and grease (in excess of the concentration
specified in this chapter) shall be removed prior to discharge.
         c.   Textile wastes. All lint, thread, pieces of cloth, latex and yarn
shall be removed prior to discharge. Kiering and acid boiling wastes shall be
cooled, neutralized and stabilized within the limits specified in this article.
Bleachery wastes shall be cooled, neutralized and stabilized within the limits
specified in this chapter. Sulfur dyeing wastes shall not be admitted to the
sanitary sewerage system. Admission of other dyeing wastes will be considered
as specific problems are presented.
         d.   BOD. Concentration of BOD in the waste in excess of three hundred
(300) milligrams per liter shall be subject to charges set forth in this
article, and concentration in excess of five hundred (500) milligrams per liter
shall be subject to further review before approval by the approving authority.
         e.   Suspended solids. Concentration of suspended solids in the waste
in excess of three hundred (300) milligrams per liter shall be subject to
charges set forth in this article, and concentration in excess of five hundred
(500) milligrams per liter shall be subject to further review before approval
by the approving authority.
         f.   Dissolved solids. Allowable concentrations of dissolved solids
shall be based on evaluation of industrial allocation and shall be determined
by the approving authority on a case-by-case basis.
         g.   Ceramic glazing wastes. Ceramic glazing wastes shall not be
discharged into the sanitary sewerage system.
         h.   Lime, alum and calcium sulphate sludges. Lime, alum and calcium
sulphate sludges shall not be discharged into the sanitary sewerage system;
provided, however, sludges generated by operations of water treatment plants
owned and operated by governmental entities may be discharged subject to
quantity limitations and permit conditions deemed appropriate by the approving
authority.
         i.   Toxic materials. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to
injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard
to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving water of the
sanitary sewerage system, or exceed the limitations set forth in Table 1 in
this chapter shall be precipitated and removed from the waste flow prior to
discharge to the sanitary sewerage system. Waste containing hexavalent chromium
shall have chromium reduced to the trivalent state prior to discharge and shall
not exceed the limitation set forth in Table 1, Sec. 4-3-88.
         j.   Phenol. Waste containing phenolics in excess of five hundred
(500) milligrams per liter will not be permitted.
         k.   Pyridine. Concentration of pyridine in the waste received at the
waste treatment facilities of the City of Columbia shall not exceed one half
(0.50) milligrams per liter by weight. Quantity of pyridine in any waste
discharged by any person shall be regulated at the source, when and if required
by the approving authority, so as to prevent the concentration of pyridine in
the waste received at the waste treatment facilities of the City of Columbia
from exceeding one half (0.50) milligrams per liter by weight.
         l.   Organotins. Monobutyltin, dibutyltin, tributyltin, tetrabutyltin
or any of the octyl tin group shall not be discharged into the sanitary sewer
system.
         m.   The omission of any particular waste from the standards outlined
in this subsection does not imply that discharge of such waste to the sanitary
sewerage system will be permitted. Any liquid waste of peculiar character and
volume, or of toxic or unusual nature, shall be subject to review by the
approving authority and to standards deemed applicable by the approving
authority.
      (7)   Measurement of volume. The volume or quantity of industrial waste
discharged by any person into the sanitary sewerage system shall be measured by
one or more of the following methods:
         a.   If the volume of water used by any person in his industrial or
process operations is substantially the same as the volume purchased from the
municipal waterworks system, then the volume of water purchased shall be
considered to be the volume of waste discharged.
         b.   If, in the establishment of any person discharging industrial
waste into the sanitary sewerage system, a substantial portion of the water
purchased from the municipal waterworks system is used for domestic or
commercial purposes (resulting in normal waste), for cooling purposes, or for
other purposes that do not require the discharge of such used water to the
sanitary sewerage system, such person may, at his own expense, install a meter
of a design approved by the approving authority on the waste line from his
industrial and/or process operations. The volume of waste flow, as measured
through the meter, shall be considered to be the volume of waste discharged to
the sanitary sewerage system.
         c.   If any person discharging or proposing to discharge industrial
waste into the sanitary sewerage system does not secure his entire water supply
requirements from the municipal waterworks system, such person shall, at his
own expense, install a meter of a design approved by the approving authority on
the waste line from his industrial and/or process operations. The volume of
waste flow, as measured through the meter, shall be considered to be the volume
of waste discharged to the sanitary sewerage system.
      (8)   Construction and maintenance of control manhole. Any person
discharging or proposing to discharge any industrial waste into the sanitary
sewerage system shall construct, at his own expense, a control manhole on the
waste line from his industrial and/or process operations for the purpose of
facilitating observations, measurements and sampling of the industrial waste
discharged from such person's establishment. The control manhole shall be
constructed in a suitable location satisfactory to the approving authority
downstream from any pretreatment facilities, holding tanks or other approved
works, and ahead of the point of discharge of such waste into the sanitary
sewerage system. The design of the control manhole shall be in accordance with
the requirements of the approving authority. The control manhole shall be
maintained by such person so as to be safe, accessible and in proper operating
condition at all times.
      (9)   Exemption from requirement for control manhole. The requirement
with respect to construction of a control manhole may be waived provided that:
         a.   Total daily waste flow from the establishment of such person does
not exceed the equivalent of twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons of sanitary
waste;
         b.   The maximum rate of discharge from the establishment does not
exceed one hundred (100) gallons per minute;
         c.   Access, means and facilities are provided within such person's
establishment for the purpose of observing, measuring and sampling the waste
flow from such person's establishment; and
         d.   The discharge of all such waste from the establishment is, in all
other respects, in full compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-88  Maximum allowable concentrations of pollutants.
 
 
TABLE 1. MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE CONCENTRATIONS
Constituent (mg/l)    Average of four consecutive Maximum for any one day (mg/
                      monitoring days (mg/1)      1)
Arsenic               0.1                         0.1
Barium                10.0                        10.0
Boron                 20.0                        40.0
Cadmium               0.7                         1.2
Chromium (trivalent)  1.0                         1.5
Chromium (hexavalent) 0.0                         0.0
Copper                0.5                         0.5
Cyanide               0.5                         1.6
Lead                  0.4                         0.6
Manganese             7.0                         10.0
Mercury               0.01                        0.02
Nickel                1.0                         2.0
Selenium              0.1                         0.3
Silver                0.7                         1.2
Zinc                  2.6                         4.2
 
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-89  Discharge permit required; issuance; conditions.
   (a)   Permit required. Any person desiring to deposit or discharge any
industrial waste or other pollutant into the sanitary sewerage system or any
person now discharging any industrial waste or other pollutant into the
sanitary sewerage system shall make application to the approving authority. The
approving authority will approve such application and issue a permit to
discharge only when satisfactory evidence is submitted by the applicant to the
approving authority that the discharge of such industrial waste or other
pollutant is in full compliance with this chapter.
   (b)   Application. Persons seeking a permit shall complete and file with the
approving authority an application in the form prescribed by the approving
authority. The applicant shall submit, where appropriate:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the
owner of the premises from which industrial wastes are intended to be
discharged.
      (2)   Daily average volume of wastewater to be discharged.
      (3)   Schedule of all industrial process waste flows produced before and
after pretreatment, if any, at the premises, including the daily volume, and
wastewater constituents and characteristics as determined by representative
samples and analyses done by a qualified laboratory acceptable to the approving
authority and in accordance with 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto.
      (4)   Estimated time and duration of discharge within a twenty percent
(20%) tolerance.
      (5)   Estimated hourly peak wastewater flow rates, including daily,
monthly and seasonal variations within a twenty percent (20%) tolerance.
      (6)   Site and plumbing plans describing any pretreatment facilities and
showing all connections to the sewerage system.
      (7)   A description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all process waste materials which are or could be
discharged, but excluding proprietary information concerning processes and
products.
      (8)   Type or classes of products produced.
      (9)   The average number of employees and normal hours of work.
      (10)   Any other relevant information as may be deemed by the approving
authority to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.
   (c)   Failure to apply for permit. The responsibility for filing an
application for a permit to discharge shall rest upon the person discharging or
proposing to discharge industrial waste or other pollutants to the sanitary
sewerage system. Should such person fail to file an application for a permit to
discharge and should such person then be discharging any industrial waste or
other pollutant to the sanitary sewerage system, the approving authority shall,
after twenty-four (24) hours' notice has been given, cause such person's water
service from the public water system to be discontinued, and water service will
be restored at such person's expense only after he has complied with the
provisions of this chapter. If such person does not use water exclusively from
the public water system, the approving authority shall, after twenty-four (24)
hours' notice has been given, cause such person's connection to the sanitary
sewerage system to be severed, and such connection will be restored at such
person's expense only after he has complied with the provisions this article.
If the approving authority finds that a person is discharging industrial waste
or other pollutants to the sanitary sewerage system without a permit that is
damaging the sanitary sewage system or endangering the lives of others, the
approving authority shall immediately terminate such person's water service
from the public water system without twenty-four (24) hours' notice, and water
service will be restored at such person's expense only after he has complied
with the provisions of this article. If such person does not use water
exclusively from the public water system, the approving authority shall, after
twenty-four (24) hours' notice has been given, cause such person's connection
to the sanitary sewerage system to be severed, and such connection will be
restored at such person's expense only after he has complied with the
provisions this chapter.
   (d)   Discharging waste prior to obtaining permit. Should any person
discharging or proposing to discharge any industrial waste or other pollutant
into the sanitary sewerage system file an application with the approving
authority for a permit to discharge and should such person then be discharging
any industrial waste or other pollutant to the sanitary sewerage system, the
approving authority shall, after twenty-four (24) hours' notice has been given,
cause such person's water service from the public water system to be
discontinued, and water service will be restored at such person's expense only
after he has complied with the provisions of this chapter. If such person does
not use water exclusively from the public water system, the approving authority
shall, after twenty-four (24) hours' notice has been given, cause such person's
connection to the sanitary sewerage system to be severed, and such connection
will be restored at such person's expense only after he has complied with the
provisions of this chapter. If the approving authority finds that a person is
discharging industrial waste or other pollutants to the sanitary sewerage
system prior to obtaining a permit that is damaging the sanitary sewage system
or endangering the lives of others, the approving authority shall immediately
terminate such person's water service from the public water system without
twenty-four (24) hours' notice, and water service will be restored at such
person's expense only after he has complied with the provisions of this
chapter. If such person does not use water exclusively from the public water
system, the approving authority shall, after twenty-four (24) hours' notice has
been given, cause such person's connection to the sanitary sewerage system to
be severed, and such connection will be restored at such person's expense only
after he has complied with the provisions this chapter.
   (e)   Compliance with discharge standards. All permit holders shall make
wastewater acceptable under the limitations established in this chapter and in
their individual permits before discharging directly or indirectly into any
part of the sewerage system. For existing industrial discharges, an appropriate
compliance schedule may be included in the permit.
   (f)   Compliance with permit conditions. No permit holder shall discharge
industrial wastewaters in excess of the quantity, rate of discharge, or quality
conditions specified in the permit. Any person desiring to modify his discharge
in a manner which would violate conditions of his permit shall notify the
approving authority in advance of such discharge and shall apply for an amended
permit.
   (g)   Issuance. A permit may contain appropriate restrictions that are more
stringent than requirements and limitations set forth in this chapter; in such
case such restrictions shall apply. Issuance of a permit shall not relieve the
discharger from complying with all applicable laws, regulations and ordinances
promulgated by other government authorities, nor shall the issuance of a permit
be construed as a representation by the city that the discharge permitted
therein complies with all of such laws, regulations and ordinances.
   (h)   Restrictions. The restrictions may include but shall not be limited to
the following:
      (1)   The maximum permissible concentration or mass of wastewater
constituents.
      (2)   Limits on rate and time of discharge, or requirements for flow
regulation and equalization.
      (3)   Requirements for inspection, flow metering and sampling facilities,
and alternative Sampling methods.
      (4)   Pretreatment of industrial wastewater before discharge.
      (5)   Provisions for intentional diversion of waste streams from any
portion of the pretreatment facility.
      (6)   Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include sampling
locations, frequency and method of sampling, flow metering, number, types and
standards for tests, and reporting schedule.
      (7)   Prohibition of discharge of certain wastewater constituents.
      (8)   Requirement for submission of periodic discharge reports, to
include information concerning volume, rate of flow, constituent
concentrations, peak flow rates, hours of operation, number of employees or
other information.
      (9)   Requirements for the protection of the sewerage system.
      (10)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the approving authority
to ensure compliance with this chapter.
   (i)   Term. Permits shall be issued for any specified period of time, not to
exceed five (5) years.
   (j)   Separate permit required for each connection; transfer of permit. A
separate permit shall be required for each wastewater connection discharging
directly or indirectly into the sewerage system. For each discharger having
multiple connections at a single plant or facility, a single permit shall be
required which may set forth specific effluent limitations and conditions for
discharge from each separate connection. No permit is transferable.
   (k)   Pretreatment facilities. Any facilities required for pretreatment or
equalization of wastewater prior to discharge into the sewerage system shall be
provided and maintained at the permit holder's expense. Where pretreatment or
equalization of wastewater flows is required by the approving authority, plans,
specifications and other pertinent data or information relating to such
pretreatment or flow control facilities shall be filed with the approving
authority prior to the construction thereof. Plans and specifications for
industrial pretreatment facilities must also be submitted to the state
Department of Health and Environmental Control, Industrial Wastewater Division,
for review and approval prior to construction. Neither filing of the plans nor
the issuance of a permit shall be construed to indicate that the approving
authority in any way vouches for or warrants the capabilities of any such
plans, specifications or data in any manner. Subsequent alterations or
additions to such pretreatment of flow control facilities shall not be made
without prior notice to the approving authority.
   (l)   Surveys. For the purpose of maintaining an accurate, up-to-date
industrial user inventory, the city may, at its discretion, require the
submittal of a survey questionnaire from any nondomestic discharger.
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-90  Right of entry of enforcement officers; right to exclude or limit
waste; compliance with state and Federal standards.
   (a)   The approving authority, the state Department of Health and
Environmental Control and other duly authorized employees of the city and/or
the state Department of Health and Environmental Control, bearing proper
identification of his credentials, shall be permitted to enter upon all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, flow measurement,
examination and copying of records and testing of industrial waste and other
pollutants in accordance with this chapter.
   (b)   The approving authority may temporarily exclude from the sanitary
sewerage system any industrial waste or other pollutant, whether pretreated or
not, whenever in the opinion of the approving authority such action is
necessary for the purpose of determining the effects of such waste upon the
sanitary sewerage system and the waste treatment facilities.
   (c)   The city may exclude from the sanitary sewerage system any industrial
waste or other pollutant, whether pretreated or not, whenever in the opinion of
the city such action is necessary to protect the sanitary sewerage system and
the waste treatment facilities or to facilitate the operation of the sanitary
sewerage system and the waste treatment facilities.
   (d)   The city may set limits on toxic and priority pollutants that are more
stringent than state and federal requirements when it is necessary for the
protection of the sewerage system and/or proper operation of the waste
treatment facilities.
   (e)   Federal and state requirements and limitations on discharges shall
apply in any case where they are more stringent than requirements and
limitations as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-91  Determination of character and strength of wastes; accidental
discharges; confidentiality of information; publication of names of
noncomplying users.
   (a)   The industrial waste and/or other pollutants being discharged by any
person into the sanitary sewerage system shall be subject to inspection. A
determination of character and strength of those wastes shall be made
quarterly, or more often as may be deemed necessary, by the approving authority
or his authorized assistants.
   (b)   Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative of
the wastes being discharged. The laboratory methods followed in the examination
of those wastes shall be those as set forth in 40 CFR 136 and amendments
thereto.
   (c)   The determination of the character, strength or quantity of the wastes
as made by the approving authority shall be binding as a basis for computation
of charges or for actions by the city. The person discharging such wastes may,
however, conduct his own sampling and analytical program and submit to the
approving authority the results relating to character, strength and quantity of
the wastes. In such cases, however, the securing of samples shall be in
accordance with methods acceptable to the approving authority, and the
laboratory procedures followed in analyzing the samples shall be as specified
in Sec.
4-3-90 of this chapter. The approving authority has the right to accept or
reject the submitted results based upon the acceptance criteria as stated in
these ordinances.
   (d)   The approving authority may require any permit holder to construct and
maintain a wastewater monitoring facility of a design or configuration
acceptable and sufficient to accomplish monitoring requirements as set forth in
the permit.
   (e)   The sampling, analysis and flow measurement procedures, equipment,
data and test results shall be subject at any reasonable time to inspection by
the approving authority. The approving authority may require the submission of
all discharge monitoring results generated by testing methods described in 40
CFR 136 or amendments thereto. Flow measurement systems and all appropriate
equipment shall be regularly calibrated in accordance with procedures
acceptable to the approving authority.
   (f)   Dischargers shall notify the approving authority immediately (within
twenty-four (24) hours) by telephone or in person upon discharging wastes in
violation of this article accidentally or otherwise. Such notification shall be
followed, within five (5) days of the day of occurrence, by a detailed written
statement to the approving authority describing the causes of the accidental
discharge and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrences. The
approving authority may require the discharger to conduct follow up testing in
accordance with methods described in 40 CFR 136 or amendments thereto and
submit the test results within a specified timeframe. Dischargers are required
to take all reasonable countermeasures to stop the discharge and to neutralize
its effect, if possible. The approving authority may require the dischargers to
provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other
wastes controlled by this section.
   (g)   Should measurements or other investigations indicate that the
industrial wastewater discharger has discharged wastewater, the constituents of
which are significantly different in quantity or quality from those stated by
the discharger, the approving authority shall notify the discharger and require
that the discharger furnish all information in his possession related to the
discharged wastewater.
   (h)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall
be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction
unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade
secrets of the user. When requested by the person furnishing a report, the
portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made
available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to
this article, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit, the
state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs. Additionally,
such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state
agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report.
   (i)   The approving authority shall at least annually provide public
notification, in the largest daily newspaper published in the metropolitan
Columbia sewer service area, of industrial users which during the previous
twelve (12) months were, at least once, in significant noncompliance with any
provision of this section or any condition or limitation of a permit issued in
accordance with this section.
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-92  Liability for extra costs incurred by city; charge for excess BOD or
suspended solids.
   (a)   Liability for costs associated with violation. Any person who violates
any provision of this article, or any condition or limitation of a permit or
plan approval related thereto, shall be financially responsible and liable to
the city, in addition to normal service charge and surcharges for industrial
wastes, for all costs incurred by the city associated with the violation of
this section, including but not limited to the following:
      (1)   Laboratory analysis costs associated with detecting and correcting
the violation.
      (2)   Additional treatment costs caused by the violation or associated
with detecting and correcting the violation.
      (3)   Repair and/or replacement of any part of the sewerage system
damaged by the violation.
      (4)   Any liability, damages, fines or penalties incurred by the city as
a result of the violation.
      (5)   Other costs as are associated with the detecting and correcting of
the violation.
   (b)   Surcharge for excess BOD or suspended solids. If any person discharges
into the sanitary sewerage system a waste containing BOD concentration or
suspended solids in excess of three hundred (300) milligrams per liter, then
such person shall pay an additional cost according to rates determined by the
city. This monthly surcharge will be assessed on each pound of BOD and each
pound of suspended solids in excess of three hundred (300) milligrams per liter
as follows:
 
                       BOD Rate Suspended Solids Rate
Effective July 1, 1998 $0.08    $0.06
Effective July 1, 1999 0.11     0.08
Effective July 1, 2000 0.14     0.10
Effective July 1, 2001 0.17     0.12
Effective July 1, 2002 0.20     0.14
 
   (c)   Liability for additional expense in handling and treatment of waste.
If any person discharges into the sanitary sewerage system a waste which,
because of its particular or unusual character, imposes an unusual burden on
the sanitary sewerage system and the waste treatment facilities, and causes the
city to incur additional expenses in the handling (conveying) and treatment of
the waste by reason of (but not limited to) provision of additional personnel,
provision of additional equipment or structures, increase in operating costs,
and decrease in efficiency of treatment processes required by and resulting
from the handling and treatment of the waste, then such person shall be charged
for such additional expense over and above the other charges set forth in this
section. The approving authority shall determine whether any person is causing
the city to incur such additional expense and, if so, the amount of such
additional expense.
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-93  Damaging or tampering with city equipment.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, deface, tamper with or remove any equipment or materials used by the
approving authority for the purpose of making waste examinations and waste flow
measurements and left upon the premises of a person discharging wastes into the
sanitary sewerage system. Only authorized persons will be allowed to uncover,
adjust, maintain and remove such equipment and materials.
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-94  Applicability of article; right of city to amend article.
   This section shall apply to any person discharging or proposing to discharge
waste into the sanitary sewerage system. This section shall not be considered
as or construed to be a contract between the city and any person. The city
hereby expressly reserves the right to amend, change or repeal this section at
any time.
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-95  Termination of water or wastewater service; revocation of discharge
permit.
   (a)   The approving authority may suspend or terminate water and/or
wastewater service when:
      (1)   Materials damaging to the sewerage system or treatment processes
are released by the discharger to the sewer system, causing rapid deterioration
of these structures or interfering with property conveyance or treatment of
wastewater;
      (2)   It is determined that the industrial discharger is delivering into
the sewerage system wastes that cannot be sufficiently treated, or require
treatment that is not normally provided, or are a contributing cause of the
City of Columbia's inability to meet applicable NPDES effluent limitations for
its wastewater treatment plants; or
      (3)   The discharger has repeatedly violated this chapter or its permit
to such an extent that compliance with this chapter or the permit cannot, in
the judgment of the approving authority, reasonably be expected.
   (b)   Violation of any of the following conditions may result in the
revocation of an industrial wastewater permit:
      (1)   Failure of the discharger to accurately and fully report the
wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics of his discharge.
      (2)   Failure of the discharger to report significant changes in
wastewater volume, constituents or characteristics.
      (3)   Refusal of reasonable access to the discharger's premises for the
purpose of inspection or monitoring.
      (4)   Failure to pay any and all costs as outlined in this chapter.
      (5)   Violation of any condition of the permit or of any of the then-
current regulations or discharge prohibitions.
   (c)   Before any further discharge of industrial wastewater may be made by a
discharger whose permit has been revoked, the discharger must apply for and be
granted a reinstatement of the terminated permit or a new permit, as the
approving authority may require, and pay all delinquent fees, charges and costs
occasioned by the violation. Costs shall include all expenses, including
general and administrative expenses, incurred by the city in revoking the
permit and disconnecting the discharger from the sewerage system, and those
incurred due to the violation as provided in this chapter. This shall be paid
for by the discharger before any new permit will be issued. When all costs
cannot be readily determined, the city may require and accept a deposit which
it considers sufficient and which will be subject to appropriate adjustment
after all costs have been determined.
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-96  Violations; penalty.
   Any person who knowingly discharges waste into any portion of the system in
violation of this chapter; or who violates the provision of any permit or order
of the approving authority issued in accordance with this chapter; or who
knowingly makes any false statement, representation or certification in any
application, record, report, plan or other document or files required to be
maintained pursuant to this chapter or any wastewater contribution permit; or
who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring
device, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable, upon conviction,
in accordance with the sections in this chapter. Each day on which a violation
shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-97  Bond or indemnity agreement.
   In any and all instances where the approving authority has reasonable cause
to believe that any of the rules, regulations or provisions set forth in this
chapter or that have otherwise been adopted by the city have been, may be or
are being violated by any person discharging water into the sanitary sewerage
system, the city may require such person to give bond or enter into an
indemnity agreement in form acceptable to the city with sufficient surety to be
approved by the city attorney to protect, indemnify and hold harmless the city
from any loss, damage or expense that it may suffer or incur as a result of
such noncompliance or violation by such person. In the event of failure to do
so after ten (10) days' notice by United States mail that such bond or
agreement will be required, the use of the sanitary sewerage system by such
person shall be denied or discontinued.
(Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
ARTICLE F
Enforcement
4-3-98  Powers and authority of inspectors.
   (a)   The city or its duly authorized representatives bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for
the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, examination and copying of
records, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. The city or its representative shall have no authority to inquire into
any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper
or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
   (b)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in division (a) above, the city or its duly authorized representatives shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company.
   (c)   The city or its duly authorized representatives bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the treatment works lying
within its easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, shall be done in
full accordance with the terms of the applicable easement.
(Amended by Ord. of 3/7/95, as amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-99  Suspension of treatment service or wastewater contribution permit.
   (a)   The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a
wastewater contribution permit when necessary, in the opinion of the city, to
stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to
the environment, or causes the violation of any NPDES permit condition. Any
person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the
wastewater contribution permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the
contribution.
   (b)   In the event of a failure of the user to comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to
the system or endangerment to any individuals.
   (c)   The city shall reinstate the wastewater contribution permit and/or the
wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the non-complying
discharge.
   (d)   An industry must notify the city immediately by phone in case of an
accidental discharge or slug loading and must submit a written report of the
incident to the city within five (5) days of the date of occurrence.
(Ord. of 1/7/85, as amended by Ord. of 3/7/95, as amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/
16)
4-3-100  Revocation of permit.
   Any user who violates the following conditions of this chapter, or
applicable state and Federal regulations, is subject to having his permit
revoked:
   (a)   Failure to factually report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of his or her discharge;
   (b)   Failure to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater
constituents and characteristics;
   (c)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection of monitoring; or
   (d)   Violation of any conditions of the permit.
(Ord. of 1/7/85, as amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
4-3-101  Legal action.
   (a)   If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes
into the city's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this
chapter, Federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the city,
the City Attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable
relief in the circuit court of this county.
   (b)   In proceedings for the assessment of civil penalties under this
chapter:
      (1)   The Utilities Director of the city, or such other officer as the
Mayor may from time to time appoint, shall issue a rule to show cause why civil
penalties should not be assessed. The rule to show cause shall be served on the
respondent and shall, to the extent practically possible, conform with the
requirements of Section 210 of Regulation 61-72 of the Department of Health and
Environmental Control, contained in 25 South Carolina Code Ann. Reg. 61-72
(Supp. 2005).
      (2)   The respondent shall issue an answer in conformance with Section
202 of Regulation 61-72 of the Department of Health and Environmental Control,
contained in 25 South Carolina Code Ann. Reg. 61-72 (Supp. 2005).
      (3)   The City Administrator shall appoint a Hearing Officer who shall be
an attorney licensed to practice in the State of South Carolina.
      (4)   All proceedings related to the Rule to Show Cause shall be filed
with the City Clerk who shall serve as clerk to the Hearing Officer.
      (5)   The hearing procedure before the Hearing officer shall conform, to
the extent practically possible, with the procedure prescribed by Sections 701
through 710 of Regulation 61-72 of the Department of Health and Environmental
Control, contained in 25 South Carolina Code Ann. Reg. 61-72 (Supp.2005).
      (6)   Any entity or discharger who, after fifteen (15) days written
notice, refuses to take reasonable and diligent action to correct any violation
hereunder, shall be subject to the full two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per
day penalty without rebate or remission unless good cause be shown why a lesser
amount is just.
(Ord. of 1/7/85, as amended by Ord. of 9/8/06, as amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/
16)
4-3-102  Penalties.
   (a)   Any user who willfully or negligently fails to comply with any
provision of this chapter, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits
issued hereunder, shall be guilty of an offense and shall be punished by the
assessment of a fine of up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per day.
   (b)   Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed
or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or wastewater
contribution permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter, shall
be guilty of an offense punishable as provided herein.
   (c)   In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover
reasonable court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation
by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated the
provisions of this chapter or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued
hereunder.
(Ord. of 1/7/85, as amended by Ord. of 3/7/95, as amended by Ord. of 9/18/06,
as amended by Ord. 2016- of 4/5/16)
TITLE 5 PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Chapter 1 PLANNING COMMISSION
5-1-1   Commission created.
   In order to undertake a continuing planning program for the physical, social
and economic growth, development, and development of the area within the city
of West Columbia and to promote the public health, safety, morals, order,
convenience, prosperity and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and
economy in the process of development, the West Columbia planning commission is
hereby established as authorized by the South Carolina Local Government
Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act of 1994. (Ord. of 4/6/99)
5-1-2   Membership; term; vacancy; removal; compensation.
   (a)   The planning commission shall consist of seven (7) members to be
appointed by the city council. Members shall serve staggered terms of four (4)
years and shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified.
   (b)   In the appointment of planning commission members, the council shall
consider their professional experience, knowledge of the community, and concern
for the future welfare of the total community and its citizens. Members shall
represent a broad cross section of the interests and concerns within the city.
   (c)   No member of the planning commission may hold elected public office in
the city of West Columbia.
   (d)   Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in
the same manner as the original appointment.
   (e)   The council shall have the authority to remove any member for cause.
   (f)   All members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed
for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. (Ord. of
4/6/99)
State Law Reference: Section 6-29-350 and 6-29-360 of the S.C. Code of Laws
1976, as amended.
5-1-3   Organization; meetings; rules; staff; finances.
   (a)   The planning commission shall elect a chairperson and a vice
chairperson from among its members. The terms of the chairperson and vice
chairperson shall be one (1) year with eligibility for re-election. It shall
appoint a secretary who may be an officer or an employee of the governing
authority or of the planning commission.
   (b)   The planning commission shall adopt rules of organizational procedure
and shall keep a record of its resolutions, findings, and determinations; and
shall meet at the call of the chairperson and at such times as the chairperson
or commission may determine.
   (c)   Meetings and records of the planning commission shall be open to the
public, unless otherwise provided or exempted by state law.
   (d)   The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may
deem necessary for its work and may make expenditures for salaries of any
employees and staff, contracts with consultants, and for the purchase of
required equipment and supplies.
   (e)   The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts or
contract receipts, shall be within the amounts appropriate for said purposes by
the city council. (Ord. of 4/6/99)
State Law Reference: Section 6-29-360 and Section 30-4-10 et seq. of the S.C.
Code of Laws 1976, as amended.
5-1-4   Powers and duties.
   The planning commission shall have all powers, duties, and responsibilities
provided by state law, including the power to:
   (1)   Prepare and revise periodically plans and programs for the development
and redevelopment of the city.
   (2)   Prepare and recommend for adoption to the city council as a means for
implementing plans and programs in the city:
      a.   Zoning ordinances to include zoning district maps and appropriate
revisions thereof;
      b.   Regulations for the subdivision or development of land and
appropriate revisions thereof, and to oversee the administration of such
regulations that may be adopted as provided for under state law;
      c.   An official map and appropriate revision on it showing the exact
location of existing or proposed public street, highway, and utility rights-of-
way and public building sites, together with regulations to control the
erection of buildings or other structures or changes in land uses within the
rights-of-way, building sites, or open spaces within the city or a specified
portion thereof, as set forth in state law;
      d.   A landscaping ordinance setting forth required planting, tree
preservation, and other aesthetic considerations for land and structures;
      e.   A capital improvements program setting forth projects to implement
plans which have been prepared and adopted, including an annual listing of
priority projects for consideration by the city council prior to the
preparation of their capital budget;
      f.   Policies or procedures to facilitate implementation of planning
elements.
   (3)   Specific planning elements must be based upon careful and
comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future
development and include recommended means of implementation. The planning
commission may make, publish, and distribute maps, plans and reports and
recommendations relating to plans and programs and the development of the city
to public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational,
professional, and other organizations and citizens. All public officials shall,
upon request, furnish to the planning commission, within a reasonable time,
such available information as it may require for its work. The planning
commission, its members and employees, in the performance of its functions, may
enter upon any land with consent of the property owner or after ten (10) days'
written notification to the owner of record, make examinations and surveys, and
place and maintain necessary monuments and marks on them, provided, however,
that the planning commission shall be liable for any injury or damage to
property resulting therefrom. In general, the planning commission has the
powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote
the planning of the city. (Ord. of 4/6/99)
State Law Reference: Sections 6-29-340 and 6-29-370 of the S.C. Code of Laws
1976, as amended.
5-1-5   Council referrals.
   The city council may provide for the reference of any matters or class of
matters to the planning commission, with the provision that final action on it
may not be taken until the planning commission has submitted a report on it or
has had a reasonable period of time, as determined by the city council, to
submit a report. (Ord. of 4/6/99)
State Law Reference: Section 6-29-370 of the S.C. Code of Laws 1976, as
amended.
Chapter 2 BUILDING REGULATION AND CODE ENFORCEMENT
*Note to Chapter 2
StateLawReference: Adoption of standard codes by reference, S.C. Code Ann. Sec.
5-7-280; authority to adopt codes, S.C. Code Ann. Sec. 6-9-10; authority to
assess fees, S.C. Code Ann. Sec. 6-1-330.
Article A
Administration
5-2-1   Creation of certain offices.
   There is hereby created the following office: building official. During the
temporary absence or disability of the building official, the city
administrator shall designate an acting official to serve.  To the extent the
codes adopted in this chapter reference a code official, the building official
shall serve in that capacity.  (Amended by Ord. of 11/10/09)
5-2-2   through 5-2-9 reserved.
Article B
Building
5-2-10   Adoption of the 2015 International Building Code.
   There is hereby adopted by and for the city the 2015 International Building
Code, including Chapter One (Amendment), subject to the South Carolina
modifications. (Ord. of 9/9/13, as amended by Ord. of 8/2/16)
5-2-11   Fire district
   (a)   The fire limits of the city shall be established by council.
   (b)   All business properties located within the fire district must comply
with Chapter III of the Standard Building Code, 1988 edition and its amendments
thereof.
State Law Reference: Establishing fire limits, S.C. Code, Sec. 5-25-1110.
5-2-12   Adoption of the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code.
   (A)   The city has adopted the current edition of the International property
Maintenance Code, regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of
all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
ensure that properties and structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation
and use and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human
occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures in the city
with the following exceptions:
      (1)   Section 302.4 and 302.8 are not adopted.
      (2)   Sections 103, 107, 108, and 111 are modified as set forth below.
      (3)   Section 110 is deleted in its entirety.
      (4)   The applicable dates for section 304.14 shall be March 31 and
September 30, respectively. The applicable dates for sections 602.3 and 602.4
shall be October 1 and March 31, respectively.
      (5)   The amounts for Section 112.4 shall be $50 and $500, respectively.
      (6)   Section 303 shall not apply to swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs
completed prior to the time of the adoption of the 2009 International Property
Maintenance Code.
   (B)   In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the code
adopted by this section and other applicable provisions of this code, state
law, or city ordinances, rules or regulations, other applicable provisions of
this code, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and
be controlling.
   (C)   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
legislation is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section. The city
hereby declares that it would have passed this law and each section,
subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or
more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared
unconstitutional.
SECTION 103
DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTION
   103.1. General.
   The executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the Building
Official. The term "Building Official" shall be substituted for the term "Code
Official" throughout this code.
   103.4
      [Deleted in its entirety]
   103.5
   The fees for activities and services performed by the Building Official in
carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be equal to the actual
cost of said services and activities plus an administrative fee of fifteen
percent (15%).
SECTION 107 NOTICES AND ORDERS
   107.3.  Method of Service.
(4)   If the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and cannot be ascertained
by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence and the public
officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such
complaint or order upon such persons may be made by publishing it once each
week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the City
of West Columbia or, in the absence of such newspaper, in one printed and
published in the county and circulating in the City in which the dwellings and/
or buildings are located. A copy of such complaint or order shall also be filed
with the Clerk of Court for the County of Lexington, and such filing shall have
the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law.
SECTION 108
UNSAFE STRUCTURES; REPAIR, CLOSURE OR DEMOLITION
   108.1. Definitions.
   The following terms whenever used or referred to in this article shall have
the following respective meanings for the purposes of this article, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context.
   1.   "Municipality" shall mean the City of West Columbia.
   2.   "Governing Body" shall mean the city council or other legislative body
under the authority of the city council charged with governing a municipality.
   3.   "Public Officer" shall mean the Building Official.
   4.   "Public Authority" shall mean any housing authority or any officer who
is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the Municipality
or State relating to health, fire or building regulations or to other
activities concerning dwellings or buildings in the municipality.
   5.   "Owner" shall mean the holder of the title in fee simple and every
mortgagee of record.
   6.   "Parties in Interest" shall mean all individuals, associations,
corporations and others who have interests of record in a dwelling and any who
are in possession thereof.
   7.   "Dwelling" shall mean any building or structure, or part thereof, used
and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used and includes any
outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
   8.   "Unsafe Dwelling or Building" shall mean any dwelling or building that
is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public
or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to
protect or warn occupants in the event of fire because such structure contains
unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or
of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete
collapse is possible.
   108.2.  Repairing, Closing, or Demolishing Unfit Dwellings or Buildings.
   Whenever the Municipality finds that there exists such dwellings or
buildings within city limits which are unfit or unsafe due to (a) dilapidation,
(b) defects increasing the hazards of fire, (c) lack of ventilation, light or
sanitary facilities, or (d) other conditions rendering such dwellings or
buildings unsafe or unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety
or morals or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the
Municipality, the Municipality may exercise its police powers to repair, close
or demolish any such dwellings or buildings in the manner herein provided.
   108.3.  Building Official.
   The Building Official is hereby designated and/or appointed to exercise the
powers prescribed by this ordinance.
   108.4.  Powers of the Building Official.
   Under the provisions of this Code, the Building Official has the following
authority:
   1.   To investigate dwelling and building conditions in the Municipality in
order to determine which dwellings or buildings therein are unfit;
   2.   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
   3.   To enter a dwelling or building at reasonable times to inspect subject
to constitutional restrictions on unlawful searches and seizures. If entry is
refused or not obtained, the Building Official is authorized to pursue recourse
as provided by law. In the case of dwellings, such entries shall be made in
such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in
possession;
   4.   To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinances; and
   5.   To delegate any of his functions and powers under the ordinances to
such officers and agents as he may designate.
   108.5.  Petition.
   A petition may be filed with the Building Official by a public authority or
by at least five (5) residents of the Municipality charging that any dwelling
or building is unfit. Upon the filing of such petition, or when it appears to
the Building Official (on his own inspection) that any dwelling or building is
unfit, the Building Official shall if his preliminary inspection discloses a
basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and all
parties with an interest in such dwelling or building, a Complaint.
   108.6.  Complaint.
   The Complaint shall state the charges and contain a notice that a hearing
will be held before the Building Official or his designated agent at a place
therein fixed not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after
the serving of such Complaint. Further, the Complaint shall contain information
that the owner and parties in interest have the right to file an Answer to the
Complaint and to appear in person or otherwise and give testimony at the place
and time fixed in the Complaint. Finally, the Complaint shall state that the
Rules of Evidence prevailing in the courts of law or equity shall not be
controlling in hearings before the public officer.
   108.7.  Hearing.
   That if after notice and hearing, the Building Official determines that the
dwelling and/or building under consideration is unfit in accordance with the
terms of this Ordinance, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in
support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the
owner thereof an Order stating either:
   1.   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling can be made at
a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling and/or building,
then the owner is required within sixty (60) days to repair, alter or improve
such dwelling and/or building to render it fit; or
   2.   If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling and/or
building cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the
dwelling and/or building, then the owner is required within sixty (60) days to
remove or demolish such dwelling and/ or building.
   108.8.  Failure to Comply.
   If the owner fails to comply with an Order to repair, alter or improve or to
vacate and close the dwelling and/or building, or to remove or demolish the
dwelling and/or building:
   1.   The Building Official may cause such dwelling and/or building to be
repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed, and the amount of
the costs of such repairs, alterations or improvements vacating and closing
shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred to
be imposed in the same way as a municipal tax lien. Further, the Building
Official may post a placard on the main entrance of any dwelling and/or
building with the following words: "This building is unfit for human
occupation; the use or occupation of this building for human occupation is
prohibited and unlawful." Any occupied dwelling and/or building so posted shall
be vacated. Any person who shall occupy a posted dwelling and/or building and/
or any owner, owner's authorized agent or person responsible for said dwelling
and/or building who shall let anyone occupy a posted dwelling and/or building
shall be liable for the penalties provided by this code. In addition, the
Building Official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of
utility service to the dwelling and/or building in case of emergency where
necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property or where such
utility connection has been made without approval. The Building Official shall
notify the serving utility and, whenever possible, the owner or owner's
authorized agent and occupant of the dwelling and/or building of the decision
to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to
disconnection the owner, owner's authorized agent or occupant of the dwelling
and/or building shall be notified in writing as soon as practicable thereafter;
or
   2.   The Building Official may cause such dwelling or building to be removed
or demolished and the amount of the costs of such repairs, alterations or
improvements vacating and closing or removal or demolition by the Building
Official shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was
incurred to be imposed in the same way as a municipal tax lien. If the
Municipality contracts with a third party not employed by the municipality to
do the work, it must bid the work in conformity with the procurement code
applicable to the Municipality.
   108.9.  Standards for Determining Fitness of Dwelling or Building.
   The Building Official may determine that a dwelling and/or building is unfit
if he finds that conditions exist in such dwelling and/or building which are
dangerous, unsafe, or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the
occupants or users of such dwelling and/or building, the occupants or users of
neighboring dwelling and/or building or other residents of the Municipality.
Such conditions may include but are not limited to the following: defects
therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities, lack of
adequate ventilation and light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair;
structural defects; and uncleanliness.
   108.10.  Service of Complaints or Orders; Posting and Filing Copies.
   Complaints or Orders issued by the Building Official pursuant to this
ordinance shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail.
If the whereabouts of such person is unknown and cannot be ascertained by the
Building Official in the exercise of reasonable diligence and the Building
Official has made an Affidavit to that effect, then service is proper by
publishing the Complaint and/or Order once a week for two consecutive weeks in
a newspaper printed and published in the Municipality or in the absence of such
newspaper, in one printed and published in the County of Lexington and
circulating in the Municipality in which the dwellings and/or buildings are
located. A copy of the Complaint and/or Order shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on the premises affected by the Complaint and/or Order. A copy of the
Complaint and/or Order shall also be filed with the Clerk of Court for the
County of Lexington, and this filing shall have the same force and effect as
other lis pendens notices provided by law.
   108.11.  Rights of Persons Affected by Orders.
   Any person affected by an Order issued by the Building Official may within
sixty (60) days after the posting and services of the Order petition the
Circuit Court for the Eleventh Judicial Circuit for an injunction restraining
the Building Official from carrying out the provisions of the Order and the
Court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the
Building Official pending the final disposition of the cause. Hearings shall be
had by the Court on such petitions within twenty (20) days or as soon
thereafter as possible and shall be given preference over other matters on the
Court's calendar. The Court shall hear and determine the issues raised and
shall enter such final Order or Decree as law and justice may require. In all
such proceedings, the findings of the Building Official as to facts, if
supported by evidence, shall be conclusive. Costs shall be in the discretion of
the Court. The remedies herein provided shall be exclusive remedies and no
person affected by an Order of the Building Official shall be entitled to
recover any damages for action taken pursuant to any Order of the Building
Official or because of compliance such person with any order of the Building
Official.
   108.12.  Sale of Materials of Removed or Demolished Dwellings and/or
Buildings.
   If a dwelling and/or building is removed or demolished by the Building
Official, he shall sell the materials of such dwelling and/or building and
shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the costs of the removal or
demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the circuit court by
the Building Official and shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by
such court and shall be disbursed by such court to the persons found to be
entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court.
   108.13.  Funds for Enforcement.
   The Municipality shall establish an estimate of the annual expenses and/or
costs to provide the equipment, personnel, and supplies necessary for periodic
examinations and investigations of the dwellings and/or buildings in the
Municipality for the purpose of determining the fitness of such dwellings and/
or buildings and for the enforcement and administration of the provisions set
forth herein. The Municipality may make such appropriations from its revenue as
it may deem necessary for this purpose and may accept and apply grants or
donations to assist it in carrying out the provisions this article.
   108.14.  Article Provisions are Cumulative.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers
of the courts or of any department of the Municipality to enforce provisions of
the charter or the ordinances or regulations or to prevent or punish violations
thereof and the powers conferred by this Article shall be in addition and
supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law.
SECTION 110 DEMOLITION
[Deleted in its entirety]
SECTION 111 MEANS OF APPEAL
   111.1.  Application for appeal.
   (A)   As stated in 2015 International Property Maintenance Code.
   (B)   With respect to any notice or order under Section 108, subsection (A)
shall not apply. Instead, any person affected by an order issued by the
Building Official may within sixty (60) days after the posting and service of
the order petition the Eleventh Judicial Circuit Court for an injunction
restraining the Building Official from carrying out the provisions of the
order.
(Ord. of 9/9/13; amended by Ord. of 7/11/17)
5-2-13   Permit fees.
   (a)   Fees for building permits shall be based on the estimated cost of the
work to be done under the permit and shall be as fixed from time to time by the
council.
   (b)   No permit shall be issued until permit fees have been paid in full.
(Code 1965, Sec. 6-2)
5-2-14   Adoption of the 2015 International Fire Code.
   There is hereby adopted for the city the 2015 International Fire Code,
subject to the South Carolina modifications. (Ord. of 9/9/13, as amended by
Ord. of 8/2/16)
5-2-15 through 5-2-20 reserved.
Article C
Electrical
5-2-21   2014 National Electrical Code adopted.
   There is hereby adopted by the city that certain code entitled 2014 National
Electrical Code, subject to the South Carolina modifications. (Ord. of 9/9/13,
as amended by Ord. of 8/2/16)
5-2-22   Applicability of provisions to homeowners.
   Nothing contained within this article shall prevent any homeowner from
installing or maintaining electrical wiring within his own property boundaries;
provided the electrical work is done by himself and is used exclusively by him
or his family. This privilege does not convey the right to violate any of the
provisions of this article; neither is it to be construed as exempting any
property owner from obtaining a permit and having the work inspected nor from
paying the required fees therefor.
5-2-23   Permits.
   Before any electrical wiring, devices or equipment is installed repaired or
altered in any building or structure within the city, the person making the
installation, repair or alteration shall obtain a permit therefore from the
electrical inspector.
5-2-24   Permit fees.
   Before any permit for electrical work shall be issued under the provisions
of this article, the applicant therefore shall pay the permit fees as shall be
determined by the council from time to time.
5-2-25   Inspections.
   It shall be unlawful for any person controlling any electrical wiring in or
of houses or buildings within the city to allow any electrical current to be
turned on or consumed in any building without having first had an inspection
thereof made and a certificate of approval thereof being issued.
5-2-26   through 5-2-40 reserved.
Article D
Plumbing
5-2-41   Adoption of the 2015 International Plumbing Code.
   There is hereby adopted for the city the 2015 International Plumbing Code,
subject to the South Carolina modifications. (Ord. of 9/9/13, as amended by
Ord. of 8/2/16)
5-2-42   through 5-2-50 reserved.
Article E
Gas
5-2-51   Adoption of the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code.
   There is hereby adopted for the city the 2015 International Fuel Gas Code,
subject to the South Carolina modifications. (Ord. of 9/9/13, as amended by
Ord. of 8/2/16)
5-2-52   through 5-2-70 reserved.
Article F
Mechanical Code
5-2-71   Adoption of the 2015 International Mechanical Code.
   There is hereby adopted by and for the city the 2015 International
Mechanical Code, subject to the South Carolina modifications. (Ord. of 9/9/13,
as amended by Ord. of 8/2/16)
5-2-72   through 5-2-80 reserved.
Article G
Housing
5-2-81   Adoption of the 2009 International Property Maintenance Code.
   (a)   The City of West Columbia has adopted the current edition of the
International Property Maintenance Code, regulating and governing the
conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other things
and conditions essential to ensure that properties and structures are safe,
sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and
structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such
existing structures in the City of West Columbia, with the following
exceptions:
      (1)   Sections 302.4 and 302.8 are not adopted.
      (2)   Sections 107 and 108 are modified as set forth in §
5-2-12 of this Code.
      (3)   Section 303 shall not apply to swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs
completed prior to the time of the adoption of the 2009 International Property
Maintenance Code by the City of West Columbia.
   (b)   In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the code
adopted by this section and other applicable provisions of this code, state law
or city ordinances, rules or regulations, other applicable provisions of this
code, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be
controlling. (Ord. of 11/2/10)
5-2-82   through 5-2-90 reserved.
Article H
Swimming Pools
5-2-91   Swimming pool code adopted.
   The Standard Swimming Pool Code, the 1985 edition thereof, together with all
subsequent revisions thereto published by the Southern Building Code Congress,
Inc., is hereby adopted by the city, and, except the portions as are hereafter
deleted, altered or amended, is incorporated herein as fully as if set out at
length, and a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk-
treasurer. In the event of any conflict with the provisions of the swimming
pool code and the provisions of this code, state law or ordinances, rules or
regulations, the provisions of this code, state law or ordinances, rules or
regulations shall prevail and be controlling.
5-2-92   through 5-2-100 reserved.
Article I
Unsafe Buildings
CrossReference: International Property Maintenance Code, Sec. 5-2-12
5-2-101   through 5-2-110 reserved.
Article J
One and Two Family Dwellings
5-2-111   Adoption of the 2006 International Residential Code for One- and Two-
Family Dwellings.
   (a)   There is hereby adopted by and for the city the 2006 International
Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings as modified by amendment of
the South Carolina Building Code Council, which code is published separately in
book form and is adopted by reference as though copied fully in this section,
as published by the International Code Council, Inc. Specifically excluded from
the adoption of the International Residential Code for One- and Two- Family
Dwellings referenced herein are Sections R103 in its entirety (enumerated as
Sections R103.1, R103.2, and R103.3), R104.8, and R112.3. Any other provision
not specifically excluded above which concerns the qualification, removal,
dismissal and duties of the building official or any other city official or
employee are deemed excluded from this section.
   (b)   In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the code
adopted by this section and other applicable provisions of this code, state law
or city ordinances, rules or regulations, other applicable provisions of this
code, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be
controlling.  (Ord. of 11/10/09)
Secs. 5-2-112 through 5-2-119 reserved.
Article K
Rental Housing Regulations
5-2-120   Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   Absentee landlord.
   a.   The owner of residential rental units who are shown as the most recent
property owner(s) on the real property tax notice for the then current year
issued by the Richland or Lexington County Treasurer's Office; and
   b.   Who resides outside of or, if the rental property is managed by or
through a business office, and that business office is outside of Richland or
Lexington County; or
   c.   Whose tax notice is addressed to a post office box regardless of the
county of residence of the owner.
   Occupant.  A "family" as defined by the city zoning ordinance.
   Owner. Any person, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable title in
the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or
municipality as holding title.
   Residential rental unit. That portion of a dwelling as defined by the city
zoning ordinance for which payment or other consideration is being made to an
owner, agent, or manager for the use and occupancy of that portion as a living
facility, excluding manufactured homes, hotels, motels, medical or long term
care facilities, and bed and breakfast establishments. Whenever the words
"rental unit" are stated in this code, they shall be construed as though they
were followed by the words "or any part thereof."  (Ord. of 11/10/09)
5-2-121   Rental permit required.
   (a)   No owner, whether a person, firm or corporation, shall operate any
residential rental unit as defined in Sec. 5-2-120 unless that owner holds a
current rental permit issued by the city for the residential rental unit named
therein.
   (b)   Permits are not transferable from any owner to another.
   (c)   The permitting year shall begin on January 1 and end on December 31.
If a permit fee is required, it must be paid by April 30 each year. If a permit
fee is required, renewals of permits after April 30 will be assessed a late
penalty fee of five percent (5%) of the unpaid fee per month. For the year
2010, the permitting period shall be as specified by the building official. 
(Ord. of 11/10/09)
5-2-122   Application.
   (a)   Applications to operate residential rental units and for renewal
thereof shall be on a form provided by the city.
   (b)   The form shall set forth the owner's name, address, and telephone
number, the residential rental unit address, the name of the person, firm, or
corporation responsible for the care and maintenance of the building and
additional information as outlined on the application for rental housing. 
(Ord. of 11/10/09)
5-2-123   Property owner and the person in charge.
   (a)   A permit will not be issued to an absentee landlord, unless a person
in charge is designated. The person in charge must reside in or have an office
within a thirty (30) mile radius of the city and be able to act as the agent
for the owner. The building official shall be notified in writing if there is a
change of owner or person in charge within fourteen (14) days of the change.
   (b)   The property owner and/or the person in charge shall maintain all
residential rental units under their control in compliance with the city codes
and is responsible for providing access for the purpose of making inspections
necessary to ensure compliance with the city's ordinances and accepting legal
notices or service of process with respect to the rental unit.
   (c)   For every residential rental unit, the owner or person in charge shall
be responsible for the repair and maintenance of the common areas of the
dwelling and responding to service requests and emergency needs, including
entry into units where an emergency appears to exist. Such person or persons
shall be situated close enough to the dwelling as to be able to service tenant
and emergency calls with reasonable dispatch. The owner shall advise the
tenants individually of the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of such
owner and/or person in charge.
   (d)   Rental property owner(s) and/or the responsible person in charge, if
applicable, shall be solely responsible for insuring compliance with all
zoning, nuisance and property maintenance codes. Failure to abate violations
after notice shall result in enforcement action against the rental property
owner(s) or responsible person in charge if applicable. The city, in addition
to or in lieu of issuing a uniform ordinance summons for a violation of this
article, may pursue any other remedy permitted by law. The filing of an appeal
shall not act as a stay of the city's right to pursue any other remedies as
permitted by law.  (Ord. of 11/10/09)
5-2-124   Acknowledgment of applicable codes.
   The rental property owner(s) and/or responsible person in charge, if
applicable, shall be required at the time of registration to sign a form
acknowledging the existence and access to city codes applicable to the rental
and maintenance of residential properties and their responsibilities related to
said code sections.  (Ord. of 11/10/09)
5-2-125   Notice procedure.
   Notices of violation to registered rental property owner(s) or the
responsible person in charge, if applicable, shall be:
   (1)   In writing and include a description of the property.
   (2)   Include a descriptive statement of the violation and required
corrective action.
   (3)   State the compliance and applicable appeal period.
   (4)   Be delivered personally or by first-class mail to the rental property
owner(s) or responsible person in charge, if applicable, at the last address
furnished as part of the registration process.
   (5)   The city may elect but is not required to provide supplemental notice
by e-mail and/or facsimile.  (Ord. of 11/10/09)
5-2-126   Reduction in notice requirements.
   The standard notice, appeal and compliance periods stated in all property
maintenance codes adopted by the city, including the International Property
Maintenance Code, shall be reduced to seven (7) days for registered rental
properties. The only exception to this provision shall apply to notices of
condemnation proceedings.  (Ord. of 11/10/09)
5-2-127   Inspections.
   The city reserves the right to inspect rental units. Nothing in this section
shall preclude the inspection of dwellings.
   (a)   Basis for inspections. Inspections may be made to obtain and maintain
compliance with the standards of this article based upon one of the following:
   (1)   A complaint received by the building department or forwarded to the
building department by another city department, indicating that there is a
potential violation of the standards or the provisions of any ordinance adopted
by the city;
   (2)   An observation by the building department or forwarded to the building
department by another city department of a violation of the standards or the
provisions of any ordinance adopted by the city;
   (3)   A report or observation of a dwelling unit that is unoccupied and
unsecured or a dwelling that is damaged by fire;
   (4)   The registration, re-registration, and certification of a rental unit
as required by this article;
   (5)   The need to determine compliance with a notice or an order issued by
the city;
   (6)   An observed condition or condition reasonably believed to exist deemed
dangerous to human life or public welfare;
   (7)   Requirements of law where a dwelling is to be demolished by the city
or where ownership is to be transferred to the city.
   (b)   Inspection procedures.
   (1)   If a basis for inspection is established under subsection (a) of this
section, the owner and/or responsible person in charge will be notified in
writing by the building department of the desired time and place of the
inspection.
   (2)   In the event that the alleged violation appears to be a clear and
imminent threat to human life, safety or public welfare as determined by the
building department, the owner and/or responsible person in charge will be
contacted, to schedule an immediate inspection. If code violations are found to
exist, immediate compliance with adopted building, property maintenance, zoning
or other applicable codes, will be required.
   (3)   If the alleged violation is not a clear and imminent threat to human
life, safety or public welfare, the owner will have seven (7) calendar days to
correct such violation unless otherwise authorized in writing by the city,
after which a reinspection or written verification from owner and/or
responsible person in charge and complaining party that the violation has been
corrected, will be required. (Ord. of 11/10/09)
5-2-128   Permit and inspection fees.
   The license permit fee, if any, and any fees for inspections shall be set by
city council by ordinance as required by S.C. Code Ann. Sec. 6-1-330. If a
permit fee is required, registered property owners shall be billed annually
based on registration information on file with the city as of December 31. No
reductions in billed fees shall be made as a result of the failure of a
property owner or responsible person in charge to update information as
required by this chapter. (Ord. of 11/10/09)
5-2-129   Penalty.
   Violation of this article shall be unlawful and an offense punishable
pursuant to the general penalty provision of the code of ordinances of the City
of West Columbia.  (Ord. of 11/10/09)
5-2-130   Severability.
   The provisions of this article are severable and if by section, sentence,
clause, part, or provision thereof shall be held illegal, invalid, or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of the
court shall not affect or impair the remaining sections, sentences, clauses,
parts, or provisions of this article. It is hereby declared that the intent of
the council is that this article would have been adopted as if such illegal,
invalid, or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause, part, or provision had
not been included herein.  (Ord. of 11/10/09)
Secs. 5-2-131 through 5-2-139 reserved.
Article L
Residential Code
Sec. 5-2-140   Adoption of 2015 International Residential Code.
   There is hereby adopted by the city the 2015 International Residential Code,
subject to the South Carolina modifications. (Ord. of 9/9/13, as amended by
Ord. of / /16)
Secs. 5-2-141 through 5-2-149 reserved.
Chapter 3 ZONING
5-3-1   Ordinance incorporated by reference.
   The zoning ordinance of the City of West Columbia, adopted by council
November 3, 1981, as now or hereafter amended, is hereby incorporated herein
and made a part of this code by reference. Copies of the zoning ordinance are
available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk-treasurer.
5-3-2   Sign ordinance amended.
   Article Nine ("Sign Regulations") of the zoning ordinance is repealed and
replaced by the ordinance codified in this section and incorporated into the
zoning ordinance by reference. (Ord. of 6/19/00)
CHAPTER 4 SUBDIVISIONS
Sec. 5-4-1 Ordinance incorporated by reference.
   The ordinance regulating subdivisions in the City of West Columbia, adopted
by council March 2, 1972, as now or hereafter amended, is hereby incorporated
herein and made a part of this code by reference. Copies of the subdivision
ordinance are available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk-
treasurer.
CHAPTER 5 SEDIMENT CONTROL, STORM DRAINAGE AND FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
*Note to Chapter 5
HistoricalNote: The provisions of this chapter are derived from an ordinance
adopted 10/19/87, unless otherwise indicated.
Sec. 5-5-l Statement of purpose.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the general health, safety, and
welfare of the people of the city and to preserve the natural scenic beauty of
the city by provisions designated to:
   (1)   provide clean and sanitary channels for storm water runoff;
   (2)   prevent pollution of watersheds, streams and natural drainage
channels;
   (3)   prevent the encroachment of buildings or other structures on natural
drainage channels;
   (4)   prevent the sedimentation of streams;
   (5)   prevent the clogging of ditches;
   (6)   prevent the silting of lakes and the erosion of soils;
   (7)   prevent changes which cause variations in flood height or velocities;
   (8)   require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (9)   control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
   (10)   control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase erosion or flood damage; and
   (11)   prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
Sec. 5-5-2 Objectives.
   The objectives of this chapter are:
   (1)   to protect human life and health;
   (2)   to minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (3)   to minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (4)   to minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (5)   to minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in floodplains;
   (6)   to help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight
areas;
   (7)   to ensure that building permits provide notification of flood area;
and
   (8)   to prevent building practices which cause flooding of other
properties.
Sec. 5-5-3 Jurisdiction.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the
jurisdiction of the city. All lands under the jurisdiction of a state or
federal land management program are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
Sec. 5-5-4 Administration.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the city, pursuant
to the engineering agreement in effect between the city and Lexington County,
in order that the public may realize full benefit of the effects of this
chapter. Throughout the body of this chapter, reference will be made to the
respective governmental agencies responsible for approvals, or comments under
the provisions contained herein.
Sec. 5-5-5 Definitions.
   Words used in this chapter shall have their customary meanings as determined
by the standard dictionary definition except for the following specific words
and terms which are herein defined. In any case, the city administrator shall
have the right to define or interpret any word or term contained within this
chapter.
   (1)   Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed
expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by
a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed
addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent
perimeter load-bearing walls is new construction.
   (2)   Appeal means a request for a review of the city council interpretation
of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
   (3)   Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or VO Zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1)
to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the
path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow
may be evident.
   (4)   Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
   (5)   Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral floating forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or the supporting foundation system.
   (6)   Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure
for any occupancy or storage.
   (7)   Construction means any building or erection of a structure or any
preparation for same.
   (8)   Developer means any person who acts in his own behalf, or as an owner
or as an agent for an owner of property, and who makes application for the
permit necessary to disturb land or vegetation or to encroach upon a major
drainage channel, or to encroach upon the designated flood plain.
   (9)   Drainage is a general term applied to the removal of surface or
subsurface water from a given area either by gravity via natural means or by
systems constructed to so remove water, and is commonly applied herein to
surface water.
   (10)   Drainage map is the map incorporated by a reference and made a part
of this chapter as though copied herein which is maintained by the city
administrator and which identifies the existing natural and man-made major
drainage channels of the city.
   (11)   Drainage system means the surface and subsurface system for the
removal of water from the land, including both the natural elements of streams,
marshes, swales, and ponds, whether of an intermittent or continuous nature,
and the man-made element which includes culverts, retention facilities and the
storm sewer system.
   (12)   Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the
lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation
perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or breakaway
walls.
   (13)   Embankment or fill means a deposit of soil, rock or other material
placed by man.
   (14)   Erosion means the general process by which soils or rock fragments
are detached and moved by the action of wind, water, ice and gravity.
   (15)   Flood means a temporary rise in the level of water which results in
the inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water. For the purposes of
this chapter, a flood shall be construed to be any inundation which has a
return frequency of one hundred (100) years of less.
   (16)   Flood control plan means a plan which fully indicates the measures to
be taken to provide for the protection of major drainage channels, the
provisions for flood control, and the provisions for the control of runoff and
which is approved as provided herein for application to a particular area or
parcel of ground.
   (17)   Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) means an official map of the city
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the
areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A.
   (18)   Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of the city on
which the administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated
both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
city. Such FIRM and any subsequent amendments thereto are hereby made a part of
this chapter and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   (19)   Flood Insurance Study is the official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the
flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   (20)   Flood plain means any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source.
   (21)   Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
   (22)   Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
   (23) Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building
(including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of
wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor
of a garage used solely for parking vehicles.
   (24)   Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used
for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity
to water, such as docking or facility necessary for the loading and unloading
of boats or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include long-term
storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities.
   (25)   Grading means any displacement of soil by stripping, excavating,
filling, stockpiling, or any combination thereof and shall include the land in
its excavated or filled state.
   (26)   Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
   (27)   Land disturbance means any activity involving the clearing, grading,
transporting, filling and any other activity which causes land to be exposed to
the danger of erosion, or which might create an alteration in the natural
drainageway.
   (28)   Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one (1) or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or
without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The
term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable
structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to
be improved property.
   (29)   Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of
the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within
the flood plain. For purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD).
   (30)   National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a
vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within
the flood plain.
   (31)   New construction means structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.
   (32)   Permit means a certificate issued to perform work authorized under
the provisions of this chapter.
   (33)   Runoff is the portion of the precipitation on the land which reaches
the drainage system.
   (34)   Sedimentation means the processes which operate at or near the
surface of the ground, or deposit soils, debris and other materials either on
other ground surfaces or in water channels.
   (35)   Sediment control and drainage plan means a drainage system plan which
fully indicates necessary land management and treatment measures, including a
timetable of the schedule for their installation, which will effectively
minimize soil erosion and sedimentation and which is approved as provided
herein for application to a particular area or parcel of ground.
   (36)   Soil and water conservation district means the Soil and Water
Conservation District for Lexington County as established by state statute.
   (37)   Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of
slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets,
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
   (38)   Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which
requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location
on the ground, including, but not limited to, tennis courts, swimming pools,
fences, and buildings.
   (39)   Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs,
reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure, taking place during
(the life of a structure) in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50
percent of the market value of the structure. The market value of the structure
should be (i) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the
initial repair or improvement, or (ii) in the case of damage, the value of the
structure prior to the damage occurring. For the purposes of this definition,
"substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a
structure required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions.
   (40)   Vegetation means all plant growth, especially trees, shrubs, mosses
and grasses.
Sec. 5-5-6 Permit required.
   Unless otherwise provided within this chapter, the surface of land in the
city shall not be disturbed or altered for any purpose whatsoever, nor any
identified major drainage channel impeded or encroached upon, nor any
construction commenced in a designated flood area, except in accordance with a
sediment control and drainage plan approved by the soil and water conservation
district, and county engineer and/or a flood control plan approved by the
county engineer. A permit indicating such approval shall be issued by the city
zoning administrator prior to any construction, grading or land disturbance of
any nature.
Sec. 5-5-7 Exceptions.
   The provisions of section
5-5-6 shall not apply to:
   (1)   Agricultural land management and cultural practices, or to the
construction of on-farm buildings and structures used in a farming operation,
provided that such practices or structures do not materially impede the runoff
capability of the existing major drainage channels or encroach upon a flood
plain.
   (2)   Construction or land improvement of single-family residences or
buildings accessory to such residences which are not a part of a residential
subdivision subject to the city subdivision regulations provided that such
construction does not materially impede the runoff capability of the existing
major drainage channels or encroach upon a flood plain.
   (3)   Land improvements to a single-family residence in a developed
subdivision provided the improvements are not located in the designated
floodway or the 100 year flood plain.
   (4)   Mining and mineral resource extraction operations conducted in
accordance with a valid mining permit issued by the South Carolina Department
of Mining and Reclamation provided the improvements are not located in the
designated floodway or 100 year flood plain.
Sec. 5-5-8 Application for permit.
   The developer shall apply in writing to the building official for a permit
to disturb land in the city. Such application shall be accompanied by four (4)
copies of a sediment control and drainage plan prepared in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The building official shall determine at the time
of sediment control and drainage plan submittal whether a flood control plan
additionally ought to accompany the application by consulting the drainage map
or the flood insurance study dated October 8, 1982 of the city or the county
engineer. If such is determined, four (4) copies of the flood control plan,
prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall be submitted.
Sec. 5-5-9 Fee schedule.
   The sediment control and drainage plan and flood control plan shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as may be fixed from time to time by
council.
Sec. 5-5-10 Approval or disapproval of application.
   (a)   The sediment control and drainage plan shall be submitted to the
building official, who shall forward the plan to the soil and water
conservation district and county engineer for review. If the plan conforms to
the requirements of this chapter, the county engineer shall approve the plan
upon receipt of a written approval from the district, and submit written
recommendation to the city building official.
   (b)   The flood control plan shall be submitted to the city building
official who shall then forward the plan to the county engineer for review. If
the plan conforms to the requirements of this chapter, the county engineer or
his designated representative shall approve same and submit written
recommendation for final approval to the city building official.
   (c)   If the application for a sediment control and drainage plan or flood
control plan is denied, written notification of such, indicating the reason or
reasons for denial, shall be forwarded to the applicant within 10 days after
denial.
   (d)   Review of any submitted plan may require 30 days from the date of
submittal until the time a decision must be rendered, either approval or
denial. If, at the end of the 30 day period a decision has not been reached, a
status report shall be forwarded to the applicant indicating the progress of
the review. Additional 30 day review increments shall automatically accrue at
the discretion of the reviewing authority according to its requirements.
   (e)   Certification from a registered professional engineer or landscape
architect with all plans stating that the non-residential flood-proofed
structure meets flood-proofing criteria as stated in section
5-5-17.
   (f)   If an application is denied, the applicant may elect to correct the
indicated deficiencies in conformance with the provisions of this chapter and
resubmit the application to the building official with no additional fee
assessed.
Sec. 5-5-11 Variance and exceptions.
   (a)   The board of adjustments may, upon application to it and showing of
undue hardship, grant variances and exceptions to any of the provisions of this
chapter, providing such variance or exception is in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this chapter. The board of adjustments shall request and
consider the written opinion of the soil and water conservation district and
the county engineer, the city building official, and the city zoning
administrator.
   (1)   Variance procedures:
      a.   The city zoning board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals
and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
      b.   The zoning board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it
is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the building official or zoning administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
      c.   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board of
adjustment or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the circuit court of
Lexington County.
      d.   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this section, except as stated in (1) a. through (1)
c. of this section, and provided the proposed reconstruction, rehabilitation,
or restoration will not result in the structure losing its historical
designation.
      e.   In passing upon such applications, the zoning board of adjustment
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
         1.   the danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         2.   the danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         3.   the susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         4.   the importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         5.   the necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the
case of a functionally dependent facility;
         6.   the availability of alternative locations, not subject to
flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
         7.   the compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         8.   the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
         9.   the safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         10.   the expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site, and
         11.   the costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
      f.   Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of
this chapter, the zoning board of adjustment may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this
chapter.
      g.   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (2)   Conditions for variances:
      a.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief; and in the instance of a historical building, a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character
and design of the building.
      b.   Variances shall only be issued upon (i) a showing of good and
sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship, and (iii) a determination that the granting of
a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
      c.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
      d.   The zoning administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency
upon request.
Sec. 5-5-12 Appeals.
   (a)   Any person aggrieved by any decision pertaining to this chapter may
appeal to the board of adjustments within 60 days upon written notice to the
chairman of the board of adjustments.
   (b)   Any person who shall feel aggrieved by any decision on the appeal to
the board of adjustments may appeal to the circuit court of the county, which
shall hear the same de novo. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days after
the decision of the board of adjustments.
Sec. 5-5-13 Other authorization or requirements.
   Where any permits, authorizations, bonds, or other securities are required
by applicable laws, regulations or ordinances for any part of the proposed work
to be done under the plan, the applicant shall, upon request, furnish the city
clerk-treasurer with satisfactory evidence that such requirements have been met
before the commencement of work under an approved application.
Sec. 5-5-14 Extension of time.
   If the applicant is unable to complete the work within the time specified in
the permit and plan, he may, prior to the expiration of such time, present in
writing to the building official a request for an extension of time setting
forth the reasons for the requested extension. The building official shall have
the authority to grant or deny the request for an extension of time subject to
such additional measures as may be required by the soil and water conservation
district under the specific circumstances involved.
Sec. 5-5-15 Responsibility of applicant.
   During any land disturbance operation the applicant shall be responsible for
carrying out the proposed work in accordance with the permit, approved plan,
specifications, and time schedule, and in compliance with all the requirements
of this chapter.
Sec. 5-5-16 Guidelines for sediment control and drainage plan preparation.
   Sediment control and drainage plans shall be prepared according to the
following guidelines prior to submission to the city:
   (1)   Select land where the drainage pattern, topography, and soils are
favorable for the intended use. (Soil survey information is available from the
Soil Conservation Service which has an office serving each county in South
Carolina.)
   (2)   Expose the smallest practical area of land for the least possible time
during development.
   (3)   When feasible, retain and protect natural vegetation. Save topsoil
where practical for replacing on graded areas.
   (4)   Use temporary plant cover, mulching, or structures to control runoff
and protect areas subject to erosion during construction.
   (5)   Provide for handling the increased runoff caused by changed soil
conditions and surface conditions with the use of diversion ditches, grassed or
surfaced waterways and outlets, enlarged and protected drainage channels, grade
control structures, and effective use of street gutters and storm sewers.
   (6)   Engineer the drainage systems of the development according to the
following:
      a.   All roadway drainage systems should accommodate a storm with a 10
year return frequency.
      b.   All other systems and easements designed to handle the internal
drainage created by the development should be designed to accommodate a storm
with a 25 year return frequency.
      c.   All easements or systems designed to handle drainage originating
outside of, yet flowing through, the development should be engineered to handle
a storm with a 100 year return frequency.
   (7)   Use sediment basins or other forms of silt traps, where practical, to
remove heavy sediment loads from runoff waters leaving the disturbed area.
   (8)   Install the permanent vegetative cover and the long-term erosion
protection structures as soon as practical in the development process.
Sec. 5-5-17 Guidelines for flood control plan preparation.
   Flood control plans shall be prepared according to the following guidelines
prior to the submission of the plan to the city:
   (1)   Encroachment upon an identified major drainage channel and the
adjacent overflow land shall be avoided. An easement, sufficient to accommodate
the flow resulting from a storm with a 100 year return frequency, shall be
provided, approved by the county engineer as to width and course, to protect
the carrying capacity of the channel and to provide working room for
construction and maintenance. Such easement shall be dedicated to the county.
   (2)   Whenever major channel improvements are carried out, sodding,
backsloping, cribbing and other bank protection shall be designed and
constructed to control erosion for the anticipated conditions and flow
resulting from a 100 year frequency rainfall.
   (3)   Provide for site improvements within the flood plain that will elevate
the building pads for all structures to an elevation one (1) foot above the 100
year frequency flood elevation, and slope the ground to the 100 year frequency
flood elevation for a distance of 10 or more feet around the building pad.
Certain nonresidential structures may be permitted with the flood plain by
virtue of their inherent design without fill or grading of the building pad if
properly floodproofed.
   (4)   Applicants shall obtain all necessary permits from those governmental
agencies from which approval is required by state or federal law.
   (5)   Design all culverts, bridges, and other drainage structures in
accordance with the specifications and design standards of the county
engineer's office, and predicate same on a 100 year frequency rainfall.
   (6)   The county engineer will review subdivision proposals and other
proposed new development to determine whether such proposals will be reasonably
safe from flooding. If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development
is in a flood-prone area, any such proposals shall be reviewed to assure that:
a. they are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-
prone area; b. all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage; c. adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to
flood hazards; and d. base flood elevation data shall be provided for
subdivision proposals and other proposed development.
   (7)   The applicant shall design new and replacement water supply systems
within flood-prone areas to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems.
   (8)   The city shall require within flood-prone areas:
      a.   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters. Onsite waste disposal systems
shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.
      b.   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
      c.   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to,
use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in
addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting
wind forces.
      d.   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
      e.   New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by
methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
      f.   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding.
   (9)   For the purpose of the determination of applicable flood insurance
risk premium rates, the city shall:
      a.   obtain the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and
whether or not such structures include a basement;
      b.   obtain, if the structure has been floodproofed, the elevation (in
relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was floodproofed; and
      c.   maintain a public record of all such information with the clerk-
treasurer of the city.
   (10)   All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential
structures shall:
      a.   have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least one
(1) foot above the base flood level; or
      b.   together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed
so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy.
   (11)   Where floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure:
      a.   a registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the floodproofing methods are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the base
flood, and a record of such certificates indicating the specific elevation (in
relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be
maintained with the building official; or
      b.   a certified copy of a local regulation containing detailed
floodproofing specifications which satisfy the water-tight performance
standards shall be submitted to the Federal Insurance Administrator for
approval.
   (12)   No encroachments including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway that
would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of base flood discharge should be permitted.
Sec. 5-5-18 Guidelines for flood control plan preparation; specific standards.
   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have
been provided, the following provisions are required:
   (1)   Residential Construction. New construction or substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. Should
solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be
provided.
   (2)   Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of
elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and
other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to
preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of
floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls.
      a.   Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified
by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria:
         1.   Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of
not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding;
         2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot
above grade; and
         3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both direction.
      b.   Electrical, plumbing, and other utility connections are prohibited
below the base flood elevation.
      c.   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow
for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance
equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or
entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).
      d.   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned
or finished into separate rooms.
   (3)    Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established
in this chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry
debris, potential projectiles and has erosion potential, the following
provisions shall apply:
      a.   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other developments unless certification (with
supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood
levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      b.   All new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with
all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter.
Sec. 5-5-19 Guidelines for flood control plan preparation; standards for
streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways.
   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in this chapter
where small streams exist but where no base flood data have been provided or
where no floodways have been provided, the following provisions apply:
   (1)   No encroachments, including fill material or structures shall be
located within a distance of the stream bank equal to five (5) times the width
of the stream at the top of bank or twenty (20) feet each side from top of
bank, whichever is greater, unless certification by a registered professional
engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments shall not result in
any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   (2)   New construction or substantial improvements of structures shall be
elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with this
chapter.
Sec. 5-5-20 References.
   All calculations, formulae and data used in the preparation of sediment
control and drainage plans or the flood control plans will be subject to review
by the county engineer who may recommend to the city's building official other
calculations to be made, formulae used or data supplied. Assistance in the
development of the plans required under this chapter may be found in the
following publications:
   (1)   Erosion and Sediment Control in Developing Areas: Planning Guidelines
and Design Aids - issued by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, 901 Sumter Street, Columbia, SC 29201 - dated July 1974.
   (2)   Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds: Technical Release No. 55 -
issued by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, 901
Sumter Street, Columbia, SC 29201 dated June 1986.
Sec. 5-5-21 Plan requirements.
   The sediment control and drainage plan and the flood control plan shall
contain the following, as applicable:
   (1)   a vicinity map sufficient to locate the site and to show the
relationship of the site to its general surrounds at a scale of not less than
one (1) mile to one (1) inch;
   (2)   the site drawn to a scale of not less than 200 feet to one (1) inch,
showing:
      a.   the boundary lines of the site on which the work is to be performed,
including the approximate acreage of the site;
      b.   existing contours with intervals of not more than two (2) feet.
Contours will extend 100 feet outside of the site boundary lines; provided that
the building official shall have the authority to alter this requirement as he
deems necessary and proper;
       c.   proposed physical improvements on the site, including present
development and future utilization if future development plans are known;
      d.   all drainage provisions, flood protection provisions, erosions and
sediment control measures, vegetative practices, or other protective devices to
be constructed in connection with, or as a part of, the proposed work;
      e.   provisions for storm water runoff control during construction and
during the life of the facility, which shall include a time schedule and
sequence of operations indicating the anticipated starting and completion dates
of the particular development sequence;
      f.   a complete and adequate grading plan for borrow applicable, showing
the storm drainageways serving such areas; and
      g.   a general description of the predominant soil types on the site;
   (3)   the name and address of the property owner, developer, and petitioner;
   (4)   title, scale, north arrow, date and name of individual or organization
preparing plat, with seal;
   (5)   the plan and certifications shall be supported by such supplemental
reports, data and additional information as the city may reasonably require;
and
   (6)   the following certifications:
      a.   applicant's certification: "I (We) hereby certify that all clearing,
grading, construction and/or development will be done pursuant to this
plan."___________ _____________Date Permit Applicant
      b.   designer's certification:"I hereby certify that this plan is
designed to contain silt on the property concerned to the maximum extent, to
provide for the protection of the property and the proposed improvements
thereon from the ravages of flooding, to provide for the control of the runoff
from the property, and that all the provisions for sediment control and storm
drainage are in accordance with the Sediment Control and Storm Drainage
Ordinance for the City of West Columbia, South Carolina."_____________
________________Date Registered Civil Engineer, Professional Soil
Conservationist or Registered Landscape Architect
Sec. 5-5-22 Inspection
   The county engineer or his authorized representative shall inspect the work
done under the approved plan periodically as deemed advisable. Upon completion,
he shall make a final inspection and if the work has been completed in
accordance with the approved plan, he shall issue to the applicant a letter of
satisfactory completion with a copy to the soil and water conservation
district.
Sec. 5-5-23 Enforcement and administration.
   (a)   Whenever the building official finds that the work done or not done
under any land disturbance permit issued under the provisions of this chapter
fails to conform to the approved plan or plans, he shall notify the zoning
administrator of the city who shall direct conformance to the plan as he deems
necessary, to include the issuance of a written order to comply, to suspend
work, to revoke the permit issued, to seek redress through legal action, or to
withhold the release of permanent electric power to the site.
   (b)   All violations of the provisions of this chapter by any person,
partnership, or corporation, whether public or private, that come to the
attention of any responsible individual concerned shall be reported to the
building official, as may be deemed advisable, including a proceeding for an
injunction.
   (c)   Any person who willfully violates the provisions of a sediment control
and drainage plan or of a flood control plan submitted to obtain a land
disturbance permit shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (d)   The city council or the soil and water conservation district may
obtain the injunctive relief to enjoin violations of any land disturbance
permit issued upon the approval of a submitted sediment control and drainage
plan or flood control plan and any person damaged as a result of such
violations may, upon a proper showing of such damages, obtain payment therefor
by a civil action.
   (e)   The building official shall:
   (1)   Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits may be
required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known,
require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the
development permit.
   (2)   Notify adjacent communities and the Water Resources Commission prior
to any alteration or relocation of a water course, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   (3)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not
diminished.
   (4)   Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved
structures.
   (5)   Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
to which the new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed.
   (6)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries
of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the building
official shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the
location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in section
5-5-12.
   (7)   When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided
then the building official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source.
Sec. 5-5-24 Conflict with other laws.
   Whenever the provisions of this chapter impose more restrictive standards
than are required in or under any other ordinance, the regulations herein
contained shall prevail. Whenever the provisions of any other ordinance require
more restrictive standards than are required herein, the more restrictive
requirements shall prevail.
Chapter 6 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
*Note to Chapter 6
Historical Note: The provisions of this chapter are derived from an ordinance
adopted 6/6/95, unless otherwise indicated. The city adopted an additional
flood damage prevention ordinance on May 1, 2018. That ordinance is not
included herein, but is on file in the city offices.
Article I
General Provisions
5-6-1   Statutory authorization.
   The Legislature of the State of South Carolina has in SC Code of Laws, Title
5, Chapters 7, 23, and 25 (Articles 5 and 7) and Title 6, Chapter 7, and
amendments thereto, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to
adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of West Columbia, South
Carolina does ordain as follows.
5-6-2   Findings of fact.
   The flood hazard areas of West Columbia are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption
of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures of
flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. Furthermore,
these flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the
occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to
other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise
unprotected from flood damages.
5-6-3   Statement of purpose and objectives.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to protect human life and health, minimize
property damage, and encourage appropriate construction practices to minimize
public and private losses due to flood conditions by requiring that uses
vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction. Uses of the
floodplain which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or
erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion are
restricted or prohibited. These provisions attempt to control the alteration of
natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are
involved in the accommodation of floodwaters, and control filling, grading,
dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion.
Additionally, this chapter prevents or regulates the construction of flood
barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood
hazards to other lands. The objectives of this chapter are to protect human
life and health, to help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound
use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood
blight areas, and to insure that potential home buyers are notified that
property is in a flood area. The provisions of this chapter are intended to
minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains,
electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in the
floodplain, and prolonged business interruptions. Also, an important floodplain
management objective of this chapter is to minimize expenditure of public money
for costly flood control projects and rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding. Floodplains are an important asset to the community. They perform
vital natural functions such as temporary storage of floodwaters, moderation of
peak flood flows, maintenance of water quality, groundwater recharge,
prevention of erosion, habitat for diverse natural wildlife populations,
recreational opportunities, and aesthetic quality. These functions are best
served if floodplains are kept in their natural state. Wherever possible, the
natural characteristics of floodplains and their associated wetlands and water
bodies should be preserved and enhanced. Decisions to alter floodplains,
especially floodways and stream channels, should be the result of careful
planning processes which evaluate resource conditions and human needs.
5-6-4   Lands to which this chapter applies.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of West Columbia as identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency in its Flood Insurance Study, dated October 8, 1982, with accompanying
maps and other supporting data, and any revision thereto, which are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter.
5-6-5   Establishment of development permit.
   A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of
this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities.
5-6-6   Compliance.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, or
structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance
and other applicable regulations.
5-6-7   Interpretation.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall
be considered as minimum requirements, liberally construed in favor of the
governing body, and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state law. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair
any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
5-6-8   Partial invalidity and severability.
   If any part of this chapter is declared invalid, the remainder of the
chapter shall not be affected and shall remain in force.
5-6-9   Warning and disclaimer of liability.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of West Columbia or by any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
5-6-10   Penalties for violation.
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any
of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more that $100
or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. Each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent West Columbia from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
5-6-11   through 5-6-20 reserved.
Article II
Definitions
5-6-21   General.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
5-6-22   Definitions.
Accessory structure means structure which is located on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the
use of the principal structure. Garages, carports and storage sheds are common
urban accessory structures. Pole barns, hay sheds and the like qualify as
accessory structures on farms, and may or may not be located on the same parcel
as the farm dwelling or shop building.
Addition (to an existing building) means an extension or increase in the floor
area or height of a building or structure. Additions to existing buildings
shall comply with the requirements for new construction, unless the addition,
renovation or reconstruction to any building that was constructed prior to the
initial Flood Insurance Study for that area, and the addition, renovation or
reconstruction does not equal 50 percent of the present market value of the
structure. Where a fire wall or load-bearing wall is provided between the
addition and the existing building, the addition(s) shall be considered a
separate building and must comply with the standards for new construction.
Agricultural structure means a structure used solely for agricultural purposes
in which the use is exclusively in connection with the production, harvesting,
storage, drying, or raising of agricultural commodities, including the raising
of livestock. Agricultural structures are not exempt from the provisions of
this chapter. Appeal means a request for a review of the local administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or VO zone on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths of one (1) to three (3)
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
Basement means any enclosed area of a building which is below grade on all
sides.
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any
occupancy or storage.
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor
elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundations perimeter
walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls parallel to the flow of water.
Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures
for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the
FIRM, or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date.
Existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision means a
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before February 15, 1979.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete slabs).
Flood means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or the
unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas
of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of
special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study means the official report provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
Flood-resistant material means any building material capable of withstanding
direct and prolonged contact (minimum 72 hours) with floodwaters without
sustaining damage which requires more than low-cost cosmetic repair. Any
material which is water soluble or is not resistant to alkali or acid in water,
including normal adhesives for above-grade use, is not flood-resistant.
Pressure-treated lumber or naturally decay-resistant lumber are acceptable
flooring materials. Sheet-type flooring coverings which restrict evaporation
from below and materials which are impervious, but dimensionally unstable are
not acceptable. Materials which absorb or retain water excessively after
submergence are not flood-resistant. Please refer to Technical Bulletin 2-93,
Flood-Resistant Materials for Buildings Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas
in Accordance with the National Flood Insurance Program, document number FIA-
TB-2, dated 4/93, and available from the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Class 4 and 5 materials, referenced therein, are acceptable flood-resistant
materials.
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot.
Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood
processing facilities. The term does not include long-term storage,
manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of the structure.
Historic structure means any structure that is:
      (a)   listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior (DOI)) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
      (b)   certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (c)   individually listed on a state inventory of historic places;
      (d)   individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified (1) by
an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of Interior, or (2)
directly by the Secretary of Interior in states without approved programs. Some
structures or districts listed on the state or local inventories may not be
"historic" as cited above, but have been included on the inventories because it
was believed that the structures or districts have the potential for meeting
the "historic" structure criteria of the DOI. In order for these structures to
meet NFIP historic structure criteria, it must be demonstrated and evidenced
that the South Carolina Department of Archives and History has individually
determined that the structure or district meets DOI historic structure
criteria.
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area. Any finished
or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access, or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a
building's lowest floor; provided, that such an enclosure is not built so as to
render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter.
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide.
It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the
floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD).
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) means, as corrected in 1929, elevation
reference points set by National Geodetic Survey based on mean sea level.
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) means datum point established at Pointe-
au-Pere on the St. Lawrence River, Quebec Province, Canada, based on the mass
or density of the earth. The datum listed as the reference datum on Flood
Insurance Rate Maps should be used for elevation certificate and floodproofing
certificate completion.
New construction means structure for which the start of construction commenced
after February 15, 1979. The term also includes any subsequent improvements to
such structure.
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete slabs) is completed on or after February 15,
1979.
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is:
      (a)   built on a single chassis;
      (b)   400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection;
      (c)   designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and,
      (d)   designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Start of construction, (for other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97-348)), includes
substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit
date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of
slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for footings, piers or
foundations, or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
building.
Structure means a walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, including a
gas or liquid storage tank, or other manmade facility or infrastructure that is
principally above ground.
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred. Please refer to the definition of "substantial improvement."
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include either:
   (1)   any project of improvement to a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions (does not include
Americans with Disabilities Act compliance standards); or,
   (2)   any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure. Permits shall be cumulative for a period of five (5) years.
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means
where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets,
utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets,
utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction, or improvement commenced.
Variance means the grant of relief from a term or terms of this chapter.
5-6-23   through 5-6-30 reserved.
Article III
Administration
5-6-31   Designation of local administrator.
   The Building Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement the
provisions of this chapter.
5-6-32   Development permit and certification requirements.
   Application for a development permit shall be made to the local
administrator on forms furnished by him or her prior to any development
activities. The development permit may include, but not be limited to, plans in
duplicate drawn to scale showing: the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures; and the
location of fill materials, storage areas, and drainage facilities.
Specifically, the following information is required:
   (1)   A plot plan that shows the 100-year floodplain contour or a statement
that the entire lot is within the floodplain must be provided by the
development permit applicant when the lot is within or appears to be within the
floodplain as mapped by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the
floodplain identified pursuant to either section
5-6-33(10) or sections
5-6-43 and
5-6-44. The plot plan must be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same.
   (2)   The plot plan required by subsection (1) of this section must show the
floodway, if any, as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or
the floodway identified pursuant to either section
5-6-33(10) or sections
5-6-43 and
5-6-44.
   (3)   Where base flood elevation data is provided as set forth in section
5-6-4 or section
5-6-33(10), the application for a development permit within the flood hazard
area shall show:
      a.   The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor of
all new and substantially improved structures; and
      b.   If the structure will be floodproofed in accordance with section
5-6-42(2), the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure
will be floodproofed.
   (4)   If no base flood elevation data is provided as set forth in section
5-6-4 or section
5-6-33(10), the application for a development permit must show construction of
the lowest floor at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade.
   (5)   Where any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of
proposed development, the application for a development permit shall include: a
description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; an
engineering report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying
capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream
and downstream; and, a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse
alteration or relocation.
   (6)   When a structure is floodproofed, the applicant shall provide
certification from a registered, professional engineer or architect that the
non-residential, floodproofed structure meets the floodproofing criteria in
section
5-6-42(2).
   (7)   A floor elevation or floodproofing certification is required after the
lowest floor is completed. As soon as possible after completion of the lowest
floor and before any further vertical construction commences, or floodproofing
by whatever construction means, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty
of the permit holder to submit to the local administrator a certification of
the elevation of the lowest floor, or floodproofed elevation, whichever is
applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea level. Said certification shall
be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or
professional engineer and certified by same. Any work done prior to submission
of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local
administrator shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted.
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder
immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed.
Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required
hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
5-6-33   Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator.
   Duties of the local administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
   (1)   Review all development permits to assure that the requirements of this
chapter have been satisfied;
   (2)   Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits may be
required, and if specific federal or state permits are known, require that
copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development
permit;
   (3)   Notify adjacent communities and the South Carolina Department of
Natural Resources, Land Resources and Conservation Districts Division, State
Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program, prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency;
   (4)   In addition to the notifications required in subsection (3) of this
section, written reports of maintenance records must be maintained to show that
maintenance has been provided within the altered or relocated portion of said
watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. This
maintenance must consist of a comprehensive program of periodic inspections,
and routine channel clearing and dredging, or other related functions. The
assurance shall consist of a description of maintenance activities, frequency
of performance, and the local official responsible for maintenance performance.
Records shall be kept on file for FEMA inspection;
   (5)   Prevent encroachments within floodways unless the certification and
flood hazard reduction provisions of Article IV are met;
   (6) Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest
floor of all new or substantially improved structures, in accordance with
section
5-6-32(7);
   (7)   Obtain the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which
the new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in
accordance with section
5-6-32(7);
   (8)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with section
5-6-42(2);
   (9)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries
of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the
necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in this article;
   (10)   When base flood elevation data or floodway data has not been provided
in accordance with section
5-6-4, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize best available base flood
elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other
source, including data developed pursuant to section
5-6-44(3) in order to administer the provisions of this chapter. Data from
preliminary, draft, and final Flood Insurance Studies constitutes best
available data from a federal, state, or other source. If an appeal is pending
on the study in accordance with 44 CFR Ch. 1, Part 67.5 and 67.6, the data does
not have to be used;
   (11)   When the exact location of boundaries of the areas special flood
hazards conflict with the current, natural topography information at the site
the property owner may apply and be approved for a letter of map amendment
(LOMA) by FEMA. A copy of the letter of map amendment issued from FEMA will be
maintained by the local administrator in the permit file;
   (12)   Make on-site inspections of projects in accordance with section
5-6-34;
   (13)   Serve notices of violations, issue stop-work orders, revoke permits
and take corrective actions in accordance with section
5-6-34;
   (14)   Maintain all records pertaining to the administration of this chapter
and make these records available for public inspection;
   (15)   Notify the land resources and conservation districts division, within
six (6) months, of any annexations that include special flood hazard areas. The
community must incorporate applicable maps from surrounding jurisdictions into
this chapter within 90 days of annexation.
5-6-34   Administrative procedures.
   (1)   Inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to a permit
progresses, the local administrator shall make as many inspections of the work
as may be necessary to ensure that the work is being done according to the
provisions of the local ordinance and the terms of the permit. In exercising
this power, the administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper
credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial jurisdiction at
any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
   (2)   Stop-work orders. Whenever a building or part thereof is being
constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation of this chapter,
the administrator may order the work to be immediately stopped. The stop-work
order shall be in writing and directed to the person doing the work. The stop-
work order shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reasons
for the stoppage, and the conditions under which the work may be resumed.
Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor.
   (3)   Revocation of permits. The local administrator may revoke and require
the return of the development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing,
stating the reason for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any
substantial departure from the approved application, plans, or specifications;
for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of state or local laws;
or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any
permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may
also be revoked.
   (4)   Periodic inspections. The local administrator and each member of his
inspections department shall have a right, upon presentation of proper
credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial jurisdiction of
the department at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other
enforcement action.
   (5)   Violations to be corrected. When the local administrator finds
violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his duty to notify
the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or occupant
shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law on the property he owns.
   (6)   Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the owner of
a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the
administrator shall give him written notice, by certified or registered mail to
his last known address or by personal service, that: a. The building or
property is in violation of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance; b. A hearing
will be held before the local administrator at a designated place and time, not
later than 10 days after the date of the notice, at which time the owner shall
be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel and to present arguments and
evidence pertaining to the matter; and c. Following the hearing, the local
administrator may issue such order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building;
or to remove fill as appears appropriate.
   (7)   Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to
the notice prescribed above, the administrator shall find that the building or
development is in violation of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, he shall
make an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the
violation within such period, not less than 60 days, the administrator may
prescribe; provided, that where the administrator finds that there is imminent
danger to life or other property, he may order that corrective action be taken
in such lesser period as may be feasible.
   (8)   Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action
may appeal from the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice
of appeal in writing to the administrator and the clerk within 10 days
following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order
of the administrator shall be final. The local governing body shall hear an
appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke
the order.
   (9)   Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or property
fails to comply with an order to take corrective action from which no appeal
has been taken, or fails to comply with an order of the governing body
following an appeal, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished
in the discretion of the court.
5-6-35   through 5-6-40 reserved.
Article IV
Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
5-6-41   General standards.
   Development may not occur in the floodplain where alternative locations
exist due to the inherent hazards and risks involved. Before a permit is
issued, the applicant shall demonstrate that new structures cannot be located
out of the floodplain and that encroachments onto the floodplain are minimized.
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required:
   (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure;
   (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with flood resistant materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;
   (3)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damages;
   (4)   Electrical, ventilation, plumbing, heating and air conditioning
equipment (including ductwork), and other service facilities shall be designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding. This requirement does not preclude
outdoor faucets for shower heads, sinks, hoses, etc., as long as cut off
devices and back flow devices are installed to prevent contamination to the
service components and thereby minimize any flood damages to the building;
   (5)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood-waters into the system;
   (6)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters;
   (7)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and
   (8)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement to a structure
which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall meet the
requirements of "new construction" as contained in this chapter.
   (9)   Nonconforming buildings or uses. Nonconforming buildings or uses may
not be enlarged, replaced, or rebuilt unless such enlargement or reconstruction
is accomplished in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. Provided,
however, nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or
replacement of an existing building or structure located totally or partially
within the floodway, provided that the bulk of the building or structure below
base flood elevation in the floodway is not increased,and provided that such
repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other requirements of
this chapter.
   (10)   Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). A building must meet the
specific standards for floodplain construction outlined in section
5-6-42, as well as any applicable ADA requirements. The ADA is not
justification for issuing a variance or otherwise waiving these requirements.
Also, the cost of improvements required to meet the ADA provisions shall be
included in the costs of the improvements for calculating substantial
improvement.
5-6-42   Specific standards.
   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has
been provided, as set forth in section
5-6-4 or section
5-6-33(10), the following provisions are required:
   (1)   Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement
of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the
lowest floor elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood
elevation. No basements are permitted. Should solid foundation perimeter walls
be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with subsection (5) of
this section.
   (2)   Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential structure
(including manufactured homes) shall have the lowest floor elevated no lower
than one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation. No basements are
permitted. Structures located in A-zones may be floodproofed in lieu of
elevation; provided, that all areas of the structure below the required
elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water, using structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered,
professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this
subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the official
as set forth in section
5-6-32(7). A variance may be considered for wet-floodproofing agricultural
structures in accordance with the criteria outlined in section
5-6-54 of this ordinance. Agricultural structures not meeting the criteria of
section
5-6-54. must meet the nonresidential construction standards and all other
applicable provisions of this chapter.
   (3)   Manufactured homes.
      a.   Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on
sites outside a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured
home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision, or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on
which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a
flood, must be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of
the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base
flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
      b.   Manufactured homes that are to be placed or substantially improved
on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision that are not
subject to the provisions of subsection (3)(a) of this section must be elevated
so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one
(1) foot above the base flood elevation, and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement.
      c.   Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement. For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes
must be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement in
accordance with section 19-425.39 of the South Carolina Manufactured Housing
Board Regulations, effective date May 25, 1990, as amended. Additionally, when
the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis at least thirty-six
(36) inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported
by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength. When the elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in height an
engineering certification is required.
      d.   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all residents
of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged manufactured home
parks or subdivisions located within flood-prone areas. This plan shall be
filed with and approved by the local administrator and the local emergency
preparedness coordinator.
   (4)   Recreational vehicles. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use
if it is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-
disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached
additions. Recreational vehicles placed on sites shall either be on site for
fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days and be fully licensed and
ready for highway use, or meet the requirements of section
5-6-32 and sections
5-6-41 and
5-6-42(3).
   (5)   Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of
elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas that are usable solely for
the parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a
basement, and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to preclude
finished living space and be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters.
      a.   Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified
by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria:
         i.   Provide a minimum of two (2) openings on different walls having a
total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding;
         ii.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot
above grade;
         iii.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of
floodwaters in both directions; and
         iv.   Fill placed around foundation walls must be graded so that the
grade inside the enclosed area is equal to or higher than the adjacent grade
outside the building on at least one side of the building.
      b.   Hazardous velocities. Hydrodynamic pressure must be considered in
the design of any foundation system where velocity waters or the potential for
debris flow exists. If flood velocities are excessive (greater than five (5)
feet per second), foundation systems other than solid foundations walls should
be considered so that obstructions to damaging flood flows are minimized.
      c.   Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow
for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance
equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or
entry to the living area (stairway or elevator).
      d.   The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned
or finished into separate rooms, except to enclose storage areas.
   (6)   Temporary development. All applicants must submit to the local
administrator, prior to the issuance of the development permit, a written plan
for the removal of any temporary structures or development in the event of a
hurricane or flash flood warning notification. The plan shall be reviewed and
approved in writing, and must include the following information:
      a.   A specified time period for which the temporary use will be
permitted;
      b.   The name, address and phone number of the individual responsible for
the removal of temporary structures or development;
      c.   The time frame prior to the event at which any structures will be
removed (i.e., minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a hurricane or
immediately upon flood warning notification);
      d.   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with a trucking
company to insure the availability of removal equipment when needed;
      e.   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside the
floodplain to which any temporary structure will be moved;
      f.   A determination of permanent structures which would be adversely
affected by increased flooding upstream or downstream, and a method for
covering this liability, such as a performance bond; and
      g.   A plan to restore the area to its natural condition once the
temporary permit expires or the temporary use is terminated, whichever is
first.
   (7)   Accessory structures. An accessory structure or garage, the cost of
which is greater than $3000, must comply with the elevated structure
requirements of subsections (2) and (5) of this section. When accessory
structures of $3000 or less are to be placed in the floodplain, the following
criteria shall be met:
      a.   Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation
(including work, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas).
      b.   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential.
      c.   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
      d.   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
      e.   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be
installed in accordance with section
5-6-41(4).
      f.   Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be
provided below base flood elevation in conformance with subsection (5) of this
section.
   (8)   Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in
section
5-6-4, are areas designated as floodways. The floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris and
potential projectiles and has erosion potential. The following provisions shall
apply within such areas:
      a.   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, additions, and other developments shall be permitted unless it
has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in
accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of
the base flood. Such certification and technical data shall be presented to the
local administrator.
      b.   If subsection (8)(a) of this section is satisfied, all new
construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable
flood hazard reduction provisions of Article IV.
      c.   Stream crossings for any purpose (i.e., timber harvesting
operations), if temporary, shall be permitted in accordance with subsection (6)
of this section. Otherwise, the development shall comply with all applicable
flood hazard reduction provisions of Article IV.
      d.   No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be
placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided
the anchoring and the elevation standards of subsection (3) of this section and
the encroachment standards of subsection (8)(a) of this section, are met.
      e.   Permissible uses within floodways may include: general farming,
pasture, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, forestry, wildlife sanctuary,
game farm, and other similar agricultural, wildlife, and related uses. Also,
lawns, gardens, play areas, picnic grounds, and hiking and horseback riding
trails are acceptable uses, provided that they do not employ structures or
fill. Substantial development of a permissible use may require a no-rise
certification. The uses listed in this subsection are permissible only if and
to the extent that they do not cause any increase in base flood elevations.
   (9)   Fill. Fill is discouraged because storage capacity is removed from
floodplains. Elevating buildings by other methods must be considered. An
applicant shall demonstrate that fill is the only alternative to raising the
building to at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, and that the
amount of fill used will not affect the flood storage capacity or adversely
affect adjacent properties. The following provisions shall apply to all fill
placed in the special flood hazard area:
      a.   Fill may not be placed in the floodway unless it is in accordance
with subsection (8)(a) of this section.
      b.   Fill may not be placed in tidal or non-tidal wetlands without the
required state and federal permits.
      c.   Fill must consist of soil and rock materials only. Dredged material
may be used as fill only upon certification of suitability by a registered
professional geotechnical engineer. Landfalls, rubble fills, dumps, and
sanitary fills are not permitted in the floodplain.
      d.   Fill used to support structures must comply with ASTM Standard D-
698, and its suitability to support structures certified by a registered,
professional engineer.
      e.   Fill slopes shall be no greater than two (2) horizontal to one (1)
vertical. Flatter slopes may be required where velocities may result in
erosion.
      f.   The use of fill shall not increase flooding or cause drainage
problems on neighboring properties.
5-6-43   Standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or
floodways.
   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section
5-6-4, are small streams where no base flood data has been provided or where no
floodways have been identified. The following provisions apply within such
areas:
   (1)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements or new development shall be permitted within 100 feet of the
stream bank unless certification with supporting technical data by a
registered, professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such
encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   (2)   If subsection (1) of this section is satisfied and base flood
elevation data is available from other sources, all new construction and
substantial improvements within such areas shall comply with all applicable
flood hazard ordinance provisions of Article IV and shall be elevated or
floodproofed in accordance with elevations established in accordance with
section
5-6-33(10). Data from preliminary, draft, and final Flood Insurance Studies
constitutes best available data. If an appeal is pending on the study in
accordance with 44 CFR Ch. 1, Part 67.5 and 67.6, the data does not have to be
used. When base flood elevation data is not available from a federal, state, or
other source, the lowest floor shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above
the highest adjacent grade.
5-6-44   Standards for subdivision proposals.
   (1)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage. An access road at or above the base flood elevation
shall be provided to allow emergency access during flood conditions.
   (2)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (3)   Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development which is greater than the lesser of five (5)
lots or five (5) acres.
5-6-45   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones).
   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Section 5-6-
4, are areas designated as shallow flooding. The following provisions shall
apply within such areas:
   (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures shall have the lowest floor elevated to the depth number specified
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If
no depth number is specified, the lowest floor shall be elevated at least three
(3) feet above the highest adjacent grade.
   (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures shall: a. Have the lowest floor elevated to the depth number
specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, in feet, above the highest adjacent
grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor shall be elevated at
least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade; or b. Be completely
floodproofed together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities to or
above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy.
5-6-46   through 5-6-50 reserved.
Article V
Variance Procedures
5-6-51   Establishment of appeal board.
   The board of adjustment as established by the West Columbia city council
shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.
5-6-52   Right to appeal.
   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board or any taxpayer may
appeal such decision to the court.
5-6-53   Historic structures.
   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure
and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure.
5-6-54   Agricultural structures.
   Variances may be issued to wet floodproof an agricultural structure in
accordance with Technical Bulletin 7-93, Wet Floodproofing Requirements for
Structures Located in Special Flood Hazard Areas in accordance with the
National Flood Insurance Program, document number FIA-TB-7, dated 12/93, and
available from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. In order to minimize
flood damages during the base flood and the threat to public health and safety,
the structure must meet all of the conditions and considerations of section
5-6-58(4), this section, and the following standards:
   (1)   Use of the structure must be limited to agricultural purposes as
listed below:
      a.   Pole frame buildings with open or closed sides used exclusively for
the storage of farm machinery and equipment;
      b.   Steel grain bins and steel frame corn cribs:
      c.   General purpose barns for the temporary feeding of livestock which
are open on at least one side;
      d.   For livestock confinement buildings, poultry houses, dairy
operations, and similar livestock operations, variances may not be issued for
structures which were substantially damaged. New construction or substantial
improvement of such structures must meet the elevation requirements of section
5-6-42(2) of this chapter; and
      e.   Detached garages and storage sheds solely used for parking and
limited storage in connection with agricultural uses only, which are no greater
than 400 square feet in area.
   (2)   The agricultural structure must be built or rebuilt, in the case of an
existing building which is substantially damaged, with flood-resistant
materials for the exterior and interior building components and elements below
the base flood elevation.
   (3)   The agricultural structure must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. All of the structure's components
must be capable of resisting specific flood-related forces including
hydrostatic, buoyancy, hydrodynamic, and debris impact forces. Where flood
velocities exceed five (5) feet per second, fast-flowing floodwaters can exert
considerable pressure on the building's enclosure walls or foundation walls.
   (4)   The agricultural structure must meet the venting requirement of
section
5-6-42(5)(a) of this chapter.
   (5)   Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be located
above the base flood elevation so that they are contained within a watertight,
floodproofed enclosure which is capable of resisting damage during flood
conditions. The structure must comply with section
5-6-41(4).
   (6)   The agricultural structure must comply with the floodway encroachment
provisions of section
5-6-41(8).
   (7)   Major equipment, machinery, or other contents must be protected. Such
protection may include protective watertight floodproofed areas within the
building, the use of equipment hoists for readily elevating contents,
permanently elevating contents on pedestals or shelves above the base flood
elevation, or determining that property owners can safely remove contents
without risk to lives and that the contents will be located to a specified site
out of the floodplain in accordance with the temporary development provisions
of section
5-6-42(6).
5-6-55   Considerations.
   In passing upon such applications, the appeal board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
   (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury
of others;
   (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage, and
the safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
   (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
   (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
   (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
   (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or
erosion damage, for the proposed use;
   (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development, and the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
   (8)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
   (9)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges; and
   (10)   Agricultural structures must be located in wide, expansive floodplain
areas, where no other alternative location for the agricultural structure
exists. The applicant must demonstrate that the entire farm acreage, consisting
of a contiguous parcel of land on which the structure is to be located, must be
in the special flood hazard area and no other alternative locations for the
structure are available.
5-6-56   Findings.
   Findings listed above shall be submitted to the appeal board, in writing,
and included in the application for a variance. Additionally, comments from the
Department of Natural Resources, Land Resources and Conservation Districts
Division, State Coordinator's Office, must be taken into account and included
in the permit file.
5-6-57   Floodways.
   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase
in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
5-6-58   Conditions.
   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this
chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. The
following conditions shall apply to all variances:
   (1)   Variances may not be issued when the variance will make the structure
in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or
ordinances.
   (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a showing of good and sufficient
cause, a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship, and a determination that the granting of a variance will
not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (4)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and a written statement that
the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. Such notification shall be
maintained with a record of all variance actions.
   (5)   The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency
upon request.
   (6)   Variances shall not be issued for unpermitted development or other
development that is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
Violations must be corrected in accordance with section
5-6-34(5).
5-6-59   and 5-6-60 reserved.
Article VI
Legal Status Provisions
5-6-61   Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing flood damage
prevention ordinance.
   This chapter in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of the provisions
of the flood damage prevention ordinance enacted October 19, 1987 as amended,
and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and continue to
enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights
and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be enforced.
The enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not affect any
action, suit or proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the flood
damage prevention ordinance of West Columbia enacted on October 19, 1987 as
amended, which are not enacted herein are repealed.
Amendment Note: In accordance with the city's wishes, the original flood damage
prevention ordinance enacted October 19, 1987 and codified as Chapter 5-5, was
not removed from this code.
5-6-62   Effect upon outstanding building permits.
   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size or designated use of any building, structure or part thereof
for which a building permit has been granted by the chief building inspector or
his authorized agents before the time of passage of the ordinance codified in
this chapter; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such
outstanding permit within a period of 60 days subsequent to passage of said
ordinance, construction or use shall be in conformity with the provisions of
said ordinance.
TITLE 6 HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
6-1-1   Nuisances prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, including the owner or occupant
of such premises, to permit or create a public nuisance on his premises or lot,
or to allow a nuisance to remain on such premises or lot, or to create a public
nuisance adjacent to his premises or in any public place which is so located
upon the premises as to be readily visible from any public place or from any
surrounding private property.
   (b)   The following are declared to be examples of such nuisances including
but not limited to:
      (1)   Garbage, trash or refuse, except garbage, trash or refuse stored in
authorized sealed receptacles specifically on designated trash collection days;
      (2)   Dilapidated or unusable furniture;
      (3)   Unusable or discarded iceboxes, refrigerators, stoves or other
appliances;
      (4)   Unusable or discarded machinery or equipment or parts thereof;
      (5)   Used and discarded building materials;
      (6)   Broken and discarded glass;
      (7)   Any other item which is either wholly or partially rusted, wrecked,
junked, dismantled, discarded, or inoperative;
      (8)   Used or discarded clothing;
      (9)   Dead animals;
      (10)   Stagnant water;
      (11)   Decayed vegetables and fruits;
      (12)   Any natural or manmade matter which causes an offensive odor;
      (13)   Dead, dying or damaged trees that present an imminent danger to
life or property;
      (14)   Anything that threatens or causes injury to the life or health of
any person or significant damage to property.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for the occupant or owner of any property within
the city to allow any of the following items to remain on the property outside
a dwelling or other enclosed structure for longer than 48 hours, in any
location visible from streets or sidewalks adjacent to the property: Bedding,
bottles, glass, cans, cardboard, upholstered furniture manufactured for indoor
use only, household appliances, except as provided in Section 6-1-4, jars,
lumber and building supply materials not related to an active permit and not
neatly stacked, machine parts, motor vehicles parts, pallets, paper, plumbing
fixtures, rags, scrap metal. For purposes of this section, the phrase "outside
a dwelling or other enclosed structure" shall mean any location that is not
within the interior of a dwelling or other enclosed structure. Porches,
balconies, decks, carports or other similar structures, unless completely
enclosed, shall be deemed to be outside a dwelling or other enclosed structure.
Temporary materials cannot be used to enclose a structure.
   (d)   The following are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting
public decency, peace and order, whether such violations are of an
intermittent, cyclical, continual, reoccurring or constant nature; and when the
responsible party generates, enables, or contributes to the occurrence of the
unlawful behavior by an absence or failure of property management policy or
practice, absence or failure of control over the property, absence or failure
of supervision of guests or invitees, absence or failure of security measures.
      (1)   Any structure, whether commercial or residential, where gambling
devices, slot machines, punch boards and other such contrivances of similar
character involving any elements of chance as a consideration or any type of
gambling, bookmaking, wagering or betting is carried on, and all gambling
equipment, except where such specific form of gambling is permitted by
applicable law;
      (2)   Any structure, whether commercial or residential, used and
maintained for the commercial or criminal purposes of unlawful sexual activity
in violation of federal, state or local law;
      (3)   Any structure, whether commercial or residential, where
intoxicating liquors are manufactured, sold, bartered or given away in
violation of federal, state or local law, or where intoxicating liquors kept
for sale, barter or distribution in violation of federal, state or local law,
and all liquors, bottles, kegs, pumps, bars and other property kept at and used
for maintaining such a place; or where required safety plans are not in place,
or where persistent violations of law occur under a failed or ineffective
safety plan;
      (4)   Any structure, whether commercial or residential, where acts of
sale, manufacture, possession or distribution of controlled substances occur in
violation of federal, state and local law;
      (5)   Any structure, whether a commercial operation or a residential use,
where violations against the federal, state or municipal laws occur with
disproportionate frequency or intensity that they require an excessive public
safety response cost. "Excessive public safety response" means:
         a.   The reasonable deployment of five (5) or more law enforcement
officers to an emergency scene at any one time, or the reoccurring need for
public safety or code personnel or emergency vehicles at the location when
compared to the frequency or intensity of law or regulation enforcement
required at other similarly situated structures;
         b.   There have been more than two (2) situations of unsafe traffic or
crowd control issues which result in the request of emergency assistance or the
need for law enforcement assistance from an emergency situation; provided,
however, this does not include when traffic control or crowd control is
requested in advance of a scheduled event pursuant to a city issued permit or
prior discussions with law enforcement.
         c.   There have been more than six (6) citations, or search warrants
executed, or a combination of the two (2), at that structure for any of the
following behaviors during any twelve (12) month period:
            i.   Violation of any state or local alcohol law;
            ii.   Violation of any federal, state or local narcotics law;
            iii.   Violation of any state or local gun law;
            iv.   Assaults; and/or
            v.   Crimes of violence against another person(s).
(Ord. of 9/17/01, as amended by Ord. of 2/6/18, as amended by Ord. of 4/16/18)
6-1-2   Accumulations of weed or refuse prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, including the owner, agent or
occupant of such premises, to maintain or permit to be maintained any premises,
including vacant lots or land, upon which grass, weeds, undergrowth is
permitted or caused to accumulate in any manner which is or may become a public
nuisance, or to place or leave such materials adjacent to his premises or in
any public place unless done pursuant to ordinances provided for its
collection.
      (1)   The words "weeds" and "rank vegetation," as used in this section,
include poison ivy, kudzu, plants of obnoxious odors, weeds and grasses causing
hay fever, weeds and grasses which serve as a breeding ground for mosquitoes or
as a refuge for snakes and rats, or any growth that creates a fire or traffic
hazard or a nuisance due to unsightliness.
      (2)   Grass, weeds, rank vegetation, and uncultivated vegetation of more
than 18 inches in height in a developed commercial, manufacturing, or
residential area are specifically deemed and declared a nuisance. The term "a
developed commercial, manufacturing, or residential area” shall include within
its meaning property zoned for commercial, manufacturing, and/or residential
use, platted for commercial and/or residential use with an approved and filed
plat, and in which construction of streets and installation of utilities and
construction of commercial and/or residential units have commenced.
      (3)   These provisions do not apply to flower beds or gardens,
vegetables, seasonal and ornamental grasses, wetlands, woodlands and forested
areas, areas within fifteen feet (15') of a stream or pond, and land actively
cultivated in crop production or engaged in farming.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person, including the owner or occupant
of such premises, to maintain or permit to be maintained kudzu, honeysuckle,
ivy or any other woody or vine-type plant upon any premises, including vacant
lots or land, when such plant grows beyond the bounds of the premises so as to
be entwined in fences, buildings, trees or public utilities or onto any other
property. 
(Ord. of 9/17/01, as amended by Ord. of 2/6/18)
6-1-3   Duty of business owners to keep premises clean.
   (a)   The owner or occupant of any store or other place of business situated
within the city shall at all times keep his premises clean of wastepaper,
wrapping paper, paper napkins, cartons, package containers and other used or
waste materials thrown or left on the premises, and prevent such articles from
drifting or blowing to adjoining premises.
   (b)   Receptacles of sufficient size and number shall be placed on the
premises accessible to the customers and employees of such businesses where the
articles of waste referred to in subsection (a) of this section may be disposed
of, and such waste collected shall be disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of Title 6, Chapter 2. (Ord. of 9/17/01)
Sec. 6-1-4 Abandoned refrigerators or other airtight containers and upholstered
furniture.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, including the owner or occupant
of any premises, to leave or permit, abandon or discard outside of such
premises, building or structure or upon a vacant lot, in a place accessible to
children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other
container of any kind which has a snap lock or other closing device thereon,
without first removing the door from the icebox, refrigerator or container.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person, including the owner or occupant
of any premises, to place and/or store any upholstered furniture on the front
or side lawn and/or porch of a premises. For purposes of this section,
"upholsteredfurniture" means any furniture that contains filling material and
is used or intended to be used for sitting, resting or reclining and is not
intended and/or suitable for outdoor use, including, but not limited to, sofas,
chairs and car seats removed from vehicles.
(Ord. of 9/17/01, as amended by Ord. of 7/5/05)
Sec. 6-1-5 Enforcement procedures; appeals; abatement by city.
   (a)   The person designated by the city administrator and those inspectors
assigned to assist him shall have the duty and responsibility of enforcing this
chapter. Enforcement of this chapter shall be by the inspection of property,
investigation of complaints and observance of persons who violate any of its
provisions. The aforementioned authorized officials may enter at any reasonable
time upon public or private property to investigate conditions related to the
matters covered by this chapter.
   (b)   The authorized official shall be empowered to issue a written notice
when any provisions of this chapter have been violated. Such notice shall allow
seven (7) days from issuance of the notice if notice is issued pursuant to Sec.
6-1-6(a)(1), and ten (10) days from the issuance of the notice if notice is
issued pursuant to Sec. 6-1-6(a)(2) and (3) for performance of any act it
requires, shall specify the manner in which the violation may be corrected, and
shall state that noncompliance may result in further legal proceedings;
   (c)   Within seven (7) days from the issuance of the notice, any person
receiving such notice, believing that the literal application of this chapter
will cause undue hardship or has been misconstrued, may file a written appeal
with the authorized official for such relief as he may grant, after
investigation of the grounds thereof, by way of a reasonable extension of time
or relief from strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The
circumstances justifying such findings are:
      (1)   Inability to immediately comply;
      (2)   The unavailability of services or equipment with which to comply,
without fault of the applicant; or
      (3)   Other extenuating circumstances showing a good faith intention on
the part of the applicant or another to comply when able to do so.
   (d)   If any person receiving such notice fails or refuses to correct the
violation within the time prescribed, such person shall be deemed in violation
of this chapter. A violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and shall
be punishable upon conviction with the following fines (plus court costs) and/
or thirty (30) days in jail:
 
First offense:                                $50.00
Second offense within twelve months:          $150.00
Third offense within twelve months:           $250.00
Each subsequent offense within twelve months: $500.00
 
   (e)   At the discretion of the city, if such violation has not been
corrected within the period set forth in the notice provided for in division
(b) of this section, the city or its agents may go upon the property to correct
the violation by utilizing city personnel or contracting with a private
company. The cost of correcting the violation, including inspection,
administration, labor and equipment costs, shall become a lien upon the real
property or the city can request restitution in municipal court for any
abatement costs that it has incurred, up to and not exceeding $7,500.00.
   (f)   The remedies in this chapter are not exclusive and are cumulative to
other remedies provided by applicable law and/or this code, including but not
limited to the suspension or revocation of a business license and the right to
pursue injunctive relief in the circuit court.
(Ord. of 9/17/01, as amended by Ord. of 12/6/16, as amended by Ord. of 2/6/18,
as amended by Ord. of 4/16/18)
Sec. 6-1-6 Service of violation notices; repeat violations.
   (a)   Notices of violation hereunder shall be deemed to be properly served
if a copy thereof is:
      (1)   Issued by delivering the notice personally to the owner of the
property and/or the person responsible, or by leaving the notice at the usual
place of abode or business of the owner or person responsible with a person of
suitable age and discretion;
      (2)   Sent by first class mail addressed to the last known address as
maintained by the Lexington County Tax Assessor; or
      (3)   Issued, if after seven (7) days of an attempt of either methods
described in divisions (1) and (2) of this section, by posting and keeping
posted for twenty-four (24) hours a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place
on the premises where the violation has occurred.
   (b)   For purposes of notice of violation to properties with more than one
owner, notice shall be made to the owner of record whose name and address is
maintained by the Lexington County Tax Assessor. Owners, co-owners, tenants,
and occupants jointly and severally are liable for the upkeep and maintenance
of property.
   (C) Any violation of any provision of this chapter which reoccurs, at the
same location while under the same ownership, within twelve (12) months of the
previous notice date, shall constitute a repeat violation. The occurrence of a
repeat violation shall waive the city's requirement to provide a notice of
violation and an abatement period pursuant to Sec. 6-1-5.
(Ord. of 9/17/01, as amended by Ord. of 12/6/16)
Sec. 6-1-7 Emergency abatement.
   Whenever the city administrator or his designee shall determine that a
public nuisance is such an imminent peril to the health or safety of the public
or to public or private property that the time required to follow the
procedures outlined in sections
6-1-6 and
6-1-7 would seriously threaten the health or safety of the public or create
injury to public or private property, the city administrator or his designee
may order forthwith the abatement of such nuisance in the form of a notice to
be served on the party responsible for the public nuisance, requiring that the
public nuisance be eliminated within seventy-two (72) hours, or else the party
responsible shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. If the party responsible has not
acted in accordance with the city's notice, the city may use city forces or it
may employ contractors to abate the nuisance after seventy-two (72) hours.
Thereafter, all proceedings required by sections
6-1-6 and
6-1-7 shall be held. The city may assess any such cost incurred against the
person responsible for the nuisance, and such cost may be placed as a lien
against their property, and the lien shall be collectible in the same manner as
municipal taxes. (Ord. of 9/17/01)
Sec. 6-1-8 Derelict vehicles; determination; parking and storage; removal;
redemption; punishment.
   (a)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply.
      Derelict vehicle. A vehicle:
         a.   Whose certificate of registration has expired; or
         b.   Whose motor or other major parts have been removed; or
         c.   Whose manufacturer’s serial plates, motor vehicle identification
numbers, license number plates, or any other means of identification have been
removed; or
         d.   Whose registered owner of record or the owner of the property on
which the vehicle is located disclaims ownership or releases his or her rights
thereto; or
         e.   Which is wrecked or partially dismantled or incapable of self-
propulsion or of being moved in the manner for which it was originally
intended; or
         f.   Which is not supported by inflated tires of proper type and size,
provided that all tires are in contact with the ground and are mounted as
originally intended; or
         g.   Which is declared by City Council to be a health or safety
hazard;
         h.   A vehicle that is capable of self-propulsion and of being moved
in the manner for which it was originally intended and is registered with the
State of South Carolina and displays a current tag and may be lawfully operated
on the roadway in its current state shall not be deemed a derelict vehicle.
      Vehicle. Any land, water, or air vehicle which can be used for towing or
transporting people or materials, including but not limited to automobiles,
trucks, buses, motor homes, motorized campers, boats, airplanes, motorcycles,
motor scooters, tractors, snowmobiles, dune buggies, all terrain vehicles, or
other off-the-road vehicles.
   (b)   No person shall place any derelict vehicle on any public street or
public grounds or upon any privately owned property in violation of this
section. No person controlling privately owned property shall permit any
derelict vehicle to remain thereupon in violation of this section. No derelict
vehicle shall be parked or stored for more than thirty (30) days on any lot
used for residential purposes other than in completely enclosed buildings or
otherwise not viewable from the public street or other public or private
property, provided that there shall be no more than two (2) occurrences of
parked derelict vehicles per property within one (1) calendar year. Visual
obscurity may be achieved for one (1) vehicle per lot by covering the vehicle
with an approved custom vehicle cover in rear yards or in side yards or only on
a paved driveway. All vehicles must be supported by inflated tires as
originally intended.
   (c)   Notice of derelict vehicles in violation of this section shall be
served as provided for in section
6-1-6, Service of violation notices.
   (d)   Enforcement of derelict vehicles in violation of this section shall be
made as provided for in section
6-1-5, Enforcement procedures; appeals; abatement by city.
   (e)   (1)   The owner of any removed vehicle, before obtaining possession
thereof, shall pay to the city or, as appropriate, its agent storing said
vehicle, all reasonable costs incidental to the removal  and storage of the
vehicle and locating of the owner.
      (2)   Should such owner fail or refuse to pay the costs, or should the
owner’s identity or whereabouts be unknown and unascertainable after a diligent
search and after notice as herein prescribed, the stored vehicle may be sold as
provided by state law.
   (f)   Violation of this section is unlawful and is a misdemeanor and shall
be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 30 days, or both, in the discretion of the court. In addition to the
fine, all court costs shall be imposed on and paid by the offender; however,
nothing in this section relieves the owner of the vehicle from paying the costs
described in section
6-1-5. (Ord. of 4/18/11)
   State Law Reference: S.C. Code Ann. §§ 56-5-5810 et seq., § 56-3-20, §§ 29-
15-10 et seq.
Chapter 2 GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Cross Reference: Littering, Sec.
9-3-3.
Sec. 6-2-1 General provision.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw or sweep any
garbage, rubbish, paper, trash or waste matter of any kind in any alley,
street, sidewalk, storm drain or other public place, or place or store any such
matter on private property, vacant lots or other open places within the city
except as specified herein.  (Ord. of  1/19/10)
Sec. 6-2-2 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   Bulk container. A container not smaller than two (2) cubic yards or larger
than eight (8) cubic yards of tight construction with the top door constructed
so that it may be emptied by commercial collection equipment. Dumpster is a
term synonymous with and meaning the same as bulk container.
   Designated collection day.  The day specified by the city for the collection
of garbage, recyclables and, to the extent possible due to seasonal
accumulations, vegetative waste.
   Garbage. All animal, fruit and other vegetable matter and all organic refuse
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, and
shall include any cartons, cans, bottles or other containers used for the
packaging of such matter.
   Hazardous refuse.  Includes items such as poisons, acids, caustics, infected
materials, explosives and any other materials identified by a federal, state,
or county governmental agency as a regulated hazardous waste.
   Prohibited items. Includes any and all items that cannot be collected by the
city's equipment or cannot be deposited in a landfill. Such prohibited items
include, but are not limited to, such items as motor oil and filters, tires,
lead acid batteries and liquid paint.
   Public works director.  The city employee directly responsible for the
overall operation of the city's public works department, particularly the day-
to-day collection and disposal of all waste from premises in the city,
including the responsibilities specified in this chapter.
   Recyclables. Includes such items designated by the city for collection and
shall include, but not be limited to, aluminum, glass (clear, green and brown),
newspaper, polyethylene terephthalate (PET #1) and high density polyethylene
(HDPE #2) plastic, metal cans and such other materials as the city
administrator may identify from time to time.
   Recyclables container.  Includes a container designated by the city,
carrying identification of the city, supplied to each property within the city
as designated by the city administrator. Recyclables containers shall remain
the property of the city and are to remain at the address to which they are
issued. Their use shall be primarily for those households that qualify for
residential garbage collection.
   Refuse.  Any item thrown aside as worthless.
   Roll cart.  A plastic, wheeled refuse receptacle having a tight-fitting
attached lid, carrying identification of the city and a designated serial
number and whose design, construction and capacity shall be specified by the
city. Roll carts shall be furnished by the city and shall remain the property
of the city. They are to remain at the address to which they are issued for the
collection of household garbage only. Their use shall be primarily for single-
family houses on individual lots, six (6) or fewer housing units on a single
property, or six (6) or fewer manufactured homes on a single property. In
certain cases, roll carts are acceptable containers for commercial refuse such
as paper products.
   Roll-off container.  An open top metal container with a capacity of ten (10)
cubic yards or more used for the collection of large quantities of commercial
refuse.
   Rubbish.  All other refuse other than garbage and vegetative wastes
incidental to the normal activities of a residence or conduct of a business.
   Solid waste.  An inclusive term for garbage, vegetative wastes, rubbish,
recyclables and any other waste materials.
   Vegetative wastes. Includes leaves, limbs, grass clippings and trimmings and
other such plant wastes generated from the normal maintenance and upkeep of a
residence or business. Yard trash is a term synonymous with vegetative wastes.
(Ord. of 1/19/10)
Sec. 6-2-3 Service provided by city; charges; rules and regulations.
   The city reserves the right to provide solid waste collection services as
determined by city council. Charges for service shall be as fixed from time to
time by council. The city's day-to-day collection, removal and disposal of
solid wastes from premises in the city shall be under the direction of the
public works director. Administrative rules and regulations for collection of
solid wastes may be promulgated by the city administrator, on approval of
council.  (Ord. of 1/19/10)
Sec. 6-2-4 Frequency of garbage collection.
   The council shall prescribe the collection of solid waste at the times and
intervals as deemed necessary for the health and sanitation of the community.
At a minimum, garbage shall be collected once per week.  (Ord. of 1/19/10)
Sec. 6-2-5 Residential collection.
   (a)   General. Residential collection service will be provided to single-
family houses on individual lots, six (6) or fewer housing units on a single
property, or six (6) or fewer manufactured homes on a single property. All
other properties will be subject to the provisions for commercial collection.
Any deviation from this requirement must be approved by the public works
director.
   (b)   Containers required. All households receiving residential collection
service by the city shall keep, on the premises or property occupied and used
as a residence, roll carts and/or recyclable containers as specified in this
chapter to handle the accumulations of refuse on the premises or property. All
garbage must be placed in a roll cart for collection. No garbage, bagged or
otherwise, is to be placed upon the ground. Residents generating garbage in
excess of the capacity of one (1) roll cart may purchase one (1) additional
roll cart; however, no household may utilize more than two (2) roll carts in
this manner.
   (c)   Placement of containers. Roll carts and recyclable containers shall be
placed at curbside no later than 7:00 a.m. on the designated collection day and
removed no later than 7:00 p.m. on the designated collection day. When not at
curbside for collection, roll carts and recyclable containers shall be stored
on the property, to the extent possible, out of view from any street or
roadway.
   (d)   Roll cart issuance and maintenance. One (1) roll cart shall be issued
to each household receiving residential collection service from the city. All
roll carts remain the property of the city for use by the households to which
they are issued. Residents who damage roll carts issued to them must pay for
repairing the carts or purchasing replacement carts from the city. Carts that
are damaged through normal use as a result of being emptied by city personnel
and equipment will be repaired or replaced at the city's expense. Collection
will be suspended at any location at which a roll cart is missing or at which a
roll cart is damaged to such an extent as to interfere with normal collection
methods.
   (e)   Recyclables container. A recyclables container shall be issued to each
requesting household receiving residential collection service from the city.
Recyclables containers shall remain the property of the city for use by the
household to which they are is issued. Residents who damage or lose the
recyclables container issued to them must purchase a replacement recyclables
container from the city in order to continue receiving service. Recyclables
containers that are damaged through normal use as a result of being emptied by
city personnel and equipment will be replaced at city expense.  (Ord. of 1/19/
10)
Sec. 6-2-6 Commercial collection.
   (a)   General. The city reserves the right to provide collection services
for businesses, schools, churches, hotels, recreational facilities and all
other non-residential uses. Properties containing seven (7) or more housing
units or seven (7) or more manufactured homes shall be considered commercial
users and shall be provided commercial collection service. Any deviation from
this requirement must be approved by the public works director.
   (b)   Containers required. Every commercial user producing or having refuse
shall keep, on the premises or property occupied or used, roll carts, bulk
containers or roll-off containers as specified in this chapter to handle
accumulations of refuse on the premises or property. No refuse shall be placed
directly upon the ground.
   (c)   Commercial roll carts. Commercial users who generate small amounts of
refuse weekly may place refuse in roll carts. The city provides collection and
disposal services for users of commercial roll carts. Roll carts shall be
placed at curbside no later than 10:00 a.m. on the designated collection day
and removed no later than 7:00 p.m. on the designated collection day. When not
at curbside for collection, roll carts shall be stored out of sight from any
street or roadway. Provisions for repair or replacement of damaged roll carts
stated in Sec. 6-2-5(d) apply. Businesses generating refuse in excess of the
capacity of one (1) roll cart may purchase one (1) additional roll cart;
however, no commercial user may utilize more than two (2) roll carts in this
manner. Commercial users who generate more than two (2) roll carts (ninety (90)
gallons) of refuse weekly are required to use bulk containers. The public works
director is responsible for determining whether commercial users are able to
have their refuse collected in roll carts.
   (d)   Commercial bulk containers and roll-off containers. Commercial users
that generate large quantities of refuse shall provide bulk containers or roll-
off containers as needed to meet their specific needs. The city does not
provide collection and disposal services for users of bulk containers and roll-
off containers. Bulk containers and roll-off containers shall be placed at the
rear of the structure, in an easily accessible location, with at least a three
(3)-foot clearance, and shall be adequately screened. They must not be placed
upon highway rights-of-way or in any other locations that pose a threat to
motorists or pedestrians.
   (e)   Limits of collection. The city shall have the right and authority to
limit the amount of garbage and other solid waste it collects and removes from
any commercial user.  (Ord. of 1/19/10)
Sec. 6-2-7 Dead animals.
   The city shall be responsible for the collection and disposal of all dead
domestic animals found on public rights-of-way. The city will not dispose of
any dead animals whose presence within the city limits is prohibited in Sec. 6-
3-16 of the code of ordinances of the city.  (Ord. of 1/19/10)
Sec. 6-2-8 Collection of vegetative wastes.
   (a)   Separation from other wastes. Vegetative wastes shall be kept separate
from other types of wastes collected. Improperly prepared vegetative wastes
will not be collected.
   (b)   Leaves. Leaves may be secured in plastic bags or raked to the curb,
but not beyond the curb, or edge of pavement if there is no curbing. In no
instance shall leaves be raked into storm drains or piled in such a manner as
to impede storm water runoff into storm drains.
   (c)   Limbs. Limbs shall be broken or trimmed to a manageable size and
placed at the curb, or edge of pavement if there is no curbing. Manageable size
generally means six (6) feet or less in length and six (6) inches or less in
diameter; however, the public works director shall determine the limits of
manageable size. See Sec. 6-2-9 for restrictions on the collection of limbs
from lot clearing.
   (d)   Curbside placement. Vegetative wastes shall be put out at any time
during the week or weekend but not more than seven (7) days prior to the next
designated collection day.
   (e)   Abnormal quantities. Normal quantities of vegetative wastes will be
removed by the city. Abnormally large quantities of vegetative wastes must be
removed by the property owner. The determination of what constitutes abnormally
large quantities of vegetative wastes shall be made by the city's public works
director.  (Ord. of 1/19/10)
Sec. 6-2-9 Restrictions on collection.
   (a)   Land clearing.  Trees, shrubbery or underbrush resulting from land
being cleared, either by order of the health department or the city, must be
removed by the property owner or contractor responsible therefor.
   (b)   Commercial cutting. Trees, shrubbery, underbrush, chips or sawdust
resulting from commercial cutting operations must be promptly removed by the
commercial tree cutter.
   (c)   Construction/demolition. Debris resulting from building construction,
remodeling, additions, repairs or demolitions, either resulting from an order
by the building official or otherwise, must be removed by the property owner or
contractor responsible therefor.
   (d)   Fee for removal. In cases where land clearing, commercial cutting, or
construction and demolition debris is not removed by the responsible property
owner or commercial entity, the city shall consider such debris to be non-
containerized waste and shall charge the property owner a fee for the city's
collection and disposal of such debris.
   (e)   Bulky items. Reasonable quantities of appliances, furniture, bedding
and other bulky items resulting from normal household use shall be subject to
special collection upon call to the city's sanitation department. These items
shall be placed at the street for collection only on the agreed upon day for
pickup.  (Ord. of 1/19/10)
Sec. 6-2-10 Illegal activities.
   It shall be unlawful for any person:
   (1)   To remove any roll cart or recyclables container from its designated
premises.
   (2)   To remove, disarrange or interfere with roll carts, recyclables
containers, bulk containers or roll-off containers used for the collection of
refuse or recyclable materials, or the contents of any such roll cart,
recyclables container, bulk container or roll-off container.
   (3)   To break or damage any roll cart, recyclables container, litter
receptacle, bulk container or roll-off container used for refuse or recycleable
materials.
   (4)   To fail to keep all roll carts, recyclables containers and bulk
containers clean, sanitary, tightly covered and in good repair.
   (5)   To fail to place garbage inside a container for collection.
   (6)   To permit refuse to be scattered upon any street or property in the
city.
   (7)   To place hot ashes or any burning matter in any roll cart, recyclables
container, litter receptacle, bulk container or roll-off container.
   (8)   To deposit hazardous refuse as identified herein out for collection.
   (9)   To bring any type of refuse that originates outside the city limits
into the city for collection by city equipment and personnel.
   (10)   To place any type of refuse in any roll cart, bulk container or roll-
off container located on the premises or property of another person or business
without permission from the affected property owner or business.
   (11)   To place any roll cart or recyclables container at curbside for
collection on any day other than the designated collection day.
   (12)   To leave any roll cart or recyclables container at curbside after 7:
00 p.m. on the designated collection day.  (Ord. of 1/19/10)
Sec. 6-2-11 Noncompliance penalties.
   Every person failing to comply with this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Each day of a violation shall constitute a separate offense. The
city shall have the authority to refuse collection services for failure to
comply with the rules of this chapter.  (Ord. of 1/19/10)
Sec. 6-2-12 Exception for eviction or ejectment actions.
   (a)   This chapter shall not apply to those household contents and items
placed at curbside as a result of an eviction or ejectment action. In those
cases, where household goods and items are placed on the curb for collection,
such items shall be removed after a period of forty-eight (48) hours, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, and may also be removed in the normal course
of debris and trash collection before or after a period of forty-eight (48)
hours, as required by South Carolina law.
   (b)   Property owners, either directly or through an officer of the court,
are required to give the city twelve (12) hours notice of an eviction or
ejectment action so arrangements can be made to remove these items from
curbside. (Ord. of 1/19/10)
CHAPTER 3 Animal Control*
Editor's Note:
* Priorcodehistory: Code 1965, Secs. 5-1, 5-2, 5-18, 5-22 and 5-23.
Article A
General Provisions
Sec. 6-3-1 Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Animal control shelter.  Any premises designated by the city for the purpose
of impounding and caring for all pets found at large or otherwise in violation
of this article, or which are surrendered to the city by the owner.
   Animal control superintendent.  That person employed by the city to
administer the animal control program.
   Animal control worker.  Any person employed by the city to enforce the
animal control program.
   Commercial kennel.  A commercial establishment in which five (5) or more
dogs or cats aged six (6) months or older, are boarded or bred.  The sale of
these animals may be a part of the kennel use.  Pet stores, pet grooming
establishments and veterinarian hospitals are not classified as commercial
kennels.
   Dangerous animal.
   a.   Dangerous animal means:
      1.   Any animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to
attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human
beings or pets;
      2.   An animal which attacks a human being or a pet without provocation;
      3.   An animal owned, kept or harbored primarily, or in part, for the
purpose of dogfighting;
      4.   An animal used to threaten or intimidate citizens or other animals.
   b.   An animal shall not be deemed dangerous if:
      1.   It bites, attacks or menaces:
         A.   Anyone assaulting the owner;
         B.   A trespasser on the property of the owner; or
         C.   Any person or other animal who has tormented or abused it.
      2.   It is otherwise acting in defense of an attack from a person or
other animal upon the owner or other person; or
      3.   It is protecting or defending its young or another animal.
   Dog.  All members of the canine family.
   Domestic chickens. Members of the subspecies Gallus gallus domesticus
(domestic chickens), not including guinea, fowl, peafowl, swans, ducks,
pheasants, waterfowl, exotics, and game birds.
   Guard dog and attack dog.  Any dog which has been trained to attack persons
independently or upon oral command and any dog which, while not so trained, is
reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of its owner and/or the property
upon and within which the dog is located and is owned by a licensed security
service or is owned or used by law enforcement agencies.
   Noncommercial kennel.  The premises of any person who keeps more than three
(3) dogs on the premises.  Pet stores, pet grooming establishments,
veterinarian hospitals, and commercial kennels are not classified as
noncommercial kennels.
   Owner.  Any person owning, keeping, harboring, acting as custodian of a pet,
or regularly feeding or providing medical care for any pet.
   Pet. means any domesticated dog or cat kept for pleasure rather than utility
or commercial purposes.
   Running at large.  A pet is deemed to be running at large if it is off the
premises of the owner or keeper and not under the physical control of the owner
or keeper by means of a leash or other similar restraining device. 
(Ord. of 11/1/05, as amended by Ord. of 8/21/06, as amended by Ord. of 2/3/09,
as amended by Ord. of 6/2/15)
Sec. 6-3-2 Limitations on pets; exceptions.
   1.   It shall be unlawful for any household within the city to possess or
maintain more than six (6) pets at any one (1) time, of which no more than
three (3) may be dogs; provided that households exceeding this limitation on
the effective date of this section shall be permitted to keep all of its
existing pets until such pet is deceased or otherwise placed outside the
household for a period in excess of fifteen (15) days.
   2.   This section shall not be construed to apply to kennels, pet stores or
veterinary hospitals, nor to pets less than four (4) months old. 
   3.   This section shall not apply to legally maintained domestic chickens.
(Ord. of 11/1/05, as amended by Ord. of 8/21/06, as amended by Ord. of 6/2/15)
Sec. 6-3-3 Rabies vaccination.
   1.   It shall be unlawful for an owner to own, harbor or keep any cat or dog
which has not been inoculated against rabies within the preceding twelve (12)
months and which does not wear a tag on its collar showing proof of the
vaccination; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to dogs and
cats less than four (4) months of age.
   2.   It shall be unlawful to tamper with or remove any collar or tag
required hereunder. 
(Ord. of 11/1/05, as amended by Ord. of 8/21/06)
Sec. 6-3-4 Kennels.
   1.   No person shall own or operate a dog kennel in which dogs are possessed
or maintained on his/her premises within the city without first obtaining a
certificate of inspection from the animal control division, issued pursuant to
this section, for which an annual inspection fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00) shall be paid.  This requirement shall not apply to pet stores,
veterinary hospitals or pet grooming establishments.
   2.   No person shall own or operate a noncommercial kennel without first
obtaining a certificate of inspection from the animal control division, issued
pursuant to this section, for which an annual inspection of one hundred dollars
($100.00) shall be paid.
   3.   All kennels shall be constructed, maintained and operated in
conformance with the current standards and procedures established by the
superintendent of animal services to include, but not be limited to the
following:
   a.   Dogs must be separated from cats;
   b.   Sick or injured animals must be separated from healthy animals;
   c.   Puppies must be separated from adults (unless nursing);
   d.   Males must be separated from females;
   e.   Aggressive animals must be separated from all others;
   f.   Nursing mothers and their young must be separated from all other
animals;
   g.   Floors must be sloped toward drains to prevent the accumulation of
water in the runs;
   h.   Floors must be made of sealed concrete or other nonporous material;
   i.   Walls must be sufficient to prevent water and waste material from
flowing between kennels and must not be less than four (4) feet in height;
   j.   Walls must be made of fiberglass, sealed cinder block, or other
nonporous material;
   k.   Walls must be sufficient to keep animals contained in kennels;
   l.   Drainage must be adequate to handle daily cleaning;
   m.   Drainage must be adequate to prevent cross-contamination of other runs
by urine, feces, or other waste material;
   n.   Shelter must be adequate to allow animals to retain body heat;
   o.   Shelter must provide adequate air circulation;
   p.   Minimum area for cages for indoor holding are as follows: four (4) feet
by six (6) feet for large dogs (more than fifty- one (51) pounds), four (4)
feet by five (5) feet for medium dogs (thirty-six (36) to fifty (50) pounds),
three (3) feet by four (4) feet for small dogs (up to thirty-five (35) pounds);
   q.   Minimum area for kennels with runs, whether fully enclosed or indoor/
outdoor are as follows:  four (4) feet by six (6) feet for kennels, four (4)
feet by eight (8) feet for runs.  The combined total of minimum area for
kennels and runs is fifty-two (52) square feet;
   r.   Enclosed areas must provide adequate room for each dog to stand, lie
down, turn around, and sit normally;
   s.   Enclosed areas must have a minimum of four (4) feet by four (4) feet
available for each dog in shared kennels;
   t.   Dogs must be kept in indoor cages or kennels, with runs, whether fully
enclosed or indoor/outdoor, at night;
   u.   Enclosed areas must have potable water available at all times;
   v.   Resting boards or beds must be provided for each animal unless floors
are heated;
   w.   Enclosures must be cleaned at least once per day;
   x.   Enclosures must be screened from the side or rear lot line by shrubbery
or a privacy fence; and
   y.   Enclosures are not permitted in the front yard area. 
(Ord. of 11/1/05, as amended by Ord. of 8/21/06)
Sec. 6-3-5 Pets running at large; removal of animal waste.
   1.   It shall be unlawful for an owner to allow any pet to run at large or
be at large within the city limits. If any pet is found unlawfully running at
large or being at large within the city limits, an animal control worker shall
seize the pet and transport it to the designated animal control shelter for
impoundment or release the pet to the owner. If impounded, pets shall be
redeemed or disposed of in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
designated animal control shelter.
   2.   The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of any
excreta deposited by his animal on public walks and ways, recreation areas or
private property. (Ord. of 11/1/05)
Sec. 6-3-6 Impoundment of pet animals.
   1.   Any animal found within the city limits in violation of the provisions
of this article may be caught and impounded by city authorities. If an animal
cannot be caught in a safe, efficient manner, animal control personnel may
tranquilize the animal by use of a tranquilizer gun. Animals which are deemed
by the superintendent of animal services or an animal control worker to
constitute a danger to other animals or persons at the shelter, or which are
infectious to other animals, in pain or near death, may be humanely destroyed
immediately.
   2.   A positively identifiable animal is one which bears or wears a legible
and traceable current permanent number, or a tag or rabies vaccination tag
pursuant to section
6-3-3 of this chapter; or a traceable registration number, tattoo or microchip
pursuant to S.C. Code Ann. Section 47-3-510 (2004).
   3.   The animal control division shall notify the owner of a positively
identifiable seized animal by telephone, in person, or by leaving a note at the
owner's last known address, if the owner is a resident of the city. The
designated animal shelter shall notify a positively identifiable impounded
animal pursuant to its rules and regulations. (Ord. of 11/1/05)
Sec. 6-3-7 Redemption of impounded pet animals.
   1.   The owner or keeper of any pet which has been impounded under the
provisions of this article shall have the right to redeem pursuant to the rules
and regulations of the designated animal shelter. (Ord. of 11/1/05)
Sec. 6-3-8 Duties of person striking animal with vehicle; disposition of
injured or diseased animals.
   1.   Anyone striking an animal with a motor vehicle or bicycle shall notify
an animal control officer or the police department, who will then take action
necessary to make proper disposition of the pet. An animal control officer or
police officer must make a reasonable attempt to contact the owner of an
identifiable pet animal. If contacted, the owner of the pet shall take
possession of the animal. If the animal control officer or the police officer
is unable to contact the owner or the owner refuses to respond, the officer
shall transport the identifiable pet animal to a licensed veterinarian approved
by the animal control superintendent. The veterinarian shall provide basic
treatment for pain or humanely euthanize the animal, as determined by the
veterinarian. The owner of the animal shall be responsible for all costs
associated with treating the animal. If the owner cannot be located within two
hours of the animal's treatment by the veterinarian, the animal may be humanely
euthanized.
   2.   Nonidentifiable pet animals may be humanely euthanized without being
transported to the animal shelter or approved veterinarian if the animal is in
severe pain from wounds, injuries or disease and an animal control officer or
police officer reasonably believes that moving the animal would inflict
unnecessary suffering on the animal.
   3.   For purposes of this section, an identifiable pet animal is defined as
an animal marked with a rabies tag, identification tag, tattoo, microchip or
other device which positively identifies the current owner of the animal. (Ord.
of 11/1/05)
Sec. 6-3-9 Restraint of animal by tethering.
   1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to tether or chain a dog or other
animal for a period of time or in a location so as to create an unhealthy
situation for the animal or a potentially dangerous situation for a pedestrian.
Tethers and chains used to restrain animals shall:
   a.   Not be less than ten (10) feet in length and shall not allow the animal
to approach within four (4) feet of the owner's property line;
   b.   Be a length and weight appropriate for the size, weight, and age of the
animal;
   c.   Be sufficient in strength to prevent the animal from breaking or
chewing through the chain or tether;
   d.   Have swivels on both ends;
   e.   Be attached to the animal by means of a properly fitting harness or
collar of not less than one (1) inch in width;
   f.   Not exceed ten (10) percent of the animal's body weight;
   g.   Be so placed or attached that they cannot become entangled with another
animal or object;
   h.   Not be placed or attached in a manner that prevents the animal from
moving about freely, lying down comfortably, and/or having convenient access to
adequate food, water and moistureproof and windproof shelter large enough to
keep the animal reasonably clean and dry;
   i.   Not use a chain as a primary collar. Collars must be made of leather or
nylon or other similar material. Choke collars and pinch collars are prohibited
for purposes of tethering an animal; and
   j.   Be humane in all other respects.
(Ord. of 11/1/05)
Sec. 6-3-10 Nuisance animals.
   1.   The actions of an animal constitute a nuisance when an animal disturbs
the rights of, threatens the safety of or damages a member of the general
public, or interferes with the ordinary use and enjoyment of their property.
   2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess or maintain
an animal in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance. By way of
example and not of limitation, the following acts or actions by an owner or
possessor of any animal are declared to be a public nuisance and are therefore
unlawful:
   a.   Failure to exercise sufficient restraint necessary to control an
animal;
   b.   Allowing or permitting an animal to damage the property of anyone other
than its owner, including, but not limited to, turning over garbage containers
or damaging gardens, flowers or vegetables;
   c.   Maintaining a dangerous animal, as defined in this article;
   d.   Maintaining animals in an environment of unsanitary conditions which
results in offensive odors or is dangerous to the animal or to the public
health, welfare or safety;
   e.   Maintaining his property in a manner that is offensive, annoying or
dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare of the community because of
the number, type, variety, density or location of the animals on the property;
   f.   Allowing or permitting an animal to howl, bark, meow, squawk or make
other sounds which create excessive and unnecessary noise across a residential
or commercial real property line or within a noise sensitive area so as to
result in a serious annoyance or interference with the reasonable use and
enjoyment of neighboring premises;
   g.   Allowing or permitting an animal to charge a fence, bite and/or
excessively growl at neighbors and/or passersby so as to result in a serious
annoyance or interference with the reasonable use and enjoyment of the
neighboring premises or neighborhood;
   h.   Maintaining an animal that is diseased and dangerous to the public
health; and
   i.   Maintaining an animal that habitually or repeatedly chases, snaps at,
attacks or barks at pedestrians, bicycles or vehicles.
   3.   Any pet found in continued violation of the provisions of this section
or identified as a public nuisance may be impounded and not released unless
authorized by the animal control superintendent.
   4.   Every female pet in heat shall be kept confined in a building or secure
enclosure in such manner as will not create a nuisance by attracting other
animals. (Ord. of 11/1/05)
Sec. 6-3-11 Interference with animal control workers.
   1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or molest
the animal control worker in the performance of his duty or seek to release any
pet in his custody without his consent.
   2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper, damage, move or
interfere with traps or release animals from traps set by animal control
workers. (Ord. of 11/1/05)
Sec. 6-3-12 Prohibition; impoundment of unattended animals.
   1.   It shall be unlawful for a person to leave any animal in a vehicle
unattended if the animal's safety and/or welfare is jeopardized. An animal
control officer, or other law enforcement officer will remove the animal by
reasonable methods under the circumstances if the animal is reasonably believed
to be in distress. Unattended animals left in vehicles shall be impounded.
(Ord. of 11/1/05)
Sec. 6-3-13 Barking dogs.
   1.   A dog that barks, bays, cries, howls or makes any other noise
continuously or incessantly for a period of ten (10) minutes, or barks
intermittently for one-half (1/2) hour or more to the disturbance of any person
at any time of day or night, regardless of whether the dog is physically
situated in or upon private property is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
unlawful. However, a dog shall not be deemed a nuisance if, at the time the dog
is barking or making any other noise, a person is trespassing or threatening to
trespass upon property in or upon which the dog is situated.
   2.   If an animal control worker or law enforcement official does not
witness the offensive behavior by the dog, the officer must have three (3)
written police reports before issuing a citation to the owner. The complainant
(s) filing the report must appear in court to testify as to the dog's offensive
behavior. If the complainant(s) does not appear, the case shall be dismissed.
(Ord. of 11/1/05)
Sec. 6-3-14 Cruelty to animals.
   1.   Any person who overloads, overdrives, overworks, tortures, torments,
wantonly beats, bruises or cuts, or any person who, by working when in an unfit
condition, or in any other way, inflicts unnecessary pain or suffering upon any
animal, or any person who does not provide sufficient food, shelter and/or
potable water for any animal in the city, whether the person is the owner
thereof, or has the temporary charge or custody of the animal, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor. (Ord. of 11/1/05)
Sec. 6-3-15 Killing, injuring, molesting birds.
   1.   It shall be unlawful to shoot, attempt to shoot, trap or molest in any
manner any bird or to remove the eggs from or otherwise molest or disturb any
bird's nest in the city.
   2.   This section shall not apply to the lawful collection of eggs of
legally maintained domestic chickens. 
(Ord. of 11/1/05, as amended by Ord. of 6/2/15)
Sec. 6-3-16 Keeping horses, livestock, poultry prohibited.
   1.   It shall be unlawful for anyone to keep, shelter or house within the
city limits horses, livestock, poultry or fowl of any nature whatsoever. This
section shall not apply to legally maintained domestic chickens (excepting
roosters) as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 11/1/05, as amended by Ord. of 6/2/15)
Sec. 6-3-17  Sick Animals.
   1.   It shall be unlawful to keep any diseased, mangy, badly sick or injured
animal in the city unless it is under the care of a licensed veterinarian.
   2.   It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to seek medical attention
for an animal that is badly injured.
(Ord. of 8/21/06)
Sec. 6-3-18  Abandonment.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner, or any person having control or custody,
of any animal to abandon it within the city limits.
(Ord. of 8/21/06)
Sec. 6-3-19  Penalties.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished in accordance with section
1-3-49. 
(Ord. of 11/1/05, as amended by Ord. of 8/21/06))
Sec. 6-3-20  Keeping of domestic chickens.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of the City Code, and as provided in
this section, the keeping of domestic chickens (excluding roosters)within the
city is permitted under the following conditions and with the following
limitations:
   (a)   The keeping of domestic chickens (excluding roosters) is permitted
only as an accessory use for a single family detached house in a residential
zoning district. No roosters (mature male domestic chickens) shall be permitted
within the city limits;
   (b)   No more than a total of four (4) domestic chickens may be kept or
maintained on a single premises. No roosters shall be allowed;
   (c)   No person shall allow any chickens to roam free for any reason.
Chickens found at large shall be impounded;
   (d)   A coop will be considered as an accessory structure. Coops must be
located in the rear yard and at least twenty-five (25) feet from all property
lines. A coop must be screened from side or rear lot lines with shrubbery or a
privacy fence if any portion of the coop or run is  located within thirty (30)
feet of a structure or pool on an adjacent property. A coop must be screened
from public rights-of-way. No coop or run may be located within five (5) feet
of a residential structure on the same lot;
   (e)   (e)   Coops must be fully enclosed, constructed of sturdy materials,
contain runs, and be well maintained to prevent odor and to discourage fly
accumulation. Coops and runs must have fencing to prevent chickens from leaving
the coop and run area and be constructed in a manner to deter predators. Coops
shall be six (6) sided (four (4) sides, a bottom, and a top). Coops must have a
minimum height of eighteen (18) inches. Coops shall contain at least two (2)
square feet in bottom surface area per chicken over four (4) months of age and
must be connected to a run of not less than nine (9) square feet for one (1)
bird; twelve (12) square feet for two (2) birds; sixteen (16) square feet for
three (3) birds; or twenty (20) square feet for four (4) birds over four (4)
months of age, which shall be fully enclosed. No portion of any coop or urn
shall exceed six (6) feet in height as measured from the ground adjacent to the
coop or run;
   (f)   The run must be well drained so there is no accumulation of chicken
excrement and shall be cleaned regularly with all droppings and excretions
disposed of in a manner so as not to cause an odor or attract flies, unless
otherwise disposed of in accordance with any Federal, state, and local health
regulations;
   (g)   Food must be stored in a sealed container;
   (h)   No sick, diseased, or injured birds may be kept on any property within
the city unless under documented veterinary care;
   (i)   Slaughter is prohibited within public view, within view of private
property, or within view of public rights-of-way. Slaughter is permitted only
for personal consumption by persons at the property on which the coop and run
are located;
   (j)   Chickens shall not be kept or used for commercial purposes. No person
may sell eggs laid by chickens kept in the corporate limits of the city;
   (k)   No person shall keep chickens on his or her premises within the city
without first obtaining:
      (l)   A zoning permit for an accessory structure; and
      (2)   A certificate of inspection from the animal services department,
issued pursuant to this section, for which an inspection fee of twenty dollars
($20.00) shall be paid;
   (l)   When the property on which chickens are to be maintained is located
within an area subject to neighborhood covenants or restrictions, any person
applying for a permit to keep chickens must provide written approval from the
home owners association or similar organization responsible for enforcing
neighborhood covenants and restrictions. If the property is not subject to any
neighborhood covenants or restrictions, the applicant must provide a written
statement that no neighborhood covenants or restrictions apply to the property.
Any permit issued may be revoked if the applicant makes any false statement
regarding any applicable neighborhood covenants or restrictions. a permit, if
issued, shall not override any applicable neighborhood covenants or
restrictions; and
   (m)   Properties permitted to keep domestic chickens are subject to re-
inspection by animal control officers.
(Ord. of 6/2/15)
Sec. 6-3-21  Additional enforcement provisions as to domestic chickens.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the impoundment
or hold period for a domestic chicken is not required to exceed three (3) days
and is subject to the policies and procedures of the animal shelter to which
the animal is transported. An impounded domestic chicken may be redeemed by the
owner within the hold period upon payment of all fees incurred as a result of
the impoundment. After the specified hold period, the domestic chicken shall
become the property of the city and may be disposed of at the discretion of the
City Administrator or the City Administrator’s designee.
   (b)   Medical care will not be provided to any injured or sick domestic
chicken and any domestic chicken determined to be unhealthy may be euthanized.
(Ord. of 6/2/15)
Secs. 6-3-22 through 6-3-30 reserved.
Article B
Dangerous Animals
Sec. 6-3-31 Prohibited; exceptions.
   1.   Except as provided in subsection (4) of this section, it shall be
unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor or act as custodian of a:
   a.   Dangerous animal, as declared by the animal superintendent or city
manager or designee; this section does not apply to guard dogs or attack dogs;
   b.   Nondomestic member of the family Felidae;
   c.   Wolf-dog hybrid containing any percentage of wolf;
   d.   Badger, wolverine, weasel, skunk and mink;
   e.   Raccoon;
   f.   Bear;
   g.   Nonhuman primate to include ape, monkey, baboon, macaque, lemur;
   h.   Marmoset, tamarin and other species of the order primates;
   i.   Bat;
   j.   Alligator, crocodile and caiman;
   k.   Scorpion;
   l.   Constricting snake of the following species: reticulated python, python
reticulatus, Burmese/Indian rock python, python molurus, rock python, python
sebae, and anaconda, eunectes murinus;
   m.   Venomous reptile; or
   n.   Lizard over two (2) feet which are members of the family Varanidae.
   2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to expose to public view or
contact, exhibit either gratuitously or for a fee, any wild or feral animals
identified in subsection (3) of this section, or any animal of mixed
domestication and feral lineage within the corporate limits of the city on
public or private property, except as provided in subsection (4) of this
section.
   3.   Wild or feral animal means:
   a.   Any animal which is not naturally tame or gentle, and which is of a
wild nature or disposition, and which is capable of killing, inflicting serious
injury upon, or causing disease among human beings or domestic animals and
having known tendencies as a species to do so;
   b.   Any animal declared to be illegal by the animal superintendent or the
city manager or his/her designee;
   c.   Any nondomesticated member of the order Carnivora;
   d.   The following animals which shall be deemed to be wild or feral animals
per se:
   (1)   All nondomestic members of the family Felidae,
   (2)   Wolves, wolf-dog hybrids containing any percentage of wolf, coyotes
and foxes,
   (3)   Badgers, wolverines, weasels, skunks and mink,
   (4)   Raccoons,
   (5)   Bears,
   (6)   Nonhuman primates to include apes, monkeys, baboons, macaques, lemurs,
marmosets, tamarins and other species of the order primates,
   (7)   Bats,
   (8)   Alligators, crocodiles and caimans,
   (9)   Scorpions,
   (10)   Any snakes or venomous reptile, or
   (11)   Lizards over two (2) feet which are members of the family Varanidae.
   4.   The prohibition contained in subsections (3)(a) through (c) of this
section shall not apply to the keeping of wild or feral animals in the
following circumstances:
   a.   The keeping of wild or feral animals in a public zoo, bona fide
education or medical institution, humane society, or museum where they are kept
as live specimens for the public to view, or for the purpose of instruction,
research or study;
   b.   The keeping of wild or feral animals for exhibition to the public by a
bona fide traveling circus, carnival, exhibit or show, properly licensed and
permitted by state and local law;
   c.   The keeping of wild or feral animals in a bona fide, licensed
veterinary hospital for treatment. (Ord. of 11/1/05)
Sec. 6-3-32 Impoundment.
   1.   The animal control superintendent or an animal control worker shall
have the authority to determine if an animal is a dangerous animal. In making
such determination, the animal control superintendent shall take into
consideration the following factors, which are listed by way of illustration
and not limitation: the animal's behavior, its size, its temperament, its
breed, and its capacity for inflicting serious injury; the adequacy of the
enclosure or confinement of the animal, if any; the likelihood that the
conditions pertaining to the animal and the animal's confinement are
detrimental to the safety or welfare of citizens, or peace and tranquility of
citizens, in the immediate surrounding area; that there is a child under the
age of twelve (12) who lives in close proximity or walks by or is otherwise in
close proximity to the property occupied by the animal; that the animal has
bitten a human being or domestic animal without provocation or a trespass or
has approached a person in an apparent attitude of attack; that the animal has
a known propensity, reputation, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked,
to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic
animals; animals used to threaten or intimidate citizens or other animals; or
other similar factors which would be relevant to a determination of whether or
not the animal is dangerous.
   2.   After making a determination that an animal is a dangerous animal, the
animal control superintendent, or his designee, shall have the authority to
immediately impound the animal. Upon impounding, the animal control
superintendent shall immediately notify the owner in writing that he has
determined that the animal is a dangerous animal and that the animal has been
impounded and will be humanely destroyed unless the owner appeals his
determination to the city manager, in writing, within five (5) days from the
date of the notice. If the owner is not known, the animal control
superintendent shall impound the dangerous animal for five (5) days and shall
make a reasonable effort to locate the owner. If the owner cannot be located,
the dangerous animal shall be humanely destroyed after the impoundment for the
five (5) day period.
   3.   If any person shall inform the superintendent of animal services of the
existence of an allegedly dangerous animal, the superintendent of animal
services or his designee shall investigate to determine if the animal is a
dangerous animal, as defined in this chapter. The person alleging that the
animal is dangerous shall provide supporting information within five (5) days
of making such allegation. Any owner of an animal that has been declared by the
superintendent of animal services or his designee to be a dangerous animal
shall have the right to appeal this decision to the city manager by requesting
a hearing by the city manager or his designee. The request for hearing must be
in writing and delivered to the city manager's office within five (5) days
after notice from the superintendent of animal services, as provided for in
this section. If, after hearing, the city manager or his designee determines
that the animal is a dangerous animal, the aggrieved owner shall have five (5)
days to appeal the city manager's adverse decision to a court of competent
jurisdiction. If the city manager or his designee determines that the animal is
not a dangerous animal, the animal shall be immediately returned to the owner
without cost, except that the owner must comply with the other provisions of
this chapter relating to his animal. If it is determined that the animal may
not be redeemed by the owner and an appeal is made to a court of competent
jurisdiction, the owner shall be responsible for posting a bond in an amount
equal to twenty-one (21) days' boarding costs. If at the end of the twenty-one
(21) day period, the appeal has not been resolved, the owner shall be
responsible for all additional boarding and care costs through the date of
final determination of the appeal. The owner shall have the right to redeem the
animal, unless the animal has attacked or bitten a human being or domestic
animal, in which case no redemption shall be had by the owner. In order to
redeem a dangerous animal, as provided in this section, the owner must prove to
the satisfaction of the superintendent of animal services that the dangerous
animal will be securely confined, must make payment of all costs incurred by
the city in impounding and caring for the animal, must comply with or provide
proof of compliance with all other provisions of this chapter, and must have in
effect a general liability insurance policy insuring against liability
resulting from acts of the animal, naming the owner as insured and also naming
the city as an additional insured in an amount not less than five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence and one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) aggregate combined single limit for bodily injury, personal
injury and property damage. Coverage shall be at least as broad as insurance
service office form CG-00-01-85. Any insurance policy provided to the city in
satisfaction of the requirements of this section shall specifically provide
that the insurer shall provide written notice to the city at least thirty (30)
days prior to cancellation, termination or modification of the coverage
provided to the city. Upon expiration of the right of the owner or of the city
to appeal the determination of an animal as being dangerous, the animal shall
immediately be returned to the owner, without cost, if the animal has been
determined not to be a dangerous animal, and if previously redeemed, the
redemption requirements of this section shall be terminated. Upon termination
of the right of the owner or of the city to appeal the determination of an
animal as being dangerous, the animal shall be immediately and humanely
destroyed by the designated animal shelter, if the animal has been determined
to be a dangerous animal. The owner shall then be liable to the city for all
costs incurred by the city in impounding and caring for the animal, if the
animal has been determined to be a dangerous animal. (Ord. of 11/1/05)
Sec. 6-3-33 Signage for guard dogs or attack dogs.
   1. All owners, keepers, harborers, lessees or custodians of any guard dog or
attack dog shall display in a prominent place on their premises, and at each
entrance or exit to the area in which such dog is confined, a sign, easily
readable by the public, using the words "Beware of Dog" or wording of similar
import in letters at least two (2) inches in height. This section shall not
apply to any guard dog or attack dog owned or used by law enforcement agencies.
(Ord. of 11/1/05)
Sec. 6-3-34 Seizure, impoundment and disposition of wild or feral animals.
   1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor, keep, shelter, feed and/
or provide care for a wild or feral animal.
   2.   In the event that a wild or feral animal is found at large or
unattended upon public or private property within the city limits, such animal
may, in the discretion of the animal superintendent or his designee, or the
chief of police, be destroyed immediately if it cannot be confined or captured
without risk of harm or injury to persons or property. The City of West
Columbia shall be under no duty to attempt the confinement or capture of a wild
or feral animal found at large or unattended, nor shall it have a duty to
notify the owner of such animal prior to its destruction.
   3.    If the wild or feral animal is impounded, the animal shall be kept
and/or disposed of pursuant to the rules and regulations of the designated
animal shelter.
   4.   Any violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. of
11/1/05)
Sec. 6-3-35 Registration of certain animals required.
   1. Any animal kept on any premises within the city, and:
   (a)   identified as a public nuisance;
   (b)   identified as a dangerous animal; or
   (c)   impounded as a dangerous animal shall be required to be registered
with the city's police department. Such registration shall require the owner or
the person in possession of the animal to provide the breed and description of
the animal, the name and address of the owner or the person in possession, the
address at which the animal will at all times be located and proof of rabies
vaccination. This section shall not apply to any animal that is:
   (1)   owned by a licensed security service and is in use by the licensed
security service for the purpose of protecting property; or
   (2)    is owned or used by a public law enforcement agency. This section is
not intended to, and does not operate to, create, provide or enhance any duty
of care of the city with regard to any particular person or persons concerning
any animal or animals so identified, impounded, registered, or required to be
registered. Any owner or person in possession of the animal in violation of
this section is subject to the general penalties as set forth in section
1-3-49 of this code. (Ord. of 11/1/05)
Chapter 4 CLEAN INDOOR AIR AND PROMOTION OF PUBLIC HEALTH
6-4-1   Title.
   This chapter shall be known as the Clean Indoor Air and Promotion of Public
Health Ordinance. (Ord. of 10/2/90)
Sec. 6-4-2 Definitions.
   As used in this chapter:
"Enclosedoffice" means an area inside of city building separated from the
public by permanent walls and a door.
"Citybuilding" means any building which is owned or leased by the City of West
Columbia in which employees of the City of West Columbia work and business is
transacted. (Ord. of 10/2/90)
Sec. 6-4-3 Smoking prohibited.
   It is unlawful for any person, including City of West Columbia employees and
nonemployees, to smoke or possess lighted smoking material in any form in any
city building except in a person's private enclosed office or in a designated
smoking area (sign should conspicuously be displayed showing smoking area)
located in the city building. No designated smoking area may impinge upon any
smoke-free area. (Ord. of 10/2/90)
Sec. 6-4-4 Penalties.
   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and punishable to a fine not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor
more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. of 10/2/90)
Sec. 6-4-5 Testing for tobacco residue not authorized.
   No person is authorized to require any other person to submit to any form of
testing to determine whether or not the person has nicotine or other tobacco
residue in his body. (Ord. of 10/2/90)
StateLawReferences: Ordinances relating to upkeep of property, S.C. Code 1976,
Sec. 5-7-80. 
CHAPTER 5 Smoking in Places of Employment
Sec. 6-5-1   Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Employee.  Any person who performs services for an employer in return for
wages, profit or other valuable consideration, and/or a person who volunteers
his or her services for a non-profit entity.
   Employer. Any person, partnership, association, corporation, trust, school,
college, university or other educational institution, nonprofit entity or other
organization, including any public or private employer, any manager,
supervisor, and all other persons charged with control, supervision, and
operation of any workplace, work space, or work spaces as defined herein, that
employs one (1) or more persons.
   Enclosed. A space bounded by walls (with or without windows), a ceiling or
roof, and enclosed by doors, including but not limited to, offices, rooms,
foyers, waiting areas and halls.
   Private club.  An organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the
owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively
for club purposes at all times, which is operated solely for a recreational,
social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for
pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its
operation. The affairs and management of the organization are conducted by a
board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members
at an annual meeting. The organization has established bylaws and/or a
constitution to govern its activities. The organization has been granted an
exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C.
Section 501. Establishments which are in fact operating as bars, restaurants,
or entertainment venues primary for the pecuniary benefit of the owner or chief
operating officer shall not be treated as private clubs under this definition.
A private club will not be considered a private club for the purposes of this
definition when being used for a function to which the general public is
allowed to enter.
   Retail tobacco store.  Any establishment which is not required to possess a
retail food permit whose primary purpose is to sell or offer for sale to
consumers, but not for resale, tobacco products and paraphernalia, in which the
sale of other products is merely incidental, and in which the entry of persons
under the age of eighteen (18) is prohibited at all times.
   Secondhand smoke.  The complex mixture formed from the escaping smoke of a
burning tobacco product (termed as "side stream smoke") and smoke exhaled by
the smoker. Exposure to secondhand smoke is also frequently referred to as
"passive smoking," "secondhand smoking" or "involuntary smoking."
   Smoking. The inhaling, exhaling, burning, lighting or carrying of a lighted
cigarette, cigar, pipe, or similar device or any other lighted tobacco product.
   Smoking materials. Includes cigars, cigarettes and all other manner of
smoking devices intended to be used for the purpose of inhaling, burning,
carrying or exhaling lighted tobacco products.
   Work space or work spaces. Any enclosed area occupied by an employee during
the course of his or her employment, including but not limited to: offices,
customer service areas, common areas, hallways, waiting areas, restrooms,
lounges, and eating areas.
   Workplace. Any enclosed indoor area, structure, building or facility or any
portion thereof at which one (1) or more employee(s) perform services for their
employer, including but not limited to: retail food stores, retail stores,
restaurants, bars, cabarets, cafes, public or private clubs, pool halls, and
bowling alleys.  (Ord. of 3/2/10)
Sec. 6-5-2   Prohibition of smoking in the workplace.
   (a)   All employers shall provide a smoke-free environment for all employees
working in any work space or workplace as those terms are defined herein.
Further, the employer shall prohibit any persons present in any work space or
workplace from smoking tobacco products therein.
   (b)   No person shall smoke or possess a lighted tobacco product in any work
space or workplace.
   (c)   Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, an owner,
operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility or
outdoor area may declare the entire establishment, facility or outdoor area as
a nonsmoking location. Smoking shall then be prohibited in any place in which a
sign conforming to the requirements of Sec. 6-5-4 is posted.  (Ord. of 3/2/10)
Sec. 6-5-3   Exceptions.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of Sec. 6-5-2, smoking may be permitted in
the following places in the city and under the following circumstances:
   (1)   Private residences.
   (2)   Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as
smoking rooms; provided, however, that not more than twenty-five percent (25%)
of rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated. All smoking
rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not
infiltrate areas where smoking is prohibited under provisions of this section.
   (3)   Retail tobacco stores as defined herein.
   (4)   Private clubs, except when being used for a function to which the
general public is admitted.
   (5)   Religious ceremonies where smoking is part of the ritual.
   (6)   A business establishment with no employees or volunteers.  (Ord. of 3/
2/10)
Sec. 6-5-4   Posting of signs.
   The owner, manager or person in control of a workplace shall post a
conspicuous sign at the main entrance to the workplace, which shall contain the
words "No Smoking" and the universal symbol for no smoking.  (Ord. of 3/2/10)
Sec. 6-5-5   Reasonable distance.
   Smoking is prohibited within a distance of ten (10) feet from any door which
is used as an entrance to or exit from an enclosed area where smoking is
prohibited so as to insure that tobacco smoke does not enter the area through
the entry. This distance shall be measured from the center of the door in
question.  (Ord. of 3/2/10)
Sec. 6-5-6   Jurisdiction, enforcement and penalties.
   (a)   A person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a
workplace or work space and who fails to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction for each occurrence of
noncompliance.
   (b)   A person smoking or possessing a lighted tobacco product in any work
space or workplace shall be guilty of an infraction for each occurrence of
smoking or possession.
   (c)   An infraction is punishable by a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
Each occurrence of a violation of this section occurs shall be considered a
separate and distinct infraction. A violation of this  chapter is further
declared to be a public nuisance.
   (d)   In addition to the fines established by this section, four (4) or more
violations of this chapter by a person who owns, manages, operates, or
otherwise controls a place of employment shall be a reason for and may result
in the suspension or revocation of any occupancy permit or business license
issued to the person for the premises on which the violation occurred.  (Ord.
of 3/2/10)
TITLE 7 LICENSING AND REGULATION
Chapter 1 BUSINESS LICENSES
Editor's Note
State Law Reference: Business license tax levy authorized, S.C. Code, Sec. 5-7-
30.
7-1-1   Required; exceptions.
   (a)   Every person engaged or intending to become engaged in any business,
trade, calling, occupation or profession, or maintaining an office or acting as
an agent for another, in whole or in part, within the city shall pay a license
fee and obtain a business license as provided in this chapter and the annual
license fee schedule.
   (b)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a homeowner doing
ordinary repairs (as defined in section R-109-1 of the One and Two Family
Dwelling Code) on property used exclusively by him and his family, nor to a
building owner doing minor repairs, as defined in section A.103.1.3 of the
Standard Building Code. Cross Reference: Standard Building Code, Sec.
5-2-12; One and Two Family Dwelling Code, Sec.
5-2-111.
7-1-2   Definitions.
   The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings as ascribed herein:
   (1)   Business means a calling, occupation, profession or activity engaged
in with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, either directly or
indirectly.
   (2)   Charitable purpose means benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or
eleemosynary purpose which does not result in personal gain to a sponsor,
organizer, officer, director, trustee or person with ultimate control of the
organization.  A charitable organization shall be deemed a business subject to
a license tax unless the entire net proceeds of its operation, after necessary
expenses, are devoted to charitable purposes.  Compensation in any form to a
sponsor, organizer, officer, director, trustee or person with ultimate control
of the organization, officer, director, trustee or person with ultimate control
of the organization shall not be deemed a necessary expense of operation.
   (3)   Classification means that division of businesses by major groups
subject to the same license rate as determined by a calculated index of ability
to pay based on national averages, benefits, equalization of tax burden,
relationships of services, or other basis deemed appropriate by city council.
   (4)   Gross income means the total income of a business, received or
accrued, for one (1) calendar year collected or to be collected from business
done within the city, excepting therefrom income from business done wholly
outside of the city on which a license tax is paid to some other city or a
county and fully reported to the city.  Gross income for brokers or agents
means gross commissions received or retained, unless otherwise specified. 
Gross income for insurance companies means gross premiums collected.  Gross
income for business license tax purposes shall not include taxes collected for
a governmental entity, escrow funds, or funds which are the property of a third
party.  The value of bartered goods or trade-in merchandise shall be included
in gross income.  The gross income for business license purposes may be
verified by inspection of returns and reports filed with the Internal Revenue
Service, the South Carolina Department of Revenue, the South Carolina Insurance
Commission, or other government agency.
   (5)   Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, non-
profit membership, corporation, joint venture, association, estate, trust,
business trust, receiver, syndicate, holding company, or other group or
combination acting as a unit, in the singular or plural, and the agent or
employee having charge or control of a business in the absence of the
principals. 
(Amended by Ord. of 10/6/98, as amended by Ord. of 4/4/06)
7-1-3   Purpose and duration.
   The business license levied by this chapter is for the purpose of providing
such regulation as may be required by the businesses subject thereto and for
the purpose of raising revenue for the general fund through a privilege tax.
Each license shall be issued for one (1) calendar year and shall expire on
December 31.
Sec. 7-1-4 License fee; separate license for each location.
   The required license fee shall be paid for each business subject hereto
according to the applicable rate classification on or before April 30. A
separate license shall be required for each place of business, each name of
business and for each classification of business conducted at one (1) location.
If gross income cannot be separated for classifications at one (1) location,
the license fee shall be computed on the combined gross income for the
classification requiring the highest rate. A license fee based on gross income
shall be computed on the gross income for the preceding calendar or fiscal
year, and on a twelve (12) month projected income based on the monthly average
for a business in operation for less than one (1) year. The fee for a new
business shall be computed on the estimated probable gross income stated in the
license application for the balance of the calendar year.
Sec. 7-1-5 Registration required.
   The owner, agent or legal representative of every business subject to this
chapter, whether listed in the classification index or not, shall register the
business and make application for a business license on or before April 30,
except that a new business shall be required to have a business license prior
to operation within the city. Application shall be on a form provided by the
license inspector, and shall contain the Social Security number and/or the
Federal Employer's Identification number, the business name as reported on the
South Carolina income tax return, and all information about the applicant and
the business deemed necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter by the
license inspector. The applicant shall certify under oath that the information
given in the application is true, that the gross income is accurately reported,
or estimated for a new business, without any unauthorized deductions, and that
all assessments and personal property taxes due and payable to the city have
been paid. Insurance agents and brokers shall report the name of each insurance
company for which a policy was issued and the total premiums collected for each
company for each type of insurance coverage on a form approved by the license
inspector. Insurance agents employed by more than one (1) company shall be
licensed as brokers.
Sec. 7-1-6 Deductions and exemptions.
   No deductions from gross income shall be made except income from business
done wholly outside the city on which a license tax is paid to some other
municipality or a county, or income which cannot be taxed pursuant to state
law. The applicant shall have the burden to establish the right to a deduction
by satisfactory records and proof. No person shall be exempt from the
requirements of this chapter by reason of the lack of an established place of
business within the city, unless exempted by state law. The license inspector
shall determine the appropriate classification for each business in accordance
with the latest issue of the U.S. Bureau of Budget Standard Industrial
Classification Manual. No person shall be exempt from this chapter by reason of
the payment of any other tax, unless exempted by state law, and no person shall
be relieved of the liability for the payment of any other tax by reason of the
application of this chapter.
Sec. 7-1-7 False application unlawful.
   It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the provisions of this
chapter to make a false application for a business license, or to give or file,
or direct the giving or filing, of any false information with respect to the
license or fee required by this chapter.
Sec. 7-1-8 Display.
   All persons shall display the license issued to them on the original form
provided by the license inspector in a conspicuous place in the business
establishment at the address shown on the license. A transient or non-resident
shall carry the license upon his person or in a vehicle used in the business
readily available for inspection by any authorized agent of the city.
Sec. 7-1-9 Change of address; transfer.
   (a)   A change of address must be reported to the license inspector within
ten (10) days after removal of the business to a new location and the license
will be valid at the new address upon written notification of the license
inspector and compliance with zoning and building codes. Failure to obtain the
approval of the license inspector for a change of address shall invalidate the
license and subject the licensee to prosecution for doing business without a
license.
   (b)   A business license shall not be transferable and a transfer of
ownership shall be considered a termination of the old business and the
establishment of a new business requiring a new business license, based on old
business income.
Sec. 7-1-10 Administration.
   The license inspector shall administer the provisions of this chapter,
collect license fees, issue licenses, make or initiate investigations and
audits to insure compliance, initiate denial or revocation procedures, report
violations to the police department and assist in prosecution of violators,
produce forms, make reasonable regulations relating to the administration of
this chapter, and perform such other duties, as may be assigned by the city
council. The city administrator or his/her designee shall act as the license
inspector. (Ord. of 9/6/05)
7-1-11   Inspection and audits.
   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the license
inspector, or other authorized agent of the city, is empowered to enter upon
the premises of any person subject to this chapter to make inspections, examine
and audit books and records, and it shall be unlawful for any such person to
fail or refuse to make available the necessary books and records. In the event
an audit or inspection reveals that false information has been filed by the
licensee, the costs of the audit shall be added to the correct license fee and
late penalties in addition to other penalties provided herein. Each day of
failure to pay the proper amount of license fee shall constitute a separate
offense. The license inspector shall make systematic inspections of all
businesses within the city to insure compliance with this chapter. Records of
inspections and audits shall not be deemed public records; the license
inspector shall not release the reported gross income of any person by name
without permission of the licensee, provided that statistics compiled by
classifications may be made public.
7-1-12   Assessments.
   When any person shall have failed to obtain a business license or to furnish
the information required by this chapter or the license inspector, the license
inspector shall proceed to examine such records of the business or any other
available records as may be appropriate and to conduct such investigations and
statistical surveys as he may deem appropriate to assess a license tax and
penalties as provided herein. A notice of assessment shall be served by
certified mail and an application for adjustment of the assessment may be made
to the license inspector within five (5) days after the notice is mailed or the
assessment will become final. The license inspector shall establish by
regulation the procedure for hearing an application for adjustment of
assessment and issuing a notice of final assessment. A final assessment may be
appealed to city council only by payment in full of the assessment under
protest within five (5) days and the filing of written notice of appeal within
ten (10) days after a payment pursuant to Section 7-1-17.
7-1-13   Delinquent license fees.
   For non-payment of all or any part of the correct license fee, the license
inspector shall levy and collect a late penalty of five percent (5%) of the
unpaid fee for each month or portion thereof after the due date until paid. If
any license fee shall remain unpaid for sixty (60) days after its due date, the
license inspector shall issue an execution which shall constitute a lien upon
the property of the license for the tax, penalties and costs of collection, and
he shall proceed to collect in the same manner as prescribed by law for the
collection of other taxes.
7-1-14   Notices.
   The license inspector may, but shall not be required to, mail written
notices that license fees are due. If notices are not mailed, he shall cause to
be published a notice of the due date in a newspaper of general circulation
within the city three (3) times prior to the due date in each year.
7-1-15   Denial of license.
   The license inspector shall deny a license to an applicant when the
application is incomplete, contains a misrepresentation, false or misleading
statement, evasion or suppression of a material fact, the municipality has been
informed by the County Treasurer that any business property taxes are past due
and unpaid, or when the activity for which a license is sought is unlawful or
constitutes a public nuisance. If withholding of the license occurs for past
due and unpaid business property taxes, the applicant shall provide a paid
receipt to that license inspector prior to issuance of a business license. A
decision of the license inspector shall be subject to appeal to City Council as
herein provided. Denial shall be written with the reasons stated. (Amended by
Ord. of 10/6/98; Amended by Ord. of 12/4/01)
7-1-16   Suspension or revocation of license.
   When the license inspector determines that a licensee has: (1) Been
mistakenly or improperly issued a license or issued a license contrary to law;
(2) Breached any condition upon which his license was issued or has failed to
comply with the provisions of this chapter; (3) Obtained a license through a
fraud, misrepresentation, a false or misleading statement, evasion or
suppression of a material fact in the license application; (4) Been convicted
of an offense under a law or ordinance regulating business, a crime involving
moral turpitude or an unlawful sale of merchandise or prohibited goods; (5)
Allowed or has knowledge or notice that any person or employee has committed a
crime of moral turpitude on the business premises, or permitted the person or
employee to engage in the unlawful sale of merchandise or prohibited goods on
the business premises and does not take remedial measures reasonably calculated
to correct such activity; or (6) Engaged in an unlawful activity or nuisance
related to the business; The license inspector shall give written notice to the
licensee or the person in control of the business within the city by personal
service or certified mail that the license is suspended pending a hearing
before city council for the purpose of determining whether the license should
be revoked. The notice shall state the time and place at which the hearing is
to be held, which shall be at a regular or special council meeting within
thirty (30) days from the date of service of the notice. The notice shall
contain a brief statement of the reasons for suspension and proposed revocation
and a copy of the applicable provisions of this chapter. (Amended by Ord. of
10/6/98)
7-1-17   Appeals to city council.
   (a)   Any person aggrieved by a final assessment or a denial of a business
license by the license inspector may appeal the decision to city council by
written request stating the reasons therefor filed with the license inspector
within ten (10) days after the payment of the assessment under protest or
notice of denial is received.
   (b)   An appeal or a hearing on revocation shall be held by city council
within thirty (30) days after receipt of a request for appeal or service of
notice of suspension at a regular or special meeting of which the applicant or
licensee has been given written notice. At such hearing all parties shall have
the right to be represented by counsel, to present testimony and evidence and
to cross-examine witnesses. The proceedings shall be recorded and transcribed
at the expense of the party so requesting. The rules of evidence and procedure
prescribed by city council shall govern the hearing. City council shall by
majority vote of members present render a written decision based on findings of
fact and the application of the standards herein which shall be served upon all
parties or their representatives and shall be final unless appealed to a court
of competent jurisdiction within 10 days after service.
   (c)   A timely appeal of city council’s decision does not effectuate a stay
of that decision. The decision of council shall be binding and enforceable
unless overturned by an appellate court after a timely appeal.
(Amended by Ord. of 4/16/18)
7-1-18   Procedure when business not within classification.
   In case of a new business applying for a license during any year when it
appears that the business cannot be placed properly under the classifications
set out in the fee schedule or it appears that a manifest injustice is done by
so classifying the business, the clerk-treasurer is directed to investigate the
business, and to establish a license classification and fee therefor as seems
just; provided, that the licensee may appeal such determination to the council.
7-1-19   Violations.
   Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense.
Punishment for violation shall not relieve the offender of liability for
delinquent penalties and costs provided for herein.
7-1-20   License fee schedule.
   In accordance with the laws of the state and the pro-visions of this code,
there shall be and is hereby imposed and levied and shall hereafter be
collected the annual license fees as provided by the schedule of license fees
on file in the office of the clerk-treasurer, which schedule is hereby adopted
and incorporated herein by reference.
Chapter 2 TAXICABS
Article A
General Provisions
7-2-1   Certificate of public convenience and necessity; required.
   (a)   No taxicab shall be licensed to do business in or use the streets of
the city unless there shall first have been obtained from the city council a
certificate of public convenience and necessity therefor.
   (b) The council may, when in their judgment the public interest and safety
require it, issue or refuse to issue to any applicant a certificate of public
convenience and necessity or upon any notice and after hearing may for like
cause revoke any certificate therefore issued. In case the certificate is
revoked, the city clerk-treasurer shall remit to the holder of the revoked
certificate the unearned portion of any license paid to the city by the
certificate holder. The burden of showing public convenience and necessity
shall rest upon the applicant. (c) In determining whether public convenience
and necessity require the licensing of the taxicabs for which application may
be made, the council shall take into consideration the following:
   (1)   Whether the demands of the public require the proposed or additional
taxicab service within the city;
   (2)   The financial responsibility of the applicant;
   (3)   The number, kind and type of equipment;
   (4)   The color scheme proposed to be used;
   (5)   The rates of fare to be charged and whether or not such rate will
jeopardize the permanent transportation system of the city;
   (6)   The increased traffic congestion and demand for in-creased parking
space upon the streets of the city which may result;
   (7)   Whether the safe use of the streets by the public, both vehicular and
pedestrian, will be preserved by the granting of such additional licenses; and
   (8)   Any other relevant facts as the council may deem advisable or
necessary.
7-2-3   Certificate of public convenience and necessit; notice of application
intent.
   Any applicant for a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall,
before making application, give at least 10 days' notice of intention to apply
for the certificate, which notice shall state the nature and general plan of
the public business to be conducted, and shall be published at least once prior
to application in one of the daily newspapers of the greater Columbia area.
7-2-4   Liability insurance.
   Before any license is issued for the operation of a taxicab, the owner shall
file with the city clerk a copy of a policy of liability insurance issued by a
company authorized to do business in this state providing for at least the
minimum coverage required by state law for other motor vehicles. The city shall
be given 10 days' notice by the insurer prior to cancellation of any such
policy. (Ord. of 11/6/90)
7-2-5   Issuance of license.
   A taxi license shall be issued to the holder of a certificate of convenience
and necessity for each vehicle to be operated under the supervision of the
holder up to the maximum number specified in the certificate. A copy of the
certificate of title or other evidence of title (which shall include the title
of a lessor of the vehicle) shall be filed with the city clerk together with a
copy of any lease documents affecting the operation of the vehicle. (Ord. of
11/6/90)
7-2-6   Supervision of operation; lease arrangements.
   Every taxicab shall be operated by or under the supervision of the person to
whom the license is issued; provided, however, that the holder of a taxi
license who owns and operates a central radio system and has a telephone number
listed under a trade name identical to or similar to the name in which the taxi
license is issued may enter into a lease arrangement for a minimum term of 90
days for the operation of a vehicle either as lessor or lessee upon such terms
as may be agreed to by the parties, provided that the holder of the license
shall be responsible for compliance with the provisions of this article. (Ord.
of 11/6/90)
7-2-7   Transfer of license and certificate.
   No taxi license shall be transferred to a new owner or lessee of a vehicle.
A certificate of convenience and necessity may be transferred upon approval of
city council to a corporation in which the original holder owns a majority of
the outstanding stock, provided that the certificate shall be subject to
revocation in the event the original holder ceased to own a majority of the
outstanding stock. No taxi license shall be issued unless there is a vehicle
owned or leased by the certificate holder which has met the requirements of
this chapter to which the license can be affixed. A taxi license shall be
surrendered and canceled when the holder no longer has a qualified vehicle for
it. No taxi license shall be leased by the holder to another party or entity,
or in any manner transferred with or without value. (Ord. of 11/6/90)
7-2-8   Permit.
   No person shall be allowed to drive any vehicle in the city for hire unless
and until the person shall have filed with the chief of police an application
for permission to drive the vehicle, which application shall be recommended by
at least two (2) responsible citizens of the city and shall be subject to the
approval of the council and chief of police.
7-2-9   License; required.
   Businesses licenses shall be obtained and displayed as provided in
title 7, chapter 1 of this code.
7-2-10   Inspection of vehicles; condemnation of unsafe vehicles.
   The chief of police, or his designate, is empowered with authority to make
inspections of vehicles operating for hire in the city, to determine their
safety and convenience for the transportation of the public. Any vehicle
condemned by the chief of police shall no longer be operated in the public
service.
7-2-11   Identifying markings on vehicles.
   Any motor vehicle operating for hire shall immediately, upon obtaining a
license from the city, have painted on the side of the vehicle to be so
operated, sufficient wording indicating that the car is being operated as a
taxi and also shall have placed on the side of the car the name of the owner or
company operating the vehicle. Lettering shall be a minimum of two (2) inches
in height and must be approved by the chief of police.
7-2-12   Identifying markings on vehicles; colors and markings for companies.
   Any person operating more than one vehicle for hire may at his discretion,
by and with the consent of the chief of police, adopt a distinctive and uniform
color for all of the vehicles operated by that person and also may, by or with
the consent of the chief of police, adopt a distinctive insignia. to be placed
on the vehicles. Upon the adoption of any such color scheme or insignia, a copy
and description of same shall be immediately filed with the clerk-treasurer;
and after the filing, no other person shall adopt a color scheme or insignia
which will imitate, appear similar, or be a coy of color scheme or insignia as
provided herein. When two persons file at the same time with the clerk-
treasurer their desired distinctive color or insignia and the two are the same
or appear similar, the one that can establish that he has used the color scheme
or insignia for the longest length of time will determine the right. Otherwise,
the time of filing will determine the right.
7-2-13   Refusal to convey orderly passengers.
   No taxicab operator or owner shall refuse to carry an orderly person
applying for transportation who agrees to pay the proper fare as herein
established unless for an unlawful purpose coming to the knowledge of the owner
or operator.
7-2-14   Transporting passengers for unlawful or immoral purposes.
   No taxicab owner or operator shall knowingly transport any person for an
unlawful purpose or a purpose not conducive to good morals and the welfare of
the general public of the city.
7-2-15   Engaging cab with intent to defraud.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage or use a taxicab or other
public vehicle or transportation in this city not intending to pay for the same
at the time the vehicle is engaged but with intent to defraud the owner or
driver of the vehicle out of the value of the use thereof, and every employment
of the vehicle shall be held to be for cash, unless other arrangements are made
at the time the vehicle is contracted.
7-2-16   Number of passengers limited.
   It shall be unlawful to transport, and no taxicab owner or operator shall
transport, in any one taxicab, more than five (5) passengers at any one time.
7-2-17   Operation from fixed stands; solicitation prohibited.
   All taxicabs shall operate from a fixed stand as designated by the police
department and upon call only, and shall at all times answer calls and return
to their stands by the shortest route possible. No taxicab shall solicit by
sign or otherwise, passengers on the street at any time. It shall be unlawful
for any taxicab to cruise for passengers.
7-2-18   Stands; designation.
   The chief of police may designate stands for vehicles for hire subject to
approval of council, and shall post at police headquarters his orders
designating the stands, which orders shall become effective one (1) week after
such posting.
7-2-19   Solicitation for hotels and boardinghouses.
   No person shall solicit anyone to ride in any vehicle or to go to any hotel
or boardinghouse.
7-2-20   Revocations.
   (a)   The chief of police may, in his discretion, summon any person
violating any of the provisions of this chapter or any of the city ordinances
regulating traffic, or any person refusing to obey the orders of the police
department, before the city council to show cause why his permit to operate
vehicles for hire in the city shall not be revoked, and the person so summoned
shall be given at least three (3) days' notice to answer before the council.
   (b)   Any person owning or operating any taxicab convict-ed of violating any
of the traffic ordinances of the city, or of any crime involving moral
turpitude, or found hauling persons for immoral purposes or transporting
intoxicating liquors for sale, may be required to forfeit his permit and shall
be ineligible to obtain any new permit to operate motor vehicles in the city;
provided, however, such permit holder shall have the right to a hearing as
outlined in this section.
7-2-21   through 7-2-30 reserved.
Article B
Taximeters
7-2-31   Requirement; accuracy.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any taxicab in the city
unless and until the taxicab has been equipped with a taximeter of a type and
design which shall have been approved by the city council, and it shall be the
duty of the carrier operating the taxicab, and also the driver thereof, to keep
the meter operating at all times within five percent (5%) of absolute accuracy.
No passengers shall be carried in any cab unless the taximeter is in operation.
This provision shall apply regardless of whether the taxicab is engaged for a
trip entirely within the boundaries of the city or partially outside thereof,
and the meter shall be kept operating continuously during the entire time that
it is engaged in the transportation of passengers for compensation, regardless
of the point of destination.
7-2-32   Lighting.
   The taximeter shall be placed in each taxicab so that the reading dial
showing the amount to be charged shall be well lighted and readily discernible
to a passenger riding in the taxicab.
7-2-33   Inspections; removal of inaccurate meters.
   Every taximeter used in the operation of taxicabs shall be subject to
inspection at any time by the chief of police or any of his agents or
assistants. Upon discovery of any inaccuracy of such taximeter, the operator
thereof shall remove or cause to be removed from service any vehicle equipped
with the taximeter until the taximeter shall have been repaired and accurately
adjusted.
7-2-34   Inspections; frequency.
   (a)   Every taximeter shall be inspected and tested for accuracy by the
carrier at least once every six (6) months. Upon the completion of the
inspection and of any adjustments necessary to cause the taximeter to operate
within the standards of accuracy prescribed in this article, the carrier shall
cause to be placed upon the meter a gummed label having printed thereon the
following: "This taximeter was inspected and tested on __________(date) and
found to comply with standard of accuracy prescribed by the City of West
Columbia, South Carolina."
   (b)   The date on which the inspection was made shall be stamped in the
blank space provided for that purpose. No label shall be removed except at the
time a subsequent inspection is made by the carrier or the police department.
7-2-35   Breaking seal prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any driver of any taxicab or any other person,
except the carrier's approved repairman or the police department, to break the
seal on any taximeter, and after any taximeter has been repaired, the cab must
be presented to the police department for inspection as to accuracy or proper
operation.
7-2-36   Changes in tire size.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed upon any
public service automobile equipped with a taxi-meter, tires of a smaller size
than those which were on the vehicle at the time the taximeter was last sealed,
without notice to the police department. After notice of a change in tires, it
shall be the duty of the police department to test and seal the taximeter.
7-2-37   Operating requirements; flags.
   It shall be unlawful for any driver of any taxicab, while carrying
passengers, to display the "flag" attached to the taximeter in such a position
as to denote that the vehicle is not employed, or to fail to throw the "flag"
of the taximeter to a position indicating the vehicle is unemployed at the
termination of each and every service.
7-2-38   Operating requirements; charges based on registration.
   All charges for taxicab service shall be calculated and indicated by a
taximeter, and at all times while the taxicab is engaged, the "flag" of the
taximeter shall be thrown into a position to register charges for mileage, or
into a position to register charges for waiting time. No taximeter shall be
used whose mechanism will register a combined charge for mileage and waiting
time in any single position, and no taximeter shall be so operated as to cause
any charge to be registered thereon except during the time the taxicab is
engaged by a passenger.
7-2-37   through 7-2-50 reserved.
Article C
Rates and Fares
7-2-51   Rates.
   Rates for the operation of taxicabs shall be as fixed from time to time by
the council. (Ord. of 7/8/84)
7-2-52   Waiting time.
   "Waiting time" shall mean the time consumed while the taxicab is not in
motion at the direction of a passenger and also the time consumed while waiting
for a passenger after having responded to a call; but no charge shall be made
for the time consumed by the premature response to a call, or for the first
three (3) minutes following timely arrival at any location in response to a
call or for time lost through traffic interruptions or delays caused by the
inefficiency of the taxicab or its driver. The driver of every vehicle covered
by this article shall keep a complete and accurate record of each trip upon a
daily trip sheet, the form of which shall be approved by the police department,
showing the time and place of origin and destination of the trip, the number of
passengers carried, the mileage and the amount of fare collected. This record
shall be filed daily and the record shall be kept on file available for
inspection by the police department or any of its agents or employees, for a
period of not less than six (6) months. (Ord. of 7/8/74)
7-2-53   Posting required.
   There shall be posted in every taxicab operating within the city a sign
displayed in a prominent place in the taxicab, setting forth the lawful fares
prescribed hereunder, which sign shall be written or printed in letters
sufficiently large to make them easily read by those offering themselves for
transportation in the taxicab.
7-2-54   Overcharging prohibited.
   No taxicab operator shall charge any passenger or passengers more than the
fixed fare rate for transportation or waiting time as determined and prescribed
by the city council or under its authority.
Chapter 3 WRECKER AND TOWING SERVICES
7-3-1   Definitions.
   1.   Assistance call. Any call to a wrecker service in which no towing is
involved, such as calls for jump starts or flat tire changes.
   2.   Carrier. A wrecker which is a minimum of 19 feet in length, equipped
with a power-operated winch with a factory-rated lifting capacity of not less
than 8,000 pounds, tie-down chains and hooks.
   3.   Heavy-duty wrecker. A wrecker weighing not less than two and a half
tons, which is equipped with a power-operated winch, winch line and boom with a
factory-rated lifting capacity of not less than 46,000 pounds, single or
double-line capacity, and a tow sling.
   4.   Rotation service. The city may create a rotation list of eligible and
approved wrecker service firms for use in calling listed firms on a rotational
basis when the need arises for a wrecker service within city limits.
   5.   Wrecker. A vehicle equipped with a power-operated winch, a winch line
and boom, with a factory-rated lifting capacity of not less than 8,000 pounds,
single-line capacity, carrying standard equipment of a towing device (wheel
lift or sling), towing dollies, and safety chains.
   6.   Wrecker service. A business, operating within the City of West
Columbia, which provides for towing of vehicles, related clean-up, and storage
of vehicles on a twenty-four hour basis, also known as a towing service,
wrecker or towing service, wrecker business, wrecker operator, wrecker or
towing firm, etc. (Ord. of 11/13/12)
7-3-2   Wreckers to respond to accidents only when called by police.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or agent of any wrecker or towing service
to go to any place where an accident has occurred unless called by the police
dispatcher. Responding to a call upon notice from gas station attendants,
taxicab drivers or unauthorized persons shall be considered a violation of this
article. (Ord. of 11/13/12)
7-3-3   Response to calls generally; monitoring police radio.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent or driver of any wrecker service
to respond to a location unless requested to do so by the police department or
an individual. No provision of this section, however, shall prohibit the owner,
agent or driver of any wrecker service from monitoring police radio calls for
the purpose of ascertaining that the police department is in compliance with
rotation regulations as provided in section
7-3-9. (Ord. of 11/13/12)
7-3-4   Solicitation of business by wrecker service.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or agent of any wrecker service to
solicit wrecker or towing services. In the event of non-accident mechanical
breakdowns, the operator of an automobile or vehicle shall be allowed to call a
wrecker service of his choice, provided the wrecker service has a business
license to operate in the city. (Ord. of 11/13/12)
7-3-5   Solicitation of business by city employees.
   It shall be unlawful for any city employee to solicit business for any
wrecker service, and any employee guilty of violating this provision may be
subject to discharge. It shall likewise be unlawful for any owner, agent, or
driver of a wrecker service to entice or engage a city employee to solicit
business for the service in exchange for payment, whether money, a gift, or a
gratuity. The offending service shall forfeit its eligibility for rotation
service. (Ord. of 11/13/12)
7-3-6   Authority of police to have vehicles towed and impounded.
   Whenever a police officer finds a motor vehicle or other vehicle that has
been abandoned or wrecked upon the public streets or ways of the city, or upon
city property, or that has been parked in violation of a city ordinance or
state law, or that has been or is being used in the commission of a crime, such
officer may have the vehicle removed by a wrecker to the storage lot or garage
operated by such wrecker. Vehicles removed under these conditions shall be held
until claimed by the legal owner or lien holder or otherwise disposed of as
provided by statute. If the owner or lien holder is unable to claim the
vehicle, because of a verified hardship, then they may authorize an agent to
recover the vehicle for them by filling out the proper form verifying their
identity, legal ownership and reason that they are unable to personally recover
the vehicle. Under special circumstances the chief of police and/or his
designee, may use his discretion to authorize the release of a vehicle after
determining that hardship is such that proper documentation cannot be obtained
otherwise. (Ord. of 11/13/12)
Sec. 7-3-7   Right of vehicle owner or operator to designate wrecker service;
other wrecker service.
   The emergency services dispatcher shall call any wrecker service having a
business license issued by the city requested by the owner or operator of a
vehicle damaged or disabled in a street or public place. If no wrecker service
is designated by the vehicle owner or operator, and in any situation in which a
vehicle is towed at the direction of city personnel without the prior
authorization or consent of the owner or operator of the vehicle, the emergency
services dispatcher shall call the wrecker service on rotation as provided in
sections
7-3-8 and
7-3-9. The emergency service dispatcher shall call the wrecker service as
provided on the city’s rotation list. (Ord. of 11/13/12)
Sec. 7-3-8   Rotation service generally.
   (a)   All wrecker services on the city’s rotation list must be independent
of each other and may not share or use common business locations, storage areas
or equipment. If an existing wrecker entity wishes to open a separate business,
the new business must comply with all applicable regulations, to include the
one year waiting period to be considered for rotation.
   (b)   Each service must have been licensed to operate as a wrecker service
and has operated a wrecker service at the same physical address in the city for
a period of one year under the same ownership.
   (c)   If an accident is too large for one service to handle in a timely
manner or one service does not have the proper equipment needed to handle the
accident, then the emergency dispatcher may call the next wrecker service on
rotation, or subcontractors may be used. Subcontractors need not be within the
city limits, but otherwise must comply with the provisions of this ordinance,
any other applicable city requirements, and be preapproved by the chief of
police.
   (d)   If more than one wrecker service is participating on the city’s
rotation list, the chief of police shall set up a rotation list for the
performance of wrecker services and shall determine when each wrecker service
shall be subject to call pursuant to the rotation list. (Ord. of 11/13/12)
Sec. 7-3-9   Eligibility for participation in rotation service.
   Any wrecker service having its main business operation within the city shall
become eligible to participate in rotation service as provided in section
7-3-8 if it has a valid license to do business in the city and if it conforms
to the rules and requirements established in this article and has done so for a
minimum of one year. Any deviation from the requirements of the policies
established in this article or failure to provide reasonable, quick and
efficient service at the rates prescribed may result in the suspension for a
specified time or termination of the contract with such company by the chief of
police. A suspension or termination shall be subject to appeal to the city
council upon written request within ten days after notice of suspension or
termination from rotation service. (Ord. of 11/13/12)
Sec. 7-3-10   Application to participate in rotation service.
   Any firm meeting the minimum eligibility requirements may apply to the chief
of police of the city to participate in rotation service towing operations. The
application shall contain the following information:
   (1)   Business operation.
   a.   Name of wrecker service: Indicate whether the firm is a corporation or
partnership, and list all parties having a financial interest in the towing
firm, including names and addresses, the number of years the business has been
established in the city.
   b.   Attendants and drivers: List names, (driver’s license numbers), and
addresses of all attendants and drivers who will conduct the police towing
service, as well as the number of years employed, training received by those
attendants and drivers and experience of the personnel in the conduct of the
business. Background checks must be provided for attendants and drivers with
each yearly reapplication.
   c.   Equipment: Describe available equipment to be used in police towing
services particularly in terms of comparative qualities or capacities as
related to minimum eligibility requirements.
   d.   Communications: Describe the method of operation of the communications
system between place of business and operating tow trucks, as well as the means
utilized for ensuring prompt dispatch of trucks upon receipt of calls from the
police department.
   e.   Other facilities and personnel available: List all provisions for
recordkeeping, backup personnel and auxiliary services which might be required
to effectively carry out a high level of service to the public in the business
of two truck operations.
   (2)   Business location and storage lot.
   a.   Primary business location: List the location of primary business
operation within the city, including dimensions and type of facilities
available.
   b.   Storage lot: List the location of storage lots, dimensions thereof,
relationship to the primary business operation, type of protection afforded,
screening and maintenance provided at the lots, and the theft insurance
providing protection to the owners of vehicles stored. (Ord. of 11/13/12)
Sec. 7-3-11   New applications to participate in rotation service.
   Any firm otherwise meeting the eligibility requirements of sections
7-3-9 and
7-3-10 and having been in the wrecker service at the same physical address
within the city for a minimum of one year may apply for participation in
rotation coverage at any time. An aggrieved applicant may, upon written notice,
appeal to the city council within ten days after notice that its application
was disapproved. The city may respond to the appeal within 30 days. (Ord. of
11/13/12)
Sec. 7-3-12   Equipment for emergency wreckers; 24-hour service required.
   (a)   Generally. Every emergency wrecker proposed to be used by an applicant
shall be subject to inspection in a manner determined by the chief of police,
and every such wrecker, other than an emergency heavy duty wrecker, shall
comply with the following minimum requirements:
   (1)   Each applicant shall have at least two wreckers, one of which must be
a carrier. Each unit shall be not less than one ton in size with dual rear
wheels. Each wrecker shall have a sign on the driver and front passenger door
clearly showing only one tow company name, address and telephone number. These
signs shall be painted on or permanently affixed to the doors. All lettering on
such signs shall be plainly visible and shall be in a color that contrasts to
that of the wrecker.
   (2)   Each wrecker shall be equipped with a power-operated winch, winch line
and boom, with a factory-rated lifting capacity or a City-tested capacity of
not less than 8,000 pounds, single line capacity. Each wrecker shall carry as
standard equipment a towing device (wheel lift or sling), towing dollies and
safety chains.
   (3)   Each carrier shall be a minimum of 19 feet in length, equipped with a
power-operated winch with a factory-rated lifting capacity of not less than
8,000 pounds, tie-down chains and hooks.
   (4)   Each wrecker and/or carrier shall be equipped with a fire
extinguisher, wrecking bar, broom, shovel, and approved warning devices.
   (5)   Each wrecker and/or carrier and all of its equipment shall be in a
safe working condition and must be titled in the name of the applicant’s
business and registered at the South Carolina Department of Motor Vehicles.
   (6)   Each wrecker and/or carrier shall be equipped with a communication
device allowing them to communicate with their main business location. A cell
phone is sufficient for this requirement.
   (b)   Heavy-duty wreckers. Every emergency heavy duty wrecker weighing not
less than two and a half tons shall meet the requirements in subsection (a) of
this section and, in addition thereto, shall be equipped with a power-operated
winch, winch line and boom with a factory-rated lifting capacity or a city
tested capacity of not less than 46,000 pounds, single or double line capacity,
and a tow sling.
   (c)   Twenty-four-hour service required. Each applicant shall maintain 24-
hour wrecker service and respond to the location of a vehicle to be towed
within twenty minutes after receipt of a call from the city. (Ord. of 11/13/12)
Sec. 7-3-13   Agreements with city.
   Approved applicants under this article shall enter into agreements with the
city, executed by the chief of police or his designee, which agreements shall
be binding contracts to perform services for the calendar year or portion
thereof in which application is made. All contracts will end December 31 of
each calendar year and need to be renewed for the following calendar year.
(Ord. of 11/13/12)
Sec. 7-3-14   Insurance.
   (a)   An applicant under this article shall procure and keep in full force
and effect a policy of public liability and property damage insurance issued by
a casualty insurance company authorized to do business in the state and in
standard form approved by the insurance commissioner of the state, with the
insured provision such policy including the City as an insured, and the
coverage provision insuring the public from any loss or damage that may arise
to any person or property by reason of the operation of any emergency wrecker
of such applicant and providing that the amount of recovery on each emergency
wrecker shall be in limits of not less than the following sums:
   (1)   For damages arising out of bodily injury to or death of one person in
any one accident, $100,000.00;
   (2)   For damages arising out of bodily injury to or death of two or more
persons in any one accident, $300,000.00; and
   (3)   For injury to or destruction of property in any one accident,
$25,000.00.
   (b)   An applicant shall procure liability insurance in the amount of
$300,000.00 to cover damages arising out of bodily injury or death to persons
and in the amount of $25,000.00 for damages for injury to or destruction of
property caused by vehicles in tow, under possession of, or in control of a
wrecker operated and maintained by the applicant.
   (c)   Every policy mentioned in subsection (a) of this section shall contain
an endorsement providing for 30 days’ notice to the city in the event of any
material change or cancellations of the policy.
   (d)   An applicant must maintain workers compensation insurance on employees
of its business and provide a certificate of insurance upon request to the
city.
   (e)   Applicants must list the city as “additionally insured,” and inform
the city of any changes to insurance. (Ord. of 11/13/12)
Sec. 7-3-15   Storage lots.
   (a)   Location; size; fencing and security. Each applicant under this
article shall have a storage lot located within the city with adequate storage,
at least 50 feet by 100 feet, or equivalent area either under cover or fenced
with a six-foot chain link fence topped with three strands of barbed wire, or
other approved security fencing, except that if other ordinance or regulations
of the city require a fence that is opaque, an opaque fence shall be installed.
Stored vehicles and contents must be kept safe from pilfering. Vehicles towed
for the city must be stored within the city and within the security fencing.
   (b)   Signage. Each wrecker service on rotation must have a sign placed on
the exterior of their business location, being clearly visible, state the
company name, telephone number, and business hours.
   (c)   Hours. There shall be an attendant on call, capable of responding to
police requests for towing within twenty minutes of a call, as well as an
attendant being present or available for the release of vehicles to the public
within thirty minutes of a call, 24 hours a day, seven days a week during one’s
appointed period of “on-call” rotation. Failure to respond to a police call for
towing within the allotted timeframe could result in the next wrecker service
on the rotation list being called and the initially called wrecker will forfeit
the call. Failure to respond to a request from the public for the release of a
vehicle within the allotted timeframe could result in suspension or termination
of the contract for provision of rotation service.
   (d)   Records. Each garage shall keep a record of the vehicle and license
number, the date and time it was towed and the location from which it was
towed, the name of the officer ordering the towing, and whether the vehicle was
impounded or towed at the owner’s request. (Ord. of 11/13/12)
Sec. 7-3-16   Towing and storage charges.
   In all cases in which a vehicle is towed at the direction of city personnel
or without the prior authorization or consent of the owner or operator of the
vehicle, the following shall apply:
   (1)   Schedule of wrecker and storage charges.
 
Type of Service Non-City Owned Vehicles City Owned Vehicles
Violation           $135.00                            n/a
Wreck fee           $140.00/$160.00                    $65.00
No tow’s (on scene$45.00                             n/a
Storage per day     $20.00                             n/a
Assistance calls    $55.00/$85.00                      n/a
Medium duty         $250.00 per hr. (portal to portal) Light truck $65.00
Medium duty         $250.00 per hr. (portal to portal) Medium truck $150.00
Heavy duty          $350.00 per hr. (portal to portal) $250.00
Abandoned           $85.00                             n/a
 
   a.   Wreck fee of $140.00 will be standard. Wreck fee of $160.00 will be for
rollover (i.e., more than one hour on scene with additional charges after the
first hour).
   b.   Assistance calls are defined as jump starts or flat tire changes with
no towing involved. Assistance calls for jump starts or tire changes will be
$55.00. Assistance calls for tows up to five miles (disabled vehicles only)
will be $85.00.
   c.   As to city-owned vehicles, the wreck fee, medium duty, and heavy duty
fees shall be based upon tows up to 25 miles.
   (2)   Release of impounded vehicles. No stored or impounded vehicle shall be
released until proper evidence of ownership has been provided to the police
department. The police department will then provide a copy of the tow sheet
along with the amount of applicable fees to the owner of the vehicle or his
representative. The towing and storage fees will then be collected by the
towing service as provided by law.
   (3)   Posting of rates. All rates approved by the city shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in each office of the wrecker service. All towing and storage
charges will be itemized on an invoice or receipt when charges are paid.
   (4)   Payment method. Every firm providing rotation services shall accept
major credit cards in addition to cash for towing and storage charges. A fee
not to exceed $5.00 may be charged for credit card use.
   (5)   Any charging above rates set under this provision may result in
probation, suspension, or termination from the rotation list by the chief of
police in addition to Section
7-3-19. (Ord. of 11/13/12)
Sec. 7-3-17   Towing of vehicles obstructing streets.
   All wrecker services under contract for police-requested towing shall assist
in towing vehicles which obstruct streets during special events, repairs, or
emergencies without cost to the city or the vehicle owner, including the
removal from the street, upon request of the police, of damaged or disabled
vehicles obstructing the right-of-way and awaiting another requested wrecker
service. All vehicles shall be checked by a police officer for damage prior to
towing. The city shall not be responsible for any towing charges under any
circumstances. (Ord. of 11/13/12)
Sec. 7-3-18   Removal of glass and debris.
   All wrecker services doing business in the city shall remove glass, damaged
parts, oil and all debris at the location from which the vehicle is towed.
(Ord. of 11/13/12)
Sec. 7-3-19   Suspension or revocation of business license.
   (a)   The chief of police may direct that the city business license
inspector revoke or suspend any business license issued for towing service for
up to 60 days if he determines that the public interest so requires and when it
is found, after investigation, that:
   (1)   The license has been mistakenly or improperly issued or issued in
violation of a city ordinance;
   (2)   The licensee has breached any condition upon which his license was
issued or has failed to comply with the provisions of this article;
   (3)   The licensee has obtained his license through any fraud or
misrepresentation, a false or misleading statement, or evasion or suppression
of a material fact in his application;
   (4)   The licensee has been convicted of an offense under a law or ordinance
regulating business, a crime of moral turpitude, or an unlawful sale of
merchandise or prohibited goods; or
   (5)   The licensee has engaged in an unlawful activity or nuisance related
to the business.
   (b)   The chief of police may direct that the city business license
inspector revoke or suspend any license issued for towing service for any of
the reasons listed in subsection (a) of this section for a period of more than
60 days, provided that any person aggrieved by an order revoking or suspending
such license may file a written request for a hearing before the city council
within ten days after issuance of such order. The city administrator shall give
five days notice of a hearing upon this request, to be held not more than 30
days after service of the notice on the person requesting the hearing or his
representative. At such hearing, the city council shall determine whether the
denial, revocation or suspension of the license was in accordance with the
provisions of this section and shall issue a written finding of facts and an
order to carry out its findings. This order and finding of facts shall be
served upon all parties.
   (c)   Revocation of business license shall automatically terminate any
contract with the city pursuant to the terms of the contract and section
7-3-13. (Ord. of 11/13/12)
Chapter 4 PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Article A
Commercial Peddlers and Solicitors
7-4-1   Defined.
   For the purposes of this article, "peddler" or " solicitor" means any person
who goes from house to house, or place to place in the city selling or taking
orders for wares, merchandise, services, photographs, magazines or
subscriptions to magazines. Provided, however, that these terms shall not apply
to persons acting in behalf of any nonprofit organization.
Cross Reference: Charitable solicitation, Sec. 7-4-30 et seq.
7-4-2   Exemption for newspapers.
   This article shall not apply to the sale or soliciting of orders for
newspapers. (Code 1965, Sec. 13-2)
7-4-3   Permit required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler
within the city without first obtaining a permit to do so.
Cross Reference: Business license, Sec.
7-1-1 et seq.
7-4-4   Application.
   The application for a permit as a peddler or solicitor shall contain the
following:
   (1)   the name, home address and local address, if any, of the applicant;
   (2)   the name and address of the person, firm or corporation, if any, that
the applicant represents or for whom or through whom orders are to be solicited
or cleared;
   (3)   the nature of the articles or things which are to be sold or for which
orders are to be solicited;
   (4)   whether the applicant, upon any sale or order, shall demand or receive
payment or any deposit of money in advance of final delivery;
   (5)   the period of time during which the applicant wishes to solicit or
peddle in the city;
   (6)   the names and addresses of any employees of the applicant who will be
engaged in peddling or soliciting in the city;
   (7)   a statement whether the applicant or any of his employees who will be
engaged in peddling or soliciting in the city have been convicted of any crime
or violation of any ordinance, the nature of the offense and the jurisdiction
in which such conviction was obtained; and
   (8)   such other relevant information as the chief of police or city clerk-
treasurer may require.
7-4-5   Investigation of applicant.
   Upon receipt of an application for a peddler's or solicitor's permit, the
city clerk-treasurer shall refer the application to the chief of police, who
shall make any investigation of the applicant's and his employees' business and
moral character as he deems necessary.
7-4-6   Disapproval of application.
   If, as a result of an investigation, the chief of police finds the
applicant's or his employees' character or business responsibility is
unsatisfactory, he shall endorse on the application his disapproval and the
reasons therefor, and return it to the city clerk-treasurer, and no permit will
be issued.
7-4-7   Approval of application; issuance of permit.
   If, as a result of an investigation, the character and business
responsibility of the applicant and his employees are found to be satisfactory,
the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval and return it
to the clerk-treasurer, who shall issue a permit upon payment of the required
fee.
7-4-8   Duty to exhibit permit.
   Peddlers and solicitors are required to exhibit their permits at the request
of any person.
7-4-9   Enforcement by police.
   It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city to require any person
seen peddling or soliciting, and who is not known by the officer to be duly
licensed or registered, to pro-duce his permit and to enforce the provisions of
this article against any person found to be violating the same.
7-4-10   Revocation of permit.
   (a)   Permits issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by
the city clerk-treasurer after notice and hearing for any of the following
causes:
   (1)   fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for a license;
   (2)   fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business of peddler or solicitor;
   (3)   any violation of this article;
   (4)   conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; and/
or
   (5)   conducting the business of peddling or soliciting in an unlawful
manner or in such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
   (b)   Notice of the hearing for revocation of a permit hereunder shall be
given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the
time and place of hearing. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
licensee at his last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set
for hearing.
7-4-11   Appeals.
   Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police or the city clerk-
treasurer in the denial or revocation of a permit shall have the right of
appeal to the city council. The appeal shall be taken by filing with the
council, within 14 days after notice of the action complained of has been
mailed to the person's last known address, a written statement setting forth
fully the grounds for the appeal. The council shall set a time and place for a
hearing on the appeal and notice of the hearing shall be given to the appellant
in the manner provided by section
7-4-10 for a notice of hearing or revocation.
7-4-12   Loud noises and sound devices.
   No peddler or solicitor, nor any person in his behalf, shall shout, cry out,
blow a horn, ring a bell, or use any sound device, including any loudspeaker or
sound amplifying device, where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or
produced to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, or other public
places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or
merchandise which he proposes to sell. (Code 1965, Sec. 13-8)
Cross Reference: Noise, Sec.
9-2-6.
7-4-13   Use of streets.
   No peddler shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public
streets, nor shall he be permitted a stationary location, nor shall he be
permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations might impede or
inconvenience the public. For the purposes of this section, the judgment of a
police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to
whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced. (Code
1965, Sec. 13-9)
7-4-14   Hours of operation.
   It shall be unlawful for any peddler to engage in the business of peddling
within the city between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. the following
morning.
7-4-15   Entering posted premises prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any peddler to enter upon any private premises when
such premises are posted with a sign stating "No Peddlers Allowed" or "No
Solicitations Allowed" or other words to such effect.
7-4-16   Refusing to leave.
   Any peddler who enters upon premises owned, leased or rented by another and
who refuses to leave after having been requested to do so by the owner or
occupant, or agent thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
7-4-17   Continuing solicitation when refused.
   It shall be unlawful for any peddler to continue soliciting after he has
been refused.
7-4-18   through 7-4-30 reserved.
Article B
Charitable Solicitations
7-4-31   Definitions.
   (a)   The following definitions shall be controlling with reference to the
provisions of this article:
   (1)   Person means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, society, organization, or league, and includes any trustee,
receiver, assignee, agent, or other representative thereof.
   (2)   Solicit and solicitation means the request, directly or indirectly, of
money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of value on the
plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance,
or other thing of value will be used for a charitable purpose as those purposes
are defined in this section. These words shall also mean and include, but not
be limited to, the following methods of securing such money, credit, property,
financial assistance, or other thing of value:
   a.   Any oral or written request;
   b.   The making of any announcement to the local press, radio, television,
or by telephone concerning a local appeal or campaign to which the public is
requested to make a contribution for any charitable purpose connected
therewith;
   c.   The distribution, circulation, posting, or publishing of any handbill,
written advertisement, or other local publication; and/or
   d.   The sale of, or the offer or attempt to sell, any advertisement,
advertising space, book, card, chance, coupon, device, lapel button,
membership, merchandise, subscription, ticket or other thing.
   (3)   Solicitation as defined herein shall be deemed to have taken place
when the request is made, whether or not the person making the same received
any contribution referred to in this section.
   (b)   The definitions of other terms used in this article shall be as
defined in the Solicitation of Charitable Funds Act of the State of South
Carolina (South Carolina Code section 33-55-10, et seq. (1976).
7-4-32   Registration and permit required.
   (a)   No person shall solicit contributions within the city unless the
person or charitable organization for whom the contributions are solicited
shall have complied with the requirements of the Solicitation of Charitable
Funds Act of the State of South Carolina and shall have filed proof of such
compliance with the city clerk-treasurer.
   (b)   The requirement of proof of compliance established in this section may
be satisfied by filing with the clerk-treasurer certification of registration
or of exemption provided by the Public Charities Division of the office of the
Secretary of State of South Carolina.
7-4-33   Effect on business license ordinance.
   Compliance with the provisions of this article shall not relieve any person
of the duty to comply with the applicable requirements of Chapter 1 of this
title concerning business and professional licenses.
Chapter 5 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
7-5-1   Adoption of state law.
   All the provisions and requirements of the general laws of the state in
regard to alcoholic liquors and beverages as contained in Sections 61-3-10
through 61-13-880 of the 1976 Code of Laws of South Carolina and amendments
thereto, insofar as such provisions and amendments have application within the
town, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as fully as though set
out herein. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to fail or
refuse to comply with the sections of the state law referred to above.
Editorial Note: Opinion of the Attorney General, No. 2282, p. 95 (1966-67)
indicates that the state has occupied the field of offenses and enforcement of
regulations involving alcoholic beverages with limited exception. See also S.C.
Code 1976, Sec. 61-5-190, which vests sole and exclusive authority to regulate
operation of all retail locations selling beer, wine, or alcoholic beverages in
state ABC commission.
Chapter 6 MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
Article A
Assemblies, Parades and Processions
Sec. 7-6-1  Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the
definitions ascribed:
   (a)   Parade means any march, procession or motorcade consisting of persons,
animals or vehicles or a combination thereof upon the streets within the city
that interfere with the normal flow or regulation of traffic upon the streets.
   (b)   Parade or public assembly permit means a permit as required by this
chapter.
   (c)   Public assembly means any meeting, demonstration, picket line, rally
or gathering of more than fifty (50) persons for a common purpose as a result
of prior planning that interferes with the normal flow or regulation of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   (d)   Sidewalk is any area or way set aside or open to the general public
for purposes of pedestrian traffic.
   (e)   Street is any place or way set aside or open to the general public for
purposes of vehicular traffic, including any berm or shoulder parkway, right-
of-way, or median strip thereof, set aside for parking or for purposes of
vehicular traffic.
(Ord. of 3/7/06)
Sec. 7-6-2  Permit required.
   No person shall engage in or conduct any parade or public assembly unless a
permit is issued by the chief of police.
(Ord. of 3/7/06)
Sec. 7-6-3  Exceptions.
   This article shall not apply to the following:
   (a)   Funeral processions;
   (b)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions; and
   (c)   Spontaneous events occasioned by news or affairs coming into public
knowledge within three (3) days of such public assembly, provided that the
organizer thereon gives written notice to the city, at least twenty-four (24)
hours prior to such parade or public assembly.
(Ord. of 3/7/06)
Sec. 7-6-4  Application.
   (a)   A person seeking a parade or public assembly permit shall file an
application with the chief of police on forms provided by the chief of police
and the application shall be signed by the applicant.
   (b)   An application for a permit shall be filed with the city manager at
least ten (10) days and not more than one hundred eighty (180) days before the
parade or public assembly is proposed to commence.  The chief of police may
waive the minimum ten (10) days filing period and accept an application filed
within a shorter period if, after due consideration of the date, time, place,
and nature of the parade or public assembly, the anticipated number of
participants, and the city services required in connection with the event, the
chief of police determines that the waiver will not present a hazard to public
safety.
   (c)   The application for a parade or public assembly permit shall set forth
the following information:
   (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct such parade or public assembly;
   (2)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the headquarters of the
organization, for which the parade or public assembly is to be conducted, if
any, and the authorized and responsible heads of the organization;
   (3)   The requested date of the parade or public assembly;
   (4)   The route to be traveled, including the starting point and the
termination point;
   (5)   The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which
will constitute such parade or public assembly and the type of animals and
description of the vehicles;
   (6)   The hours when such parade or public assembly will start and
terminate;
   (7)   A statement as to whether the parade or public assembly will occupy
all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;
   (8)   The location by street of any assembly areas for such parade or public
assembly;
   (9)   The time at which units of the parade or public assembly will begin to
assemble at any such area;
   (10)   The intervals of space to be maintained between units of such parade
or public assembly;
   (11)   If the parade or public assembly is designed to be held by, or on
behalf of any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit
shall file a letter from that person with the chief of police authorizing the
applicant to apply for the permit on his or her behalf;
   (12)   The type of public assembly, including a description of activities
planned during the event;
   (13)   A description of any recording equipment, sound amplification
equipment, and a physical description of banners, signs, or other attention-
getting devices to be used in connection with the parade or public assembly,
and the maximum decibel level of any such sound amplification equipment;
   (14)   The approximate number of participants (spectators are by definition
no participants);
   (15)   A designation of any public facilities or equipment to be utilized.
(Ord. of 3/7/06)
Sec. 7-6-5  Fees.
   (a)   A non-refundable fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to cover
administrative costs of processing the permit shall be paid to the City of West
Columbia by the applicant when the application is filed.
   (b)   If the application is for the use of any city property or if any city
services shall be required for the parade or public assembly, the applicant
shall pay, prior to the issuance of a permit, the charges for those services in
accordance with a schedule of service costs approved by the city council by
resolution.
(Ord. of 3/7/06)
Sec. 7-6-6  Standards for issuance.
   (a)   The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided for herein when,
from consideration of the application and from such other information as may
otherwise be obtained, he or she finds that:
   (1)   The conduct of the parade or public assembly will not require the
diversion of so great a number of city police officers to properly police the
line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection of the city;
   (2)   The parade or public assembly is scheduled to move from its point of
origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable
delays enroute;
   (3)   There are sufficient parking places near the site of the parade or
public assembly to accommodate the number of vehicles reasonably expected;
   (4)   Such parade or public assembly is not for the primary purpose of
advertising any product, goods or event that is primarily for private profit,
and the parade itself is not primarily for profit. The prohibition against
advertising any product, goods or event shall not apply to signs identifying
organizations or sponsors furnishing or sponsoring exhibits or structures used
in the parade;
   (5)   No parade or public assembly permit application for the same time and
location is already granted or has been received and will be granted;
   (6)   No parade or public assembly permit application for the same time bu
different location is already granted or has been received and will be granted,
and the police resources required for that prior parade or public assembly are
so great that in combination with the subsequent proposed application, th
resulting deployment of police services would have an immediate and adverse
effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and property; and
   (b)   No permit shall be granted that allows for the erection or placement
of any structure whether permanent or temporary, on a city street, sidewalk, or
right-of-way unless advance approval for the erection or placement of the
structure is obtained from the city council.
(Ord. of 3/7/06)
Sec. 7-6-7  Nondiscrimination.
   The chief of police shall uniformly consider each application upon its
merits and shall not discriminate in granting or denying permits under this
article based upon political, religious, ethnic race, disability, sexual
orientation or gender related pounds.
(Ord. of 3/7/06)
Sec. 7-6-8  Notice of denial of application.
   The chief of police shall act promptly upon a timely filed application for a
parade or public assembly permit but in no event shall grant or deny a permit
less than four (4) days prior to the event.  If the chief of police disapproves
the application, he or she shall notify the applicant either by personal
delivery or certified mail at least four (4) days prior to the event of his or
her action and state the reasons for denial.
(Ord. of 3/7/06)
Sec. 7-6-9  Alternative permit.
   (a)   The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade or public
assembly permit, may authorize the conduct of the parade or public assembly at
a date, time, location or route different from that named by the applicant.  An
applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five (5) days
after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of
acceptance with the chief of police.
   (b)   An alternate parade or public assembly permit shall conform to the
requirements of and shall have the effect of, a parade or public assembly
permit issued under this article.
(Ord. of 3/7/06)
Sec. 7-6-10  Appeal procedure.
   (a)   Any applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade or
public assembly permit to the city council. The denied applicant shall make the
appeal within five (5) days after receipt of the denial by filing a written
notice with the chief of police and a copy of the notice with the city
administrator.  The city council shall promptly act upon the appeal at the next
scheduled meeting following receipt of the notice of appeal.
   (b)   In the event that the city council rejects an applicant's appeal, the
applicant may file an immediate request for prompt judicial review with a court
of competent jurisdiction.  In the event of any such review, the city shall
file its response to the complaint or appeal motion within ten (10) days of
service of same, and will join with the applicant in an application to the
court for an expedited hearing and decision of the appeal at the next available
term of court.
(Ord. of 3/7/06)
Sec. 7-6-11  Notice to city and other officials.
   Immediately upon the issuance of a parade or public assembly permit, the
chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the following:
   (a)   The mayor and members of city council;
   (b)   The city administrator;
   (c)   The fire chief;
   (d)   The director of the department of public works.
(Ord. of 3/7/06)
Sec. 7-6-12  Contents of permit.
   Each parade or public assembly permit shall state the following information:
   (a)   Starting and approximate ending time;
   (b)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between parade units;
   (c)   The portions of the streets that may be occupied by the parade or
public assembly;
   (d)   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; and
   (e)   Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to
the enforcement of this article.
(Ord. of 3/7/06)
Sec. 7-6-13  Duties of permittee.
   (a)   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and
conditions an with all applicable laws and ordinances.
   (b)   The parade or public assembly chairman or other person heading such
activity shall carry the parade or public assembly permit upon his person
during the conduct of the parade or public assembly.
(Ord. of 3/7/06)
Sec. 7-6-14  Prohibitions.
   The following prohibitions shall apply to all parades and public assemblies:
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stage, present, or conduct any
parade or public assembly without first having obtained a permit as herein
provided;
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a parade or
public assembly for which the person knows a permit has not been granted;
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of, or responsible for
the conduct of, duly licensed parade or public assembly to knowingly fail to
comply with any condition of the permit;
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any parade or public
assembly activity that would constitute a substantial hazard to the public
safety or that would materially interfere with or endanger the public peace or
rights of residents to the quiet and peaceful enjoyment of their property;
   (e)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, drive, or cause to be
ridden or driven any animal or any animal-drawn vehicle upon any public street,
unless specifically authorized by the permit.
(Ord. of 3/7/06)
Sec. 7-6-15  Public conduct during parades or public assemblies.
   (a)   No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere
with any parade or public assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal
participating or used in a parade or public assembly.
   (b)   Unless otherwise directed by a police officer directing traffic, no
driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a
parade or public assembly when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are
conspicuously designated as a parade or public assembly.
   (c)   The chief of police, or his or her designee, shall have the authority,
when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles
along a street constituting a part of the route of a parade or public
assembly.  The chief of police shall post signs to that effect, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation
thereof.
(Ord. of 3/7/06)
Sec. 7-6-16  Revocation of permit.
   The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade or public
assembly permit instantly upon violation of the conditions or standards for
issuance as set forth in this chapter or when a public emergency arises where
the police resources required for that emergency are so great that deployment
of police services for the parade or public assembly would have an immediate
and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety, of persons or property.
(Ord. of 3/7/06)
Sec. 7-6-17  Penalties.
   Any person violating the provisions of any section of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punished by fine not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00) or imprisonment of not more than thirty (30) days, or both.
(Ord. of 3/7/06)
Sec. 7-6-18  Severability.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is
for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this chapter.
(Ord. of 3/7/06)
Secs. 7-6-19 through 7-6-22 reserved.
Article B
Junkyards
7-6-23 through 7-6-30 reserved.
Article C
Bingo
State Law Reference: Bingo games, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 52-17-10 et seq.
7-6-31   General.
   The game of bingo shall not be conducted within the boundaries of the city
unless the organization which conducts the game:
   (1)   Is a nonprofit organization which is an organization exempt from
federal income taxes pursuant to Internal Revenue Code Sections 50l(c)(3), 50l
(c)(8) and 501(c) (10);
   (2)   Has been domiciled in the state for a period of three (3) years prior
to its application;
   (3)   Holds and maintains a valid bingo certificate issued by the secretary
of state;
   (4)   Has a permanent facility and conducts regular meetings according to
its by-laws within the boundaries of the city; and
   (5)   Complies with the provisions of this article. (Ord. dated 2/6/90)
Amendment note: Subsections (1) and (2) of the above section were amended by
Ord. of 2/6/90 to change exemption eligibility criteria and requirements for
length of occupancy in the state.
7-6-32   Permit required.
   Prior to operation of a bingo game, the organization shall first obtain a
permit from the city clerk-treasurer. The form of the permit shall be
prescribed by the city clerk-treasurer. (Ord. of 6/7/83)
7-6-33   Permit; application.
   (a)   All applicants for a permit under this article shall pay a non-
refundable application fee, as fixed by council and shall file a written sworn
application showing:
   (1)   That the organization meets all of the requirements of section
7-6-31;
   (2)   The names of the officers and the location of the organization;
   (3)   that no non-member participated in the decision to operate a bingo
game;
   (4)   that the members of the organization will be solely responsible for
managing, supervising, conducting and operating the bingo game;
   (5)   such other relevant and reasonable information regarding the
organization and the identity of the members managing, supervising or
conducting the bingo game as the city clerk-treasurer may deem proper to
fulfill the purposes of this chapter and the laws of this state.
   (b)   The bingo application must be accompanied by a sworn statement, signed
by the appropriate official of the applying organization, stating that no
portion of the proceeds derived from the playing of bingo will be paid to any
person or other organization, and that all proceeds derived from the playing of
bingo will go to charity or the purpose for which the organization was
established, with the exception of the payment of reasonable operating costs.
(Ord. of 2/6/90)
Amendment Note: Subsection (b) of the above section was amended by Ord. of 2/6/
90 to delete the reference to outside promoters.
7-6-34   Permit; Investigation; issuance or denial.
   (a)   Upon receipt of an application for a permit, the clerk-treasurer shall
cause an investigation of the organization to be made. The investigation shall
be limited to information, affidavits or other documentation needed to insure
compliance with this chapter and the laws of this state.
   (b)   Upon satisfaction of the requirements of this article by applicant,
the clerk-treasurer shall issue a bingo permit, upon payment of the required
fee. If, as a result of the investigation, the background is found to be
unsatisfactory, the application shall be denied.
   (c)   The permit shall be denied or issued within 30 days from the date the
application and all required information related thereto are received by the
clerk-treasurer.
Cross Reference: Planning commission, Sec.
5-1-1 et seq.
7-6-35   Permit; duration; fete.
   (a)   The permit issued under this article shall be valid for a period of
one (1) year from the date of issuance, and shall be in addition to and not in
lieu of any required business license.
   (b)   The fee for a bingo permit shall be as fixed from tine to time by
council.
Cross Reference: Business license required, Sec.
7-1-1.
7-6-36   Permit; suspension or revocation.
   A permit may be suspended or revoked at any time if the city clerk-treasurer
discovers that the information on the application is inaccurate or when, in his
determination, the organization does not comply with the requirements of this
article, or other applicable ordinances or laws. (Ord. of 6/7/83)
7-6-37   Permit; appeal; effect.
   (a)   Any organization whose application for a permit has been denied or
whose permit has been suspended or revoked may appeal such decision to the city
council by filing written notice thereof with the clerk-treasurer within 10
days of receipt of the decision.
   (b)   Once an application for a bingo permit has been considered and
subsequently denied by the city council, no further application may be
submitted by the same applicant or organization for a period of one (1) year
from the date of the denial by the city council.
7-6-38   Display of permit.
   A permit issued under this article shall be posted conspicuously at the
location of the bingo operation named therein. (Ord. of 6/7/83)
7-6-39   Inspection.
   (a)   The bingo operation shall at all reasonable times be open for
inspection by the city clerk-treasurer or his designee.
   (b)   The city clerk-treasurer, or his designee, may require that the
organization provide any information, affidavits, or other documentation
necessary to insure compliance with this article and with the laws of the
state. (Ord. of 6/7/83, as amended by Ord. of 5/7/85)
7-6-40   Operation of bingo games.
   (a)   All bingo games shall be conducted in compliance with state law and
the provisions of this article.
   (b)   The game of bingo must be played in the organization's regular meeting
place unless an alternate location is approved by the city clerk-treasurer.
   (c)   Under no circumstances an a single organization operate games of bingo
at more than one location within the city.
   (d)   No more than one organization shall be permitted to conduct bingo
games at any one location.
   (e)   Any subdivision or auxiliary chapter of such organization cannot take
advantage of the organization's permit with the city except with the written
permission of the organization and the city clerk-treasurer. Under no
circumstances shall such subdivision or auxiliary chapter operate any bingo
session at the same time the organization operates such a session.
7-6-41   Penalty.
   Any person who operates or conducts bingo games in violation of this article
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of whether or not he holds a bingo
permit. Each session conducted in violation of this article shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. of 6/7/83)
Article D
Gold, Silver and Precious Metals Dealers
7-6-42   Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   Dealer means any person who holds himself out to the public as a
purchaser of precious metals, or who in the courses of operation of a licensed
business engages in the purchase of silver, gold or precious metals.
   (b)   Precious metals means any article made, in whole or part, of gold,
silver or platinum, which article has been used or sold by a retailer. The term
precious metals shall not include any coin or any gold or silver ingot or bar.
   (c)   Wholesale precious metals are articles made in whole or in part of
silver, gold or platinum that have not been previously used, traded or sold by
a retailer and that are being purchased by a dealer from a manufacturer or from
a wholesaler or distributor of newly manufactured precious metals. (Ord. of 3/
9/81)
7-6-43   License and place of operation.
   No dealer as defined herein shall operate in the city except from a
permanent shop or place of business, with a valid business license. No dealer
shall operate upon public property nor from a vehicle, flea market, hotel room
or similar temporary location. (Ord. of 3/9/81)
7-6-44   Daily report to police; positive identification of sellers;
photographs of purchases and retention of records for purchase of precious
metals.
   (a)   Every dealer shall mail daily reports on forms supplied by the police
department to the chief of police of the city, within twenty-four hours from
the time of purchase, giving the name and address of the seller, the price paid
for each item, the date of purchase, a description of each article purchased,
the manufacturer (where known), any identifying marks on each article and the
seller's driver's license number or the number on any other governmental
identification card bearing a photograph of the seller.
   (b)   The dealer shall also record descriptions of the seller and the
property purchased as required in this section in a bound book with
consecutively numbered pages which shall be retained for three years.
   (c)   The dealer in such goods shall also take a photograph of each group of
purchased precious metals using an instant photography process when the total
value of the purchase exceeds fifty dollars ($50.00), which photographs shall
be forwarded to the chief of police of the city with the daily report required
in this section.
   (d)   Any records required to be kept or maintained by this section shall at
all times be open to the inspection of the chief of police or an officer duly
authorized by him to inspect the same.
   (e)   The police department shall not reveal a seller's identity supplied
under this section, except to other law enforcement agencies and prosecuting
officials, or pursuant to the valid order of a court, or in the course of any
criminal prosecution. (Ord. of 3/9/81)
7-6-45   Purchase of gold or silver from minors prohibited.
   No dealer shall purchase gold or silver from a person under eighteen (18)
years of age. (Ord. of 3/9/81)
7-6-46   Goods to be held for ten (10) days before resale.
   All precious metals purchased by a dealer must be held in the city in the
possession of the dealer, before being resold, melted or altered in any manner,
for a period of ten (10) days. The location of these goods and the identifica-
tion of the person in possession of these goods must be filed with the chief of
police of the city within twenty-four (24) hours from the time of the purchase,
if such goods are held or stored at a location other than the point of sale.
All goods required to be held under this section shall at all times be open to
the inspection of the chief of police or an officer duly authorized by him to
inspect the same. (Ord. of 3/9/81)
7-6-47   Purchase of coins.
   Any purchaser of coins made up in whole or in part of gold or silver, where
the total purchase exceeds the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00), shall comply with
Section
7-6-44(a), (b) and (d). (Ord. 3/9/81)
7-6-48   Exemptions.
   The provisions of this article shall not apply to purchases of wholesale
precious metals, nor shall it apply to a transaction between dealers of
precious metals, where the selling dealer has already complied with the terms
of this article, including the ten-day holding period. (Ord. of 3/9/81)
Chapter 7 CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATION
Historical Note: Unless otherwise indicated, the provisions of this chapter are
derived from an ordinance adopted 12/28/93.
7-7-1   Definitions.
   In this chapter: Basic cable rates means the monthly charges for a
subscription to the basic service tier and the associated equipment. Basic
service tier means a separately available service tier to which subscription is
required for access to any other tier of service, including as a minimum, but
not limited to, all must-carry signals, all PEG channels and all domestic
television signals other than superstations. Benchmark means a per channel rate
of charge for cable service and associated equipment which the FCC has
determined is reasonable.
   Cable Act of 1992 means the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992. Cable operator means any person or group of persons:
(a) Who provide cable service over a cable system and directly or through one
or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such a cable system; or (b)
Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the
management and operation of such a cable system. Channel means a unit of cable
service identified and selected by a channel number or similar designation.
Cost of service showing means a filing in which the cable operator attempts to
show that the benchmark rate or the price cap is not sufficient to allow the
cable operator to fully recover the costs of providing the basic service tier
and to continue to attract capital. FCC means the Federal Communications
Commission. Initial basic cable rates means the rates that the cable operator
is charging for the basic service tier, including charges for associated
equipment, at the time the city notifies the cable operator of the city's
qualification and intent to regulate basic cable rates. Must-carrysignal means
the signal of any local broadcast station (except superstations) which is
required to be carried on the basic service tier. PEG channel means the channel
capacity designated for public educational, or governmental use, and facilities
and equipment for the use of that channel capacity. Price cap means the ceiling
set by the FCC on future increases in basic cable rates regulated by the city,
based on a formula using the GNP fixed weight price index, reflecting general
increases in the cost of doing business and changes in overall inflation.
Reasonable rate standard means a per channel rate that is at, or below, the
benchmark or price cap level. Superstation means any non-local broadcast signal
secondarily transmitted by satellite.
7-7-2   Initial review of basic cable rates.
   (a)   Notice. Upon the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter
and the certification of the city by the FCC, the city shall immediately notify
all cable operators in the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested,
that the city intends to regulate subscriber rates charged for the basic
service tier and associated equipment as authorized by the Cable Act of 1992.
   (b)   Cable Operator Response. Within 30 days of receiving notice from the
city, a cable operator shall file with the city, its current rates for the
basic service tier and associated equipment and any supporting material
concerning the reasonableness of its rates.
   (c)   Expedited Determination and Public Hearing.
   (1)   If the city council is able to expeditiously determine that the cable
operator's rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment are within
the FCC's reasonable standard, as determined by the applicable benchmark, the
city council shall: (A) Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may
express their views; and (B) Act to approve the rates within 30 days from the
date the cable operator filed its basic cable rates with the city.
   (2)   If the city council takes no action within 30 days from the date the
cable operator filed its basic cable rates with the city, the proposed rates
will continue in effect.
   (d)   Extended Review Period.
   (1)   If the city council is unable to determine whether the rates in issue
are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard based on the material before it,
or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing, the city council
shall, within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed its basic cable
rates with the city and by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the
following additional periods of time, as applicable, to make a final
determination:
   (A)   90 days if the city council needs more time to ensure that a rate is
within the FCC's reasonable rate standard; or
   (B)   150 days is the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing
seeking to justify a rate above the applicable benchmark.
   (2)   If the city council has not made a decision within the 90 or 150 day
period, the city council shall issue a brief written order at the end of the
period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate account of all amounts
received by reason of the proposed rate and on whose behalf the amounts are
paid.
   (e)   Public Hearing. During the extended review period and before taking
action on the proposed rate, the city council shall hold at least one public
hearing at which interested persons may express their views and record
objections.
   (f)   Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to
the proposed initial basic rate may request the city clerk to record the
objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing
anytime before the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to
be made part of the record, the objector must provide the city clerk with the
objector's name and address.
   (g)   Benchmark Analysis. If a cable operator submits its current basic
cable rate schedule as being in compliance with the FCC's reasonable rate
standard, the city council shall review the rates using the benchmark analysis
in accordance with the standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on the city
council's findings, the initial basic cable rates shall be established as
follows:
   (1)   If the current basic cable rates are below the benchmark, those rates
shall become the initial basic cable rates and the cable operator's rates will
be capped at that level.
   (2)   If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, the rates shall
be the greater of the cable operator's per channel rate on September 30, 1992,
reduced by 10 percent, or the applicable benchmark, adjusted for inflation and
any change in the number of channels occurring between September 30, 1992, and
the initial date of regulation.
   (3)   If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, but the cable
operator's per channel rate was below the benchmark on September 30, 1992, the
initial basic cable rate shall be the benchmark, adjusted for inflation.
   (h)   Cost-of-Service Showings. If a cable operator does not wish to reduce
the rates to the permitted level, the cable operator shall have the opportunity
to submit a cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify an initial basic
cable rates above the FCC's reasonable rate standard. The city council will
review a cost-of-service submission pursuant to FCC standards for cost-of-
service review. The city council may approve initial basic cable rates above
the benchmark if the cable operator makes the necessary showing; however, a
cost-of-service determination resulting in rates below the benchmark or below
the cable operator's September 30, 1992, rates minus 10 percent, will prescribe
the cable operator's new rates.
   (i)   Decision.
   (1)   By formal resolution. After completion of its review of the cable
operator's proposed rates, the city council shall adopt its decision by formal
resolution. The decision shall include one of the following:
   (A)   If the proposal is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard or is
justified by a cost-of-service analysis, the city council shall approve the
initial basic cable rates proposed by the cable operator; or
   (B)   If the proposal is not within the FCC's reasonable rate standard and
the cost-of-service analysis; if any does not justify the proposed rates, the
city council shall establish initial basic cable rates that are within the
FCC's reasonable rate standard or that are justified by a cost-of-service
analysis.
   (2)   Rollbacks and Refunds. If the city council determines that the initial
basic cable rates as submitted exceed the reasonable rate standard or that the
cable operator's cost-of-service showing justifies lower rates, the city
council may order the rates reduced in accordance with paragraph (g) or (h) of
the excessive portion of the rates with interest (computed at applicable rates
published by the Internal Revenue Service for tax refunds and additional tax
payments), retroactive to September 1, 1993. The method for paying any refund
and the interest rate will be in accordance with FCC regulations as directed in
the city council's decision resolution.
   (3)   Statement of Reasons for Decision and Public Notice. If rates proposed
by a cable operator are disapproved in whole or in part, or if there were
objections made by other parties to the proposed rates, the resolution must
state the reasons for the decision and the city council must give public notice
of its decision. Public notice will be given by advertisement in the official
newspaper of the city.
   (j)   Appeal. The city council's decision concerning rates for the basic
service tier or associated equipment, may be appealed to the FCC in accordance
with applicable federal regulations.
7-7-3   Review of request for increase in basic cable rates.
   (a)   Notice. A cable operator in the city who wishes to increase the rates
for the basic service tier or associated equipment shall file a request with
the city and notify all subscribers at least 30 days before the cable operator
desires the increase to take effect. This notice may not be given more often
than annually and not until at least one year after the determination of the
initial basic cable rates.
   (b)   Expedited Determination and Public Hearing.
   (1)   If the city council is able to expeditiously determine that the cable
operator's rate increase request for basic cable service is within the FCC's
reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable price cap, the city
council shall:
   (A)   Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express their
views; and
   (B)   Act to approve the rate increase within 30 days from the date the
cable operator filed its request with the city.
   (2)   If the city council takes no action within 30 days from the date the
cable operator filed its request with the city, the proposed rates will go into
effect.
   (c)   Extended Review Period.
   (1)   If the city council is unable to determine whether the rate increase
is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard based on the material before it,
or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing, the city council
shall, by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the following additional
periods of time, as applicable, to make a final determination:
   (A)   90 days if the city council needs more time to ensure that the
requested increase is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard as determined
by the applicable price cap; and
   (B)   150 days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing
seeking to justify rate increase above the applicable price cap.
   (2)   The proposed rate increase is tolled during the extended review
period.
   (3)   If the city council has not made a decision within the 90- or 150-days
period, the city council shall issue a brief written order at the end of the
period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate account of all amounts
received by reason of the proposed rate increase and on whose behalf the
amounts are paid.
   (d)   Public Hearing. During the extended review period and before taking
action on the requested rate increase, the city council shall hold at least one
public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and record
objections.
   (e)   Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to
the proposed rate increase may request the city clerk to record the objection
during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing anytime before
the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to be made part
of the record, the objector must provide the city clerk with the objector's
name and address.
   (f)   Delayed Determination. If the city council is unable to make a final
determination concerning a requested rate increase within the extended time
period, the cable operator may put the increase into effect, subject to
subsequent refund if the city council later issues a decision disapproving any
portion of the increase.
   (g)   Price Cap Analysis. If a cable operator presents its request for a
rate increase as being in compliance with the FCC's price cap, the city council
shall review the rate using the price cap analysis in accordance with the
standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on the city council's findings, the
basic cable rates shall be established as follows:
   (1)   If the proposed basic cable rate increase is within the price cap
established by the FCC, the proposed rates shall become the new basic cable
rates.
   (2)   If the proposed basic cable rate increase exceeds the price cap
established by the FCC, the city council shall disapprove the proposed rate
increase and order an increase that is in compliance with the price cap.
   (h)   Cost-of-Service Showings. If a cable operator submits a cost-of-
service showing in an attempt to justify a rate increase above the price cap,
the city council will review the submission pursuant to the FCC standards for
cost-of-service review. The city council may approve a rate increase above the
price cap if the cable operator makes the necessary showing; however, a cost-
of-service determination resulting in a rate below the price cap or below the
cable operator's then current rate will prescribe the cable operator's new
rate.
   (i)   Decision. The city council's decision concerning the requested rate
increase, shall be adopted by formal resolution. If a rate increase proposed by
a cable operator is disapproved in whole or in part, or if objections were made
by other parties to the proposed rate increase, the resolution must state the
reasons for the decision. Objections may be made at the public hearing by a
person requesting the city clerk to record the objection or may be submitted in
writing at anytime before the decision resolution is adopted.
   (j)   Refunds.
   (1)   The city council may order refunds of subscriber's rate payments with
interest if:
   (A)   The city council was unable to make a decision within the extended
time period as described in paragraph (c) above; and
   (B)   The cable operator implemented the rate increase at the end of the
extended review period; and
   (C)   The city council determines that the rate increase as submitted
exceeds the applicable price cap or that the cable operator failed to justify
the rate increase by a cost-of-service showing, and the city council
disapproves any portion of the rate increase.
   (2)   The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in
accordance with FCC regulations as directed in the city council's decision
resolution.
   (k)   Appeal. The city council's decision concerning rates for the basic
service tier or associated equipment, may be appealed to the FCC in accordance
with applicable federal regulations.
7-7-4   Cable operator information.
   (a)   City May Require.
   (1)   In those cases when the cable operator has submitted initial rates or
proposed an increase that exceeds the reasonable rate standard, the city
council may require the cable operator to produce information in addition to
that submitted, including proprietary information be kept confidential in
accordance with this section.
   (2)   In cases where initial or proposed rates comply with the reasonable
rate standard, the city council may request additional information only in
order to document that the cable operator's rates are in accord with the
standard.
   (b)   Request for Confidentiality.
   (1)   A cable operator submitting information to the city council may
request in writing that the information not be made routinely available for
public inspection. A copy of the request shall be attached to and cover all of
the information and all copies of the information to which it applies.
   (2)   If feasible, the information to which the request applies shall be
physically separated from any information to which the request does not apply.
If this is not feasible, the portion of the information to which the request
applies shall be identified.
   (3)   Each request shall contain a statement of the reasons for withholding
inspection and a statement of the facts upon which those reasons are based.
   (4)   Casual requests which do not comply with the requirements of this
subsection, shall not be considered.
   (c)   City Council Action. Requests which comply with the requirements of
subsection (b), will be acted upon by the city council. The city council will
grant the request if the cable operator presents by a preponderance of the
evidence, a case for nondisclosure consistent with applicable federal
regulations. If the request is granted, the ruling will be placed in a public
file in lieu of the information withheld from public inspection. If the request
does not present a case for nondisclosure and the city council denies the
request, the city council shall take one of the following actions.
   (1)   If the information has been submitted voluntarily without any
direction from the city, the cable operator may request that city return the
information without considering it. Ordinarily, the city will comply with this
request. Only in the unusual instance that the public interest so requires,
will the information be made available for public inspection.
   (2)   If the information was required to be submitted by the city council,
the information will be made available for public inspection.
   (d)   Appeal. If the city council denies the request for confidentiality,
the cable operator may seek review of that decision from the FCC within five
working days of the city council's decision and the release of the information
will be stayed pending review.
7-7-5   Automatic rate adjustments.
   (a)   Annual Inflation Adjustment. In accordance with FCC regulations, the
cable operator may adjust its capped base per channel rate for the basic
service tie annually by the final GNP-PI index.
   (b)   Other External Costs.
   (1)   The FCC regulations also allow the cable operator to increase its rate
for the basic service tier automatically to reflect certain external cost
factors to the extent that the increase in cost of those factors exceeds the
GNP-PI. These factors include retransmission consent fees, programming costs,
state and local taxes applicable to the provision of cable television service,
and costs of franchise requirements. The total cost of an increase in a
franchise fee may be automatically added to the base per channel rate, without
regard to its relation to the GNP-PI.
   (2)   For all categories of external costs other than retransmission consent
and franchise fees the starting date for measuring changes in external costs
for which the basic service per channel rate may be adjusted will be the date
on which the basic service tier becomes subject to regulation on February 28,
1994, whichever occurs first. The permitted per channel charge may not be
adjusted for costs of retransmission consent fees or changes in those fees
incurred before October 6, 1994.
   (c)   Notification and Review. The cable operator shall notify the city at
least 30 days in advance of a rate increase based on automatic adjustment
items. The city shall review the increase to determine whether the item or
items qualify as automatic adjustments. If the city makes no objection within
30 days of receiving notice of the increase, the increase may go into effect.
7-7-6   Enforcement.
   (a)   Refunds. The city may order the cable operator to refund to
subscribers a portion of previously paid rates under the following
circumstances:
   (1)   A portion of the previously paid rates have been determined to be in
excess of the permitted tier charge or above the actual cost of equipment; or
   (2)   The cable operator has failed to comply with a valid rate order issued
by the city.
   (b)   Fines. If the cable operator fails to comply with a rate decision or
refund order, the cable operator shall be subject to a fine of $500 and/or 30
days in jail for each day the cable operator fails to comply.
TITLE 8 MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
8-1-1   Adoption of state law.
   There is hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof as if set out in
full those provisions of state law known as the "Uniform Act Regulating Traffic
on Highways" as contained in S.C. Code, title 56, chapter 5.
State Law Reference: Municipal courts authorized to try violation of state
traffic laws, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 56-5-6150.
Editorial Note: The cited state law may be incorporated by reference in an
ordinance by municipalities, Op. Atty. Gen., No. 2460, p. 125. (1967-68).
Municipalities may further regulate traffic, provided the additional
regulations do not conflict with state law, S.C. Code, Secs. 56-5-30 and 56-5-
710.
8-1-2   Only licensed operators may drive vehicles.
   No vehicle shall be operated within the city limits other than by a properly
licensed driver.
State Law Reference: Driver's license, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 56-1-20 et seq.
8-1-3   Obedience to traffic laws.
   Drivers of all vehicles shall abide by signals of traffic officers and all
automatic and stationary traffic signs and signals, and all laws enacted in the
"Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways" within the city limits.  (Amended
by Ord. of 11/10/08)
8-1-4   Title applicable to all streets, highways, etc., in city.
   The provisions of this chapter relating to the operation of vehicles shall
apply to the operation of vehicles upon any and all streets, alleys, highways
and roadways located within the corporate limits of the city. (Code 1965, Sec.
18-7)
8-1-5   Obedience to title.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden, or to fail to
perform any act required in this title. (Code 1965, Sec. 18-2)
Chapter 2 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
State Law Reference: Powers of local authorities, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 56-5-
710.
8-2-1   Speed restrictions.
   The speed limit for the streets or portions of streets within the city shall
be as indicated by signs giving notice thereof.
State Law Reference: General rules as to maximum speed limits, S.C. Code 1976,
Sec. 56-5-1520; alteration of speeds by local authorities, S.C. Code, Sec. 56-
5-1540.
8-2-2   Designation of through streets, stop intersections, yield
intersections.
   The city council may designate through streets and stop or yield right-of-
way intersections. Appropriate signs or markings shall be installed giving
notice of such designation. (Code 1965, Sec. 18-39)
8-2-3   Zone of quiet.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person
operating a motor vehicle in such zone shall sound the horn or other warning
device of the vehicle, except in an emergency. (Code 1965, Sec. 18-56)
8-2-4   Designation of and driving on one-way streets.
   The city council may designate any street or any separate roadway under its
jurisdiction for one-way traffic and shall erect appropriate signs giving
notice thereof. Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic, a
vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated. (Code 1965, Sec. 18-
51)
8-2-5   Corner cutting.
   No operator of a vehicle shall attempt to avoid obedience to any traffic-
control sign, signal or device by driving upon or through any private property.
8-2-6   Careless operation of vehicles.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle without care and
caution, and full regard for the safety of persons and property. Any person
failing to do so shall be guilty of careless driving or riding. The operation
of any vehicle when the same or any of its appliances is not in proper or safe
condition shall be prima facie evidence of careless driving or riding. Careless
operation shall be unlawful and may be a lesser included offense of reckless
driving.
8-2-7   "Fixing" traffic tickets.
   It shall be unlawful for any official or employee of the city to "fix" or
cancel any ticket or summons issued by the police department for a violation of
this chapter or any other traffic ordinance. (Code 1965, Sec. 18-12)
State Law Reference: Uniform traffic tickets, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 56-7-10 et
seq.
8-2-8   Pedestrians' obedience to traffic-control signals.
   Pedestrians shall strictly comply with the directions of any official
traffic-control signal. (Code 1965, Sec. 18-127)
State Law Reference: Pedestrians, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 56-5-3110 et seq.
8-2-9   Accident reports.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident within the city shall file
with the police department a copy of the report filed with the South Carolina
Department of Highways and Public Transportation. (Code 1965, Sec. 18-115)
State Law Reference: Accident reports, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 56-5-1270;
municipalities may require reports, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 56-5-1360.
8-2-10   Prohibition of commercial/industrial trucks using certain streets as
thoroughfares.
   (a)   Purpose. In order to protect the citizens, environment, natural
resources, roadways, peace and quiet, and/or historic districts of the city of
West Columbia, council may designate by ordinance certain roadways as "no
through traffic to commercial/industrial trucks." Roadways designated as such
shall be clearly posted at the entrances to these areas.  When a roadway or
route has been designated as closed to commercial/industrial trucks, it shall
be unlawful for any vehicle so defined by this section to use the roadway or
route as a throughway or means of passage to another destination. For the
purposes of this provision, "commercial/industrial truck" shall be defined as
any straight body, combination or semi vehicle consisting of a single or double
axle tractor.
   (b)   Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two
hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days.
   (c)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
following:
   (1)   Vehicles engaged in the delivery of goods, services, or emergency
assistance to the businesses, residences, or establishments specifically
located within the designated area;
   (2)   Public service vehicles engaged in their course of business;
   (3)   Buses engaged in the transportation of school children and buses
engaged for the primary purpose of transporting passengers within the urban
area.
   (d)   Designated Areas. The following are designated as "no through traffic
to commercial/industrial trucks" areas:
   (1)   Ninth Street (S-370) between Meeting Street (US 1) and Knox Abbott
Drive (US 21/176/321);
   (2)   Decatur Street between Airport Boulevard (SC Route 302) and Platt
Springs Road (SC Route 602). (Ord. of 12/7/99)
Chapter 3 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
State Law Reference: Stopping, standing and parking, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 56-5-
2510 et seq.; municipalities to designate parking spaces for handicapped, S.C.
Code 1976, Sec. 56-3-1965.
8-3-1   Parking prohibited on certain streets.
   No person shall park a vehicle where signs prohibiting parking are erected
on streets.
8-3-2   Parking prohibited during certain hours in designated places.
   When signs are erected in a block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle between the hours and on the days so designated.
8-3-3   Parking time limited in designated places.
   When signs are erected in a block giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle for longer than the period and between the hours so designated.
8-3-4   Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the purpose of:
   (1)   Displaying it for sale; or
   (2)   Advertising of any nature whatsoever.(Code 1965, Sec. 18-92 (a))
8-3-5   Parking for certain purposes prohibited; removal.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to store or park a motor vehicle on the streets
or sidewalks of the city for the purpose of making repairs to such vehicle,
except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
   (b)   Upon failure of the owner to remove a vehicle in violation of this
section within 24 hours after notice is attached thereto, the city may cause
the vehicle to be removed and the owner shall be charged for the towing and
storing of such vehicle in addition to any penalty imposed. (Code 1965, Sec.
18-92, as amended by Ord. of 4/7/70)
8-3-6   Time limit on certain vehicles; exceptions.
   (a)   No person shall leave unattended or park any vehicle or truck in
excess of two (2) tons upon the right-of-way of any street in the city for a
period in excess of two (2) hours, day or night.
   (b)   The time limitation imposed by this section shall not apply to any
vehicle which is actually engaged in lawful loading or unloading.
8-3-7   Fines for parking violations.
   (a)   The following fines for parking violations are hereby established:
 
Parking Violation                       Amount of Fine
Parking in a fire zone                  $50.00
Blocking a fire hydrant                 $50.00
Obstructing traffic                     $25.00
Parking on the wrong side of the street $15.00
Parking on a yellow curb                $15.00
Blocking a sidewalk                     $15.00
Double parking                          $15.00
Leaving a key in an unattended vehicle  $25.00
Blocking a driveway                     $15.00
Other parking violations                $15.00
 
   (b)   If the fine is not paid within thirty (30) days of issuance, the fine
shall increase by one-half (1/2) of the original amount for every thirty (30)
days that it is not paid.  (Ord. of 10/7/08)
Chapter 4 BICYCLES
State Law Reference: Bicyclists, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 56-5-3410 et seq.
8-4-1   Certificate of registration required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle propelled
wholly or in part by muscular power upon any of the streets, alleys or public
highways of the city without first obtaining a certificate of registration from
the chief of police and attaching to the bicycle a metallic or other suitable
registration plate. (Code 1965, Sec. 18-144)
8-4-2   City to provide registration plates, seals and cards.
   The city shall provide metallic or other suitable registration plates or
seals, together with registration cards. (Code 1965, Sec. 18-145)
8-4-3   Numbering, design and identification of plates and cards.
   Metallic or other suitable registration plates and registration cards are to
be numbered in numerical order beginning with number one (1); the design and
identification lettering thereon shall be approved by the chief of police.
(Code 1965, Sec. 18-146)
8-4-4   Duty of chief of police to provide plates.
   It shall be the duty of the chief of police and his assistants to see that
the metallic or other suitable registration plate provided for in this chapter
is attached to the frame of each bicycle and to issue a corresponding
registration card to the owner of each bicycle upon payment of the registration
fee herein required. (Code 1965, Sec. 18-147)
8-4-5   Record of registrations.
   The police department shall keep a permanent register in which shall be
entered the name, address and age of the owner of each registered bicycle, the
date of registration and sufficient information to identify each bicycle. (Code
1965, Sec. 18-148)
8-4-6   Registration plate to be attached to bicycle during period of
operation.
   The metallic registration plate provided for in this chapter shall remain
attached to the bicycle for which it was issued during the period the bicycle
is operated within the city. (Code 1965, Sec. 18-149)
8-4-7   Transfer of ownership.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or transfer ownership of any
bicycle without reporting to the chief of police within 48 hours from the time
thereof, full and complete information relative to the transfer, so that the
bicycle may be registered in the name of the transferee. The purchaser or
transferee of any bicycle shall apply for a transfer of registration therefor
within five (5) days from the time the bicycle is acquired by him. (Code 1965,
Sec. 18-150)
8-4-8   Reports of secondhand dealers.
   All persons engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles or any
parts of secondhand bicycles, are hereby required to report to the chief of
police of the city within 48 hours after acquiring any secondhand bicycle or
parts thereof, such report to include the registration number of each bicycle,
a description of each bicycle acquired and the frame number thereof, together
with the name and address of the person from whom the same was acquired. In
case of the purchase of any parts of bicycles, the report shall describe each
part and give the name and address of the person from whom the same was
acquired. (Code 1965, Sec. 18-151)
8-4-9   Mutilation, etc., of plates, numbers and cards.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously remove,
destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle frame registered pursuant
to this chapter. It shall also be unlawful for any person to willfully or
maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any registration card or
registration plate issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter during
time of which the registration card or plate is in effect; provided, however,
that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the chief of police from stamping a
number on the frame of the bicycle on which no serial number can be found or on
which the number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes.
(Code 1965, Sec. 18-152)
8-4-10   Registration fee.
   The registration fee to be paid for each bicycle registered shall be as
fixed by council from time to time. Once a bicycle has been registered in a
given name the registration thereon may be transferred from one owner to
another without the payment of an additional fee. The fee required shall cover
all charges incident to registering and issuance of registration plates and
cards. All fees collected shall be turned over to the city clerk-treasurer and
accounted for in the same manner as other general fund revenue. (Code 1965,
Sec. 18-153)
8-4-11   Impounding.
   Any bicycle operated by the owner or other person lawfully in custody
thereof in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, may be ordered
removed from the streets of the city by any officer of the city, and the person
operating the same in violation of this chapter shall not be permitted to
operate the bicycle on the streets of the city for a period not exceeding 30
days in the discretion of the municipal judge. (Code 1965, Sec. 18-154)
8-4-12   Control of bicycle.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle crosswise or curving
to and fro, or to ride without control of the bicycle on any street in the city
limits. (Code 1965, Sec. 18-162)
8-4-13   Riding on sidewalks.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle upon any sidewalk
or pedestrian walkway in the city. (Code 1965, Sec. 18-163)
8-4-14   Riding without hands on handlebars.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle on any street, alley
or highway in the city without having his hands upon the handlebars. (Code
1965, Sec. 18-164)
TITLE 9 OFFENSES
Chapter 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Cross Reference: General penalty, Sec.
1-3-49; nuisances, Sec.
6-1-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, Sec.
6-3-1.
State Law Reference: Fortunetelling to promote business, S.C. Code 1976, Sec.
16-17-690; coin-operated devices, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 12-21-2710 et seq.;
unlawful games and betting, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 16-19-40; removal of doors
from abandoned airtight containers, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 16-3-1010; giving
false information to law enforcement officer or member of fire department or
rescue squad, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 16-17-725.
9-1-1   Crime watch zones.
   The police department may designate crime watch zones by erecting
appropriate signs at such locations as determined by the department. (Ord. of
7/5/83)
State Law Reference: Signs designating crime watch areas, S.C. Code 1976, Sec.
57-1-90.
9-1-2   Inhalation of vapors or fumes.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally inhale vapors or fumes
of any substance for the purpose of inducing euphoria, hallucination or
intoxication or to visit or resort to any place within the city with knowledge
that such acts are being conducted, practiced or carried on. (Ord. of 8/7/73)
9-1-3   Parking in places designated for handicapped persons.
   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in a parking place clearly
designated for handicapped persons unless the vehicle bears the distinguishing
license plate or placard provided in South Carolina Code Section 56-3-1960. It
shall be unlawful for any person who is not handicapped or who is not
transporting a handicapped person to exercise the parking privileges granted
handicapped persons pursuant to South Carolina Code Section 56-3-1960. Any
person violating the provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction shall be fined one hundred dollars or imprisoned for not more
than thirty days for a first offense and each subsequent offense. (Ord. of 3/3/
92)
9-1-4   Stop on command of officer; failure to obey officer.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person in the municipality to willfully and
knowingly fail or refuse to stop when signalled, hailed, or commanded to stop
by a policeman or other officer of the municipality. This applies to
pedestrians, pedicyclists, and motorized vehicle operators.
   (b)   It is unlawful for any person to fail to obey the commands of a
legally constituted police officer in the course of his duty. The definition of
police officer shall also include any person duly appointed to monitor and
direct traffic, including, but not limited to, school crossing guards.
   (c)   Violators of this provisions shall be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned for not more than 30 days. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day that a violation occurs. (Ord. of 7/17/95)
9-1-5   Sale or use of synthetic drugs prohibited.
   (a)   The following words, terms, and phrases when used in this chapter
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicated a different meaning. Definitions shall be equally
applicable to both singular and plural forms of any of the terms herein
defined.
      Synthetic marijuana shall mean and refer to all chemical compounds
intended to replicate, mimic, or cause a similar reaction to the effects of
marijuana or cannabis. Such compounds are known or marketed under names
including but not limited to:
         a.   Black Mamba;
         b.   Blaze;
         c.   Bliss;
         d.   Bombay Blue;
         e.   Fake Weed;
         f.   Genie;
         g.   Herbal incense;
         h.   Herbal smoking blends;
         i.   HU-210 Cannabicylohexanol;
         j.   JWH-018;
         k.   JWH-073;
         l.   K2;
         m.   Potpourri;
         n.   Spice;
         o.   THC;
         p.   Zohai.
      Synthetic cocaine shall mean and refer to all chemical compounds intended
to replicate, mimic, or cause a similar reaction to the effects of cocaine,
ecstasy, amphetamines, LSD, Khat, and other psychoactive drug with stimulant
properties which acts as a norepinephrine-dopamine reuptake inhibitor (NDRI).
Such compounds are known or marketed under names including but not limited to:
         a.   Aura;
         b.   Bath sales or bath salts-like substances;
         c.   Bliss;
         d.   Blue Silk;
         e.   Bonzai Grow;
         f.   Charge Plus;
         g.   Cloud Nine;
         h.   Dawn;
         i.   Drone or Drone IV;
         j.   Energy-1;
         k.   Euphoria;
         l.   Bake Bath Salts;
         m.   Fake Fertilizer;
         n.   Fake Insect Repellant;
         o.   Hurricane Charlie;
         p.   Ivory Wave;
         q.   KS;
         r.   Lovey Dovey;
         s.   Lunar Wave;
         t.   Magic;
         u.   MDK;
         v.   MDPV;
         w.   Meow Meow;
         x.   Mephedrone;
         y.   Methoxymethcathinone;
         z.   Methylone;
         aa.   Ocean;
         bb.   Ocean Burst;
         cc.   Plant Food;
         dd.   Pure Ivory;
         ee.   Purple Wave;
         ff.   PV;
         gg.   Red Dove;
         hh.   Red X;
         ii.   Scarface;
         jj.   Serenity Now;
         kk.   Snow Lepard;
         ll.   Stardust;
         mm.   Super Coke;
         nn.   Vanilla;
         oo.   Vanilla Sky;
         pp.   White Dove;
         qq.   White Knight;
         rr.   White Lightening.
      Package means each single unit marketing package or packaging for
synthetic marijuana and/or bath salts.
   (b)   Offenses; penalties.
      (1)   A person or entity that violates the provisions contained in this
section shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a civil fine in the
amount of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
      (2)   A person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a
business location who fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall
be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a civil fine in the amount of not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
      (3)   The possession, sale, distribution, or use of each separate package
of synthetic marijuana or synthetic cocaine shall constitute and be punished as
a separate occurrence and infraction of this section.
      (4)   In order to enforce infractions of this section, the city shall
serve a uniform ordinance summons upon the infractor.
      (5)   In addition to the civil fines established in this section, three
(3) or more violations of this section by a person or entity that owns,
manages, operates, or otherwise controls a place of business in the City of
West Columbia shall be a reason for and may result in the suspension or
revocation of any business license issued for the premises on which the
infractions occurred.
      (6)   A violation of provisions of this section, by selling, marketing,
or distributing synthetic marijuana or synthetic cocaine shall constitute a
nuisance in the City of West Columbia.
   (c)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, advertise,
sell, purchase, possess with the intent to consume, transfer, or use synthetic
cocaine or synthetic marijuana with the City of West Columbia.
      (2)   Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished within the jurisdictional
limits of the West Columbia municipal court.
      (3)   The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the West
Columbia Police Department.  (Ord. of 12/6/11)
Chapter 2 OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC PEACE
Editor's Note
State Law Reference: Pointing firearms, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 16-23-410;
concealed weapons, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 16-23-460; unlawful carrying of pistol,
S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 16-23-20; wearing masks, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 16-7-110;
burning crosses, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 16-7-120; engaging in riot, S.C. Code
1976, Sec. 16-5-120; disturbance of religious worship, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 16-
17-520. Cross Reference: Barking dogs, Sec. 6-3-25.
Sec. 9-2-1 Disorderly conduct.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any of the following acts
in any public place, or sufficiently near to any such place or to any residence
or place of business as to disturb or annoy any other person: (1) Riotous,
tumultuous, violent or obstreperous conduct of any kind; (2) Fighting; (3)
Uttering obscene remarks or making obscene gestures; (4) Offering violence to
another; or (5) Disclaiming or crying out in a noisy, obscene or abusive
manner. StateLawReference: Disorderly conduct, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 16-17-530.
Sec. 9-2-2 Resisting, interfering with employees and officers.
   Any person who shall resist or interfere with any employee or officer of the
city in the discharge of his duties shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Sec. 9-2-3 Disturbing assemblies.
   It shall be unlawful to interrupt or disturb any audience assembled in any
place of amusement by any noise, loud talking or other annoyance. (Code 1965,
Sec. 12-5)
Sec. 9-2-4 Disturbing court.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or disrupt any court
proceedings in the city. (Code 1965, Sec. 12-6)
Sec. 9-2-5 Weapons; discharging; exceptions.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful to fire or discharge any pistol, rifle, firearm,
bow and arrow, slingshot, "BB" gun, air gun or other weapon or device by which
a projectile is fired or discharged; provided, however, that the chief of
police has the authority to waive the provisions of this section for theatrical
and like performances.
   (b)   This section shall not apply to police or other law enforcement
officers while in the exercise and discharge of their duties nor shall it be
construed to abridge or abrogate the right of defense of person or property.
Sec. 9-2-6 Noise.
   (a)   The creation of any unreasonably loud, excessive and disturbing noises
in the city is hereby prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to make,
continue, or cause to be continued any loud, excessive, or disturbing noise, or
any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace or safety of others within the city.
   (b)   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing
and excessive noises in violation of this section; provided, however, that such
enumeration shall not be construed to be exclusive of other noises:
   (1)   The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus, streetcar or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a
danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or
if in motion only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and
deceleration of the vehicle is intended or to signal a backing-up of the
vehicle; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably
loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for any unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time;
   (2)   The playing or operation of any radio, television, phonograph, stereo,
computer, CD player, cassette player, loudspeaker or similar sound-producing or
sound-emitting device or any musical instrument in such a manner, or with such
volume, particularly during the hours between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to
unreasonably disturb any person in the vicinity thereof;
   (3)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar or vehicle so out of
repair, so loaded or operated in such manner as to create loud or unnecessary
noises such as spinning or squealing tires, grating, grinding, rattling or
other noise;
   (4)   The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler,
except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of
danger;
   (5)   The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal-combustion engine, motor vehicle or boat engine, except
through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises therefrom;
   (6)   The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air, except
pneumatic drills, unless the noise thereby created is effectively muffled and
reduced;
   (7)   The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair
of any building in a residential or business district other than between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in case of urgent
necessity in the interest of public safety, and then only with a permit from
the director of public safety, which permit may be renewed for a period of
three (3) days or less while the emergency continues;
   (8)   The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any
school, institution of learning, or court while the same are in session, or
adjacent to any hospital or church or place of worship, which unreasonably
interferes with the working of such institution;
   (9)   The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with the
loading or unloading of any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales,
boxes, crates and containers;
   (10)   The sounding of any bell or gong attached to any building or premises
which is reasonably calculated to disturb a person of ordinary disposition if
such person were in the vicinity thereof;
   (11)   The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which
disturb the quiet and peace of the neighborhood;
   (12)   The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for
the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance,
show or sale of merchandise;
   (13)   The use of loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other vehicles.
   (c)   An unreasonably loud, excessive or disturbing noise is defined as any
sound regulated by this section, which is plainly audible at a distance of
fifty (50) feet from its source.
   (d)   Noises audible in public streets or public places which violate the
standards of this article are hereby declared to be public nuisances which may
be abated by any law officer.
   (e)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
   (1)   Noises from any authorized emergency vehicle;
   (2)   Noise from church bells or chimes;
   (3)   Noise resulting from events of an entertainment or recreational nature
which are held in the city, parks, public buildings or elsewhere such as to
broadcast programs of music, speeches or general entertainment as a part and in
recognition of the community celebration of national, state or city events,
public festivals or outstanding events to the extent allowed under the terms of
the permit issued by the city administrator or his/her designee; and
   (4)   Noise resulting from parades to the extent allowed under the terms of
the permit issued by the city administrator or his/her designee.
   (f)   The owning, possession or harboring of any animal which frequently, or
for continued duration, howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes other sounds
which create excessive and unnecessary noise across a residential or commercial
real property line or within a noise sensitive area. For the purpose of this
chapter, "barkingdog" shall mean a dog that barks, bays, cries, howls or makes
any other noise continuously or incessantly for a period of ten (10) minutes,
or barks intermittently for one-half (1/2) hour or more to the disturbance of
any person at any time of day or night, regardless of whether the dog is
physically situated in or upon private property. However, a dog shall not be
deemed a "barking dog" if, at the time the dog is barking or making any other
noise, a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon property in or
upon which the dog is situated.
   (g)   The complaints of more than one (1) persons and/or the complaint of a
police officer are prima facie evidence that a sound regulated by this section
annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or
safety of others in violation of this article.
   (h)   Violation of this article is a misdemeanor and is punishable, as
provided in chapter 6 of title 1 of the code of ordinances of the City of West
Columbia.
   (i)   Any persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in
an amount not exceeding nine hundred dollars ($900.00) or be imprisoned in the
county jail for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days or by both such fine
and imprisonment. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
   (j)   In addition to the penalty provided by subsection (i) of this section,
and as an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device,
instrument or machinery in violation of any provision of this chapter, which
operation or maintenance causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons
of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace
of residents in the area, shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public
nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or
injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. of 10/3/00, as
amended by Ord. of 5/3/05)
Sec. 9-2-7 Obstructing streets, sidewalks, etc., prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for persons to obstruct any street, alley, park,
square, public right-of-way or sidewalk by congregating in crowds, except when
incident to a lawful parade or assembly.
CrossReference: Assemblies, parades and processions, Sec.
7-6-1 et seq.
Sec. 9-2-8 Drinking in public places.
   (a)   No person shall drink any alcoholic beverages, including beer and wine
on the streets, road rights-of-way, sidewalks, parks, or other public places in
the municipality. This prohibition includes private property not attended by
the owner and instances in which the owner has not given approval for the
activity. (b) Violators of this provision shall be fined not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation occurs
or continues. (Ord. of 7/17/95)
9-2-9   Disposition of alcoholic beverages in possession of persons committing
alcohol related offenses.
   Alcoholic beverages possessed by offenders at time of arrest shall be seized
and, following court disposition, destroyed or otherwise appropriately disposed
of in a manner prescribed by the chief of police in the absence of court
directed disposition. Alcoholic beverages shall not be returned to an offender
upon release from custody. (Ord. of 7/17/95)
9-2-10   Drunkenness.
   (a)   Any person who shall be found drunk or intoxicated in the corporate
limits of the municipality in any place, public or private, so as to be
offensive to others or a danger to himself or others, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (b)   Violators of this provisions shall be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned for not more than 30 days. (Ord. of 7/17/95)
9-2-11   Loitering.
   (a)   Definitions, as used in this section, "loitering" shall means
remaining idle in essentially one location, spending time idly, loafing or
walking around aimlessly in a public place, including vacant lots and other
private property unattended by the owner or to conduct oneself in such a manner
as to:
   (1)   Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person;
   (2)   Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace;
   (3)   Obstruct or hinder the free passage of vehicles or pedestrians;
   (4)   Obstruct or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place;
   (5)   Engage in begging;
   (6)   Engage in gambling;
   (7)   Engage in prostitution;
   (8)   Solicit or engage in any business, trade or commercial transaction
unless specifically authorized or licensed to do so;
   (9)   Unlawfully use or possess an unlawful drug;
   (10)   Unlawfully use or possess beverages, beer or wine.
   (b)   Violation. Any person loitering in any public place as defined above
may be ordered by any law enforcement officer to leave that place. Any person
who shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by a law enforcement
officer shall be guilty of a violation of this section. Nothing in this section
shall be construed or enforced in such a manner as to restrict freedom of
speech, religion, or association.
   (c)   Penalty. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be fined
not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than thirty days. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a violation occurs or
continues. (Ord. of 7/17/95)
9-2-12   Odors.
   (a)   No objectionable odor shall be detectable beyond the property line and
the emission of odors, regardless of type, shall not be such as to be
detrimental to the value and use of adjacent property. It shall be unlawful for
any person, business, or entity to make, continue, or cause to be continued any
objectionable odor.
   (b)   "Objectionable odor" shall be defined as an event for which the city
receives five (5) or more odor complaints from different individuals
independent from each other within a three (3)-day period relating to a single
odor generator and/or the complaint of a code enforcement officer, building
official, police officer, and/or fire department personnel. The complaints of
more than five (5) individuals and/or the complaint of a code enforcement
officer, building official, police officer, and/or fire department personnel
are prima facie evidence that an odor regulated by this section is in violation
of this chapter.
   (c)   Odor reporting. Individuals may report odors through any means
established by the city, including but not limited to the Code Compliance
Hotline and online service requests. For the report to be considered, the
complainant must leave his or her name and address, the date, time, location,
description, place of detection of the odor, and duration/ intensity of the
reported odor.
   (d)   Once an objectionable odor has been reported by the requisite number
of individuals or a code enforcement officer, building official, police
officer, and/or fire department personnel, the investigating code enforcement
officer shall be responsible for identifying, monitoring, investigating,
citing, and/ or reporting on the objectionable odor, including, but not limited
to: visiting the area from which the complaint arose preparing a report showing
the time of day, weather conditions (temperature, wind direction, humidity,
etc.), describing any odor, and, if possible, identifying the source of the
odor and estimating its duration. The investigating code enforcement officer
shall have the right to inspect in an effort to determine the source of odor.
   (e)   Violation of this section is a misdemeanor and is punishable, as
provided in Chapter 6 of Title 1 of the code of ordinances of the City of West
Columbia.
      (1)   Any persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter may be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in
an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be imprisoned in the
county jail for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days or by both such fine
and imprisonment. In addition to the fine, all court costs shall be imposed on
and paid by the offender.
      (2)   Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. Service shall be
made as set forth in section 6-1-6 of the code of ordinances of the City of
West Columbia.
   (f)   In addition to the penalty provided by subsection (e) of this section,
and as an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device,
instrument, facility, or machinery in violation of any provision of this
chapter, which operation or maintenance causes discomfort or annoyance to
reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort,
repose, health or peace of residents in the area, shall be deemed, and is
declared to be, a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by
a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
Nothing in this section shall be a waiver of the city's right to file a civil
action to enforce the provisions of this section or any other rights imposed by
law, ordinance, or statute.
   (g)   Exemptions. Open burning, recreational fires, and portable outdoor
fireplaces shall be exempt from the provisions of this section and shall be
governed by the applicable fire code. To the extent the odor is determined to
be caused by a violation of the City of West Columbia Fats, Oils, and Grease
Management Program, the West Columbia Fats, Oils, and Grease Management Program
will control. (Ord. of 2/6/18)
Chapter 3 OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
State Law Reference: Entering premises after warning or refusing to leave on
request, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 16-11-620; altering and removing landmarks, S.C.
Code 1976, Sec. 16-11-680; petit larceny, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 16-13-30;
receiving stolen goods, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 16-13-180; obtaining signature or
property by false pretenses, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 16-13-240; obtaining property
under false tokens or letters, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 16-13-260; failure to
return books, etc. borrowed from libraries, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 16-13-340;
securing property by fraudulent impersonation of officer, S.C. Code 1976, Sec.
16-13-290; removing or destroying fences, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 16-11-650;
mutilation of monuments or tombstones, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 16-17-590;
destruction of graves and graveyards, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 16-17-600; entry on
another's lands without permission, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 16-11-610; entry on
another's lands after notice, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 16-11-600.
Cross Reference: Damaging city property, Sec.
3-1-31; burning matter on streets and sidewalks, Sec. 3-1-36; unlawful use of
city water, Sec.
4-2-5.
9-3-1   Damaging property.
   Whoever shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently cut, mutilate, deface,
or otherwise injure any real or personal property belonging to the city or any
other person, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Code 1965, Sec. 12-3)
State Law Reference: Malicious injury to property, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 16-11-
510 et seq.
9-3-2   Advertising materials.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to be placed any
sign, billboard, advertisement or advertising materials on any public property,
or on any private property without the consent of the owner of such property.
9-3-3   Littering prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to litter within the city by willfully
or negligently throwing or dropping bottles, cans, literature, reading matter
or other papers, or trash of any kind, or by depositing such items in any
manner that results in their being blown or scattered.
State Law Reference: Littering, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 16-11-700.
Cross Reference: Garbage and refuse, Sec.
6-2-1 et seq.
9-3-4   Abandoned motor vehicles/determination of abandonment.
   For the purposes of this article, motor vehicle means any self-propelled
land, water, or air vehicle which can be used for towing or transporting people
or materials, including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, buses, motor
homes, motorized campers, boats, airplanes, motorcycles, motor scooters,
tractors, snowmobiles, dune buggies, all terrain vehicles, or other off-the-
road vehicles.
   For the purposes of this article, a vehicle shall be determined to have been
abandoned if:
   (1)   The motor vehicle is required to be registered by the State of South
Carolina if operated in South Carolina; and
   (2)   The motor vehicle is left on private or city property without the
consent of the owner, occupant or lessee thereof for a period of time exceeding
seven (7) days; or
   (3)   The vehicle is left on any public street, highway or road right-of-way
for a period of time greater than forty-eight (48) consecutive hours. (Ord. of
9/17/01, as amended by Ord. of 4/18/11)
9-3-5   Abandonment prohibited; penalty.
   (a)   No person shall abandon any motor vehicle on any public street or
public grounds or upon any privately owned property. No person controlling
privately owned property shall permit any abandoned or unsafe vehicle to remain
thereupon.
   (b)   (1)   Violation of this section is unlawful and is a misdemeanor and
shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding thirty (30) days, or both, in the
discretion of the court. In addition to the fine, all court costs shall be
imposed on and paid by the offender; however, nothing in this section relieves
the owner of the vehicle from paying the costs described in section
9-3-7.
      (2)   Each day any violation of any provision of this code or of any
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. of 9/17/01,
as amended by Ord. of 4/18/11)
   State Law Reference: S.C. Code Ann. §§ 56-5-5810 et seq., § 56-3-20, §§ 29-
15-10 et seq.
9-3-6   Removal; notice to owner.
   (a)   Any abandoned motor vehicle may be removed to a storage area for
safekeeping by or at the direction of the police department or such other
person charged with enforcing the provisions hereof.
   (b)   Notwithstanding subsection (a) hereof, a vehicle determined to be
abandoned only because it meets the criteria of subsection
9-3-4(2) shall not be removed from a privately owned premises unless the
written request by, or the written consent of, the owner, lessee or occupant of
the premises has been received.
   (c)   Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the right of city
council to find and declare a vehicle to be a health or safety hazard and to
order its removal, provided, however, before city council shall declare any
vehicle on private property to be a health or safety hazard, the owner, lessee,
or occupant of the premises shall be afforded notice and an opportunity to be
heard before the council.
   (d)   When any vehicle is left unattended on any public street, highway or
road right-of-way, or on other public or private property without the consent
of the owner or person in control of the property, an officer may place a
colored tag on the vehicle which is notice to the owner, the person in
possession of the vehicle, or any lien holder that it may be considered to be
abandoned and is subject to forfeiture.
   (e)   The colored tag serves as the only legal notice that the vehicle will
be moved to a designated place to be sold if the vehicle is not removed by the
owner or person in control of the vehicle. The vehicle must be removed within
the following times from the date the tag is placed on the vehicle:
      (1)   Forty-eight hours if it is located on any public street highway or
road right-of-way, or
      (2)   Seven days if it is located on other public or private property.
(Ord. of 9/17/01, as amended by Ord. of 4/18/11)
   State Law Reference: S.C. Code Ann. §§ 56-5-5810 et seq., § 56-3-20, §§ 29-
15-10 et seq.
9-3-7   Redemption of removed vehicles.
   (a)   The owner of any removed vehicle, before obtaining possession thereof,
shall pay to the city or, as appropriate, its agent storing said vehicle, all
reasonable costs incidental to the removal and storage of the vehicle and
locating of the owner.
   (b)   Should such owner fail or refuse to pay the costs, or should the
owner's identity or whereabouts be unknown and unascertainable after a diligent
search and after notice as herein prescribed, the stored vehicle maybe sold as
provided by state law.  (Ord. of 9/17/01, as amended by Ord. of 4/18/11)
   State Law Reference: S.C. Code Ann. §§ 56-5-5810 et seq., § 56-3-20, §§ 29-
15-10 et seq.
9-3-8   Trespassing upon property of another.
   (a)   Any person who commits any of the following acts in the city shall be
deemed guilty of the offense of trespassing:
      (1)   Knowingly and without authority enters any vehicles or buildings or
any part thereof of another without the owner's consent;
      (2)   Knowingly enters upon the land or any part thereof of another after
receiving, immediately prior to the entry, notice from the owner, occupant, or
person in charge of said land or part thereof or a public safety officer that
the entry is forbidden or who remains upon the land of another after receiving
notice to depart;
      (3)   Lounges, loiters, or plays upon the steps, platform, or approach to
any church building or in any way trespasses upon church property in the city;
      (4)   Willfully trespasses upon or illegally makes use of, any public
property of any kind whatsoever belonging to, or in the possession of the city.
   (b)   For the purposes of this section, a person has received notice from
the owner, occupant or person in charge of land if he or she has been notified
personally, either orally, or in writing if a printed or written motion
forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main
entrance to the land or the forbidden part thereof.
   (c)   The term public safety officer means any person who, by virtue of his
or her office or public employment, is vested by law with a duty to maintain
public order or to make an arrest for offenses, whether that duty extends to
all offenses or is limited to specific offenses. (Ord. of 11/10/09)
Chapter 4 CARRYING OF WEAPONS
9-4-1   Carrying of certain weapons prohibited.
   It is unlawful for any person to carry about the person whether concealed or
not, a pistol (except as allowed by section 16-23-10 of the Code of Laws of
South Carolina-1976 Amended), dirk, metal knuckles, razor, ice pick, hawkbill
knife or any spring or clasp knife, which has a blade more than three (3)
inches in length, or other weapon usually used for the infliction of personal
injury or injuries. (Ord. of 8/7/90)
Chapter 5 PUBLIC INDECENCY
9-5-1   Public indecency unlawful.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally, in
a public place:
      (1)   Engage in sexual intercourse;
      (2)   Engage in deviate sexual conduct;
      (3)   Appear in a state of nudity; or
      (4)   Fondle the genitals of himself or another person. (Ord. of 12/1/92)
9-5-2   Definitions.
   (a)   "Nudity" means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic
area, or buttocks or showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque
covering of any part of the nipples, or the showing of the covered male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
   (b)   "Public place" includes any public or private property which is open
to the public or through which the public passes, or any establishment which
characterizes itself as private which sells admission or memberships to the
general public, or private property that is within the public view. (Ord. of
12/1/92)
9-5-3   Penalty.
   (a)   Anyone violating this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be subject to a two hundred dollar ($200.00) fine or thirty (30) days in
jail. Each day of a violation of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.
    (b)    Any individual or business establishment who aids or abets any such
violation of subsection (a) of this section or who procures another to perform
such acts or any person, who as owner, manager, lessee, director, promoter or
agent or any other capacity knowingly hires, leases or permits the land,
building or premises of which he has control, to be used for purposes of any
such act of indecency is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, must be
fined not more than thirty (30) days in jail. Each day of a violation of this
chapter shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. of 12/1/92)
State Law References: Abandoned motor vehicles, S.C. Code 1976, Sec. 56-5-5610
et seq.
CHAPTER 6 Drug Paraphernalia
Sec. 9-6-1 Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Drug paraphernalia means all equipment, products and materials of any kind
which are used, intended for use or designed for us, in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this
article.  It includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting any species of plant which is a
controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived.
      (2)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled
substances.
      (3)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance.
      (4)   Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in
identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances.
      (5)   Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances.
      (6)   Scales or balances used, intended for use or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances.
      (7)   Dilutents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used intended for use or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances.
      (8)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for
us in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marijuana.
      (9)   Blenders, bowls containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances.
      (10)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended
for use or designed for us in compounding controlled substances.
      (11)   Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled    substances.
      (12)   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for
use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into
the human body.
      (13)   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil
into the human body, such as:
         a.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, ceramic pipes with
or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
         b.   Water pipes;
         c.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         d.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         e.   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material such
as marijuana cigarettes that have become too small or short to be held in the
hand;
         f.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
         g.   Chamber pipes;
         h.   Carburetor pipes;
         i.   Electric pipes;
         j.   Air-driven pipes;
         k.   Chillums;
         l.   Bongs;
         m.   Ice pipes or chillers.
(Ord. of 9/2/03)
Sec. 9-6-2 Factors determining classification of objects.
   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other
authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors,
the following:
      (1)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
      (2)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of
the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled
substance;
      (3)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of this article;
      (4)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
      (5)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object;
      (6)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of any owner or of
anyone in control of the object to deliver it to persons whom he knows or
should reasonably know intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of
this article; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object,
as to a direct violation of this article shall not prevent a finding that the
object is intended for use or designed for us as drug paraphernalia;
      (7)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use;
      (8)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
      (9)   National and local advertising concerning its use;
      (10)   The manner in which the objects is displayed for sale;
      (11)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
      (12)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;
      (13)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community; and
      (14)   Expert testimony concerning its use.
(Ord. of 9/2/03)
Sec. 9-6-3 Offenses; penalties for violation of article.
   (a)   Possession of drug paraphernalia.  It is unlawful for any person to
use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest,
inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in
violation of this article.  Any person who violates this subsection is guilty
of a crime and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment of not more than thirty (30) days, or both
in the discretion of the court, provided that no penalty shall exceed the
penalty provided by the state law for similar offenses.
   (b)   Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia.  It is unlawful for any
person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with intent
to deliver drug paraphernalia knowing, or under circumstances where one
reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate,
grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of
this article.  Any person who violates this subsection is guilty of a crime
and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars
($500.00) or by imprisonment of not more than thirty (30) days, or both in the
discretion of the court, provided that no penalty shall exceed the penalty
provided by the state law for similar offenses.
   (c)   Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor.  Any person eighteen (18)
years of age or over who violates subsection (b) of this section by delivering
drug paraphernalia to a person under eighteen (18) years of age who is at least
three (3) years his junior is guilty of a special offense and, upon conviction,
shall be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by
imprisonment of not more than thirty (30) days, or both in the discretion of
the court provided that no penalty shall exceed the penalty provided by the
state law for similar offenses.
   (d)   Advertisement of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to
place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any
advertisement, knowing or under circumstances where one reasonably should know
that the purpose of this advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the
sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.  Any person
who violates this subsection is guilty of a crime and, upon conviction, shall
be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment of
not more than thirty (30) days, or both in the discretion of the court,
provided that no penalty shall exceed the penalty provided by the state law for
similar offenses.  (Ord. of 9/2/03)
Sec. 9-6-4 Civil forfeiture.
   (a)   Any of the items of personal property which are listed in this section
and which are legally confiscated by the city will be forfeited. Any such
property will be secured by the city department of public safety for a period
of ten (10) days, and thereafter the city will either destroy the property or
advertise notice of public sale of such property and sell such thereof as may
be used for legitimate purposes.
   (b)   Property subject to be forfeited under this article may be seized by
the city department of public safety upon process issued by the municipal
judge. Seizure without process may be made if the seizure is incident to an
arrest or a search under a search warrant.
(Ord. of 9/2/03)
Tables
Files listed below require Adobe Acrobat Reader.
Statutory_References
Code_Comparative_Table
ORDINANCE DISPOSITION TABLE
(References are to section numbers)
   R - Repealed
   S - Superseded by
   et seq. - And the sections which follow
   NC - Not codified
 
Date Subject Disposition
6/30/55  Election of recorder                R
4/7/59   Abandonment of iceboxes             R
5/30/60  Prohibition of operation of dance   R
         halls
5/2/61   Keeping of livestock and poultry    S
                                             6-3-3
10/6/64  Use of sirens                       S
                                             9-2-6
                                             S
8/2/66   Storage and collection of garbage   6-2-1; S
                                             6-2-2; S
                                             6-2-6
8/2/66   Tax levy on property                NC
2/4/69   Emergency procedure                 2-3-1 et seq.
4/7/70   Abandoned vehicles                  8-3-5
2/8/72   Dogs running at large               S
                                             6-3-6
4/5/77   Transfer of Shadblow Sewer System   NC
8/7/73   Inhalation of vapors or fumes       9-1-2
                                             7-2-4;
7/8/74   Taxicabs (amendment)                7-2-51;
                                             7-2-52
12/8/75  Adoption of council form of         1-1-1
         government
4/5/77   Sewer system transfer               NC
6/7/77   Non-partisan election procedure     1-7-2;
                                             1-7-4(a) & (c)
8/1/78   Alcoholic beverages                 R
9/5/78   Elections                           S
                                             1-7-4(b)
2/6/79   Sewer system                        4-3-1 et seq.
2/6/79   Sediment control and storm drainage R
10/2/79  Fill limits                         5-2-11
4/1/80   Housing code                        S
                                             5-2-81
12/8/80  Municipal court                     1-6-1 et seq.
3/9/81   Gold, silver and precious metals    7-6-42 et seq.
7/5/82   Parking or storage of trucks        S
                                             8-3-6
6/7/83   Amendment to zoning ordinance       NC
6/7/83   Bingo                               7-6-31 et seq.
7/5/83   Designation of crime watch area     9-1-1
4/3/84   Planning commission                 R
4/3/84   Amendment to zoning ordinance       NC
9/4/84   Wrecker and towing services         R
         (amendment)
                                             4-3-41(b)(5); 4-3-72 et seq.;
                                             4-3-42 (a)(1) & (5); (b)(1) & (4),
                                             & (c);
1/7/85   Sewer use (amendment)               4-3-43;
                                             4-3-44 ;
                                             4-3-99  -
                                             4-3-102
1/7/85   Sewer and water meter taps          4-2-9
4/2/85   Business and professional license   NC
                                             7-6-33(b);
                                             7-6-34(c);
5/7/85   Bingo (amendment)                   7-6-37(b);
                                             7-6-39(b);
                                             7-6-40(d)
6/17/85  Fiscal year budget                  NC
1/7/86   Zoning map amendment                NC
3/4/86   Business and professional license   NC
         (amendment)
3/4/86   Zoning map amendment                NC
4/1/86   Amendment to zoning ordinance       NC
4/1/86   Water and/or sewer charge           4-1-5
5/6/86   Zoning map amendment                NC
6/23/86  Budget ordinance                    NC
8/18/86  Defeasance of bonds                 NC
9/2/86   Water sale, purchase and lease      NC
         agreements between city and county
9/2/86   Zoning map amendment request        NC
12/9/86  Appropriation of capital project    NC
         funds
12/9/86  Amendment to revenue sharing budget NC
         (1986-87)
12/9/86  Nulla bona of unpaid taxes          NC
2/3/87   Purchasing procedures               R
2/3/87   Amendment to zoning ordinance       NC
4/13/87  Drought response                    R
4/13/87  Amendment to business and           NC
         professional license
4/30/87  Annexation (Dreher Rd., U.S. #1     NC
         area)
6/2/87   Zoning map amendment                NC
                                             S
6/23/87  Budget for fiscal year              1-5-3;
                                             1-5-5
6/23/87  Zoning                              NC
10/19/87 Zoning map amendment                NC
10/19/87 Zoning map amendment                NC
10/19/87 Zoning map amendment                NC
10/19/87 Sediment control, flood damage      5-5-1 et seq.
         prevention
11/3/87  Zoning map amendment                NC
12/1/87  Annexation (Eli Witt area to city)  NC
12/1/87  Annexation (Hite residential        NC
         property to city)
12/1/87  Appropriation-capital project funds NC
         (amendment)
         Appropriation-reserve water/sewer
12/1/87  funds; appropriation-capital        NC
         project funds (amendment)
4/5/88   Drought response                    R
5/3/88   Annexation (U.S. Rt. 1 and Meeting  NC
         St. Expressway)
5/3/88   Zoning of annexed area              NC
6/7/88   FHA discount purchase program       NC
6/7/88   Appropriation-reserve water/sewer   NC
         funds
6/20/88  Budget adoption; tax levy           NC
6/20/88  Annexation (Alexandria St./Manning  NC
         Dr.)
7/5/88   Water and sewer rates               4-2-13
9/6/88   Zoning map amendment                NC
10/4/88  Contract re. budget assistance      NC
10/4/88  Annexation (Saluda River/River Hill NC
         Farms area)
11/1/88  Water and sewer rates (amendment)   4-2-13
11/1/88  Zoning map amendment                NC
11/3/88  Bonds (Lake Murray Water Plant)     NC
11/3/88  Series ordinance                    NC
12/12/88 Water and sewer rates               NC
12/27/88 Annexation (Hooklawn, Holland,      NC
         Leaphart St. area)
3/7/89   Annexation (Danwood shopping        NC
         center)
4/4/89   Zoning map amendment                NC
6/6/89   Wrecker and storage charges         7-3-5
6/26/89  Budget adoption                     NC
7/10/89  Annexation (Weathers/Floyd, Dreher  NC
         Road)
9/5/89   Annexation (Edens/Dreher)           NC
9/18/89  Code adoption                       p. vii
10/3/89  Zoning map amendment                NC
11/7/89  Water rates                         NC
2/6/90   Bingo                               7-6-31,
                                             7-6-33
3/6/90   Electrical code                     S
                                             5-2-21
4/3/90   City clerk                          1-4-7
4/3/90   City treasurer                      1-4-9
6/5/90   Annexation (Railroad Avenue area)   NC
6/5/90   Zoning map amendment                NC
6/18/90  Budget ordinance                    NC
6/18/90  Water/sewer rates                   NC
8/7/90   Annexation (Second Ave./Denham      NC
         Ave.)
8/7/90   Annexation (Jamaica Drive)          NC
8/7/90   Sewer rates and sewer tap fees      NC
8/7/90   Prohibition of carrying of certain  9-4-1
         weapons
9/4/90   Zoning map amendment                NC
10/2/90  Clean indoor air and promotion of   6-4-1 et seq.
         public health
                                             7-2-4,
11/6/90  Taxi cabs                           7-2-5,
                                             7-2-6,
                                             7-2-7
12/10/90 Zoning map amendment                NC
12/10/90 Zoning map amendment                NC
1/8/91   Zoning map amendment                NC
5/7/91   Annexation (to City of West         NC
         Columbia)
6/17/91  Amends 1990-91 budget               NC
6/24/91  Adopts budget                       NC
9/3/91   Annexation (to City of West         NC
         Columbia)
12/3/91  Water and sewer system bond         NC
         issuance
2/4/92   Authorizes conveyance and           NC
         improvements
3/3/92   Handicapped parking                 9-1-3
3/24/92  Council meetings                    1-3-6
6/15/92  Adopts budget                       NC
8/4/92   Traffic violation assessments       NC
11/3/92  Special election                    NC
11/16/92 Cable television franchise          NC
12/1/92  Public indecency                    9-5-1 et seq.
12/1/92  Annexation (Augusta Rd./Grove St./  NC
         Dreher Rd. area)
2/11/93  Memorandum of understanding with    NC
         Town of Lexington
3/2/93   Zoning                              NC
4/19/93  Municipal uniform ordinance summons 1-3-50
5/4/93   Election of councilmembers and      1-7-1,
         terms of office (amendment)         1-7-2
5/4/93   Proclaims May 7, 1993 as "Jarvis R. NC
         Kapman Day"
6/14/93  Budget ordinance                    NC
8/3/93   Business and professional license   NC
         (amendment)
8/31/93  Business and professional license   NC
         (amendment)
10/5/93  Police officers retirement          NC
         incentive plan
                                             1-3-49,
10/5/93  Fines for various offenses          1-3-50,
         amendment                           1-6-5,
                                             4-2-32
11/1/93  Wastewater treatment agreement with NC
         town of Lexington
11/2/93  Proclamation for National Bible     NC
         Week
12/28/93 Cable television rate regulation    7-7-1 et seq.
12/28/93 Garbage and refuse collection and   R
         disposal (amendment)
         Town of Gaston to join Lexington
1/18/94  County Joint Municipal Water and    NC
         Sewer System
         Town of Lexington to join Lexington
1/18/94  County Joint Municipal Water and    NC
         Sewer System
2/1/94   Supports loan to Three Rivers Diner NC
         Corporation
2/1/94   Membership in Lexington County      NC
         Regional Solid Waste Commission
         Bull Swamp Rural Water Company,
3/1/94   Inc. to join Lexington County Joint NC
         Municipal Water and Sewer
         Commission
3/1/94   Regulates basic CATV rates          NC
4/5/94   Family and Medical Leave Act        1-8-1 et seq.
5/3/94   City administrator memorandum       1-4-6
6/20/94  Budget ordinance                    NC
         Town of Gilbert-Summit Rural Water
7/12/94  District to join Lexington County   NC
         Joint Municipal Water and Sewer
         Commission
7/12/94  Council compensation                NC
7/18/94  Water agreement with city of Cayce  NC
8/3/94   Declares September 1993 "Keep West  NC
         Columbia Safe and Sparkling Month"
         NFPA 1582 Standard on Medical
8/8/94   Requirements for Fire Fighters      NC
         adopted
8/30/94  FCC assistance in determining costs NC
         for basic cable service tier
         NFPA 1582 Standard on Medical
9/1/94   Requirements for Fire Fighters      NC
         adopted
9/9/94   Extends review time on CATV Forms   NC
         1200 and 1205
11/1/94  Authorizes city to participate in   NC
         SCLGAG Retiree Plan
11/1/94  Proclamation for National Bible     NC
         Week
12/6/94  Supports community oriented         NC
         policing
1/10/95  Supports joint study of municipal   NC
         solid waste collection
                                             4-3-1,
                                             4-3-40—-
                                             4-3-43,
3/7/95   Sewer use                           4-3-45,
                                             4-3-47,
                                             4-3-98,
                                             4-3-99 ,
                                             4-3-102
6/6/95   Flood damage prevention             5-6-1 et seq.
6/19/95  Adopts budget                       NC
         Authorizes submission of a
7/17/95  community development block grant   NC
         application
                                             9-1-4,
7/17/95  Alcoholic beverages                 9-2-8-
                                             9-2-11
7/17/95  Zoning                              NC
7/17/95  Residential care facilities         NC
         distance requirement
11/7/95  Mayor pro tem                       1-2-5
1/9/96   Two percent rate for title          NC
         insurance companies
5/7/96   Annexation                          NC
6/4/96   Budget ordinance                    NC
2/24/97  Taxicab license fees                NC
2/24/97  Contractor bonds                    NC
12/18/97 Amusement machines license fees     NC
3/3/98   Time of council meetings            1-3-1
6/2/98   Telemommunications business license NC
         tax
6/2/98   Establishes redevelopment project   NC
         area
         Denial, suspension or revocation of 7-1-2,
10/6/98  business licenses                   7-1-15,
                                             7-1-16
12/1/98  Mayor and city council compensation NC
4/6/99   Planning commission                 5-1-1 et seq.
6/1/99   Sewer service charges               NC
6/14/99  Statements of candidacy for         1-7-4
         municipal elections
9/7/99   Business license taxes              NC
9/7/99   Amendment to zoning ordinance       NC
         Prohibition of commercial/
12/7/99  industrial trucks on certain        8-2-10
         streets
3/7/00   Police department                   2-1-1
4/4/00   Fire Department                     2-2-1
6/19/00  Signs                               5-3-2
10/3/00  Noise                               9-2-6
                                             9-3-4,
9/17/01  Offenses ordinance                  9-3-5,
                                             9-3-6,
                                             9-3-7
                                             6-1-1,
                                             6-1-2,
                                             6-1-3,
                                             6-1-4,
9/17/01  Sanitation and junkyards            6-1-5,
                                             6-1-6,
                                             6-1-7,
                                             7-6-21,
                                             7-6-22
12/4/01  Standard building code              R
12/4/01  Business licenses                   7-1-15
8/6/02   International Property Maintenance  S
         Code                                5-2-12
10/1/02  Purchasing of supplies              1-5-111-
                                             1-5-815
11/6/02  Enforcement procedures              6-1-5(b)
9/2/03   Drought management plan             4-2-21-
                                             4-2-24
9/2/03   Drug paraphernalia                  9-6-1-
                                             9-6-4
3/8/04   Financial administration            1-5-121,
                                             1-5-221
10/5/04  Business license tax levy on retail NC
         telecommunications services
12/7/04  Business license ordinance          NC
5/3/05   Garbage and refuse collection and   6-2-2,
         disposal                            6-2-5, 6-2-13
5/3/05   Noise                               9-2-6
         Prohibition of placement and/or
7/5/05   storage of upholstered furniture on 6-1-4
         premises
9/6/05   Business licenses                   7-1-10
                                             1-5-114,
                                             1-5-115,
9/19/05  Purchasing                          1-5-211,
                                             1-5-310,
                                             1-5-320
9/19/05  Exemptions from purchasing          NC
         procedures
11/1/05  Animal control                      6-3-1 et seq.
3/7/06   Assemblies, parades and processions 7-6-1-
                                             7-6-18
4/4/06   Charitable purpose                  7-1-2
                                             6-3-1-
8/21/06  Animal control                      6-3-4,
                                             6-3-17-
                                             6-3-19
                                             4-3-1,
9/18/06  Sewerage system                     4-3-3,
                                             4-3-101,
                                             4-3-102
9/18/06  Establishing sewer rates            NC
9/18/06  Sewer rates                         NC
9/18/06  Recovery of collection costs        NC
10/3/06  Council meetings date and time      1-3-1
12/5/06  Mayor pro tem                       1-2-5
1/3/06   Streets and sidewalks               3-1-5-
                                             3-1-10
3/6/07   Building code                       NC
3/6/07   Adopting a comprehensive plan       NC
4/3/07   Increasing the candidate filing fee 1-7-4
4/3/07   Conducting  municipal elections    NC
5/17/07  Prohibiting sub-metering and resale NC
         of water and sewer services
8/7/07   Stormwater management               NC
11/6/07  Cable system franchise fee          NC
4/1/08   Garbage and refuse collection and   R
         disposal
4/21/08  International Property Maintenance  S
         Code                                5-2-12
10/7/08  Fines for parking violations        8-3-7
11/10/08 Obedience to traffic laws           8-1-3
2/3/09   Animal control definitions          6-3-1
4/7/09   Election date                       1-7-3
10/6/09  Mayor pro tem                       1-2-5
11/10/09 Trespass on property of another     9-3-8
11/10/09 Rental housing regulations          5-2-120 -
                                             5-2-130
                                             5-2-1,
                                             5-2-2, S
                                             5-2-10, S
                                             5-2-14, S
         Building regulation and code        5-2-41, S
11/10/09 enforcement                         5-2-51,
                                             5-2-52, S
                                             5-2-71,
                                             5-2-81,
                                             5-2-101,
                                             5-2-111
1/19/10  Garbage and refuse collection and   6-2-1 -
         disposal                            6-2-12
3/2/10   Smoking in places of employment     6-5-1 -
                                             6-5-6
3/15/10  False alarms                        2-1-5
11/2/10  2009 International Property         5-2-81
         Maintenance Code adopted
4/5/11   Sale of water/sewer service to      NC
         high-volume business entities
                                             6-1-8,
4/18/11  Derelict and abandoned vehicles     9-3-4 -
                                             9-3-7
11/1/11  Water/sewer service availability    4-2-12
         fees
11/1/11  2011 Comprehensive Plan adopted     NC
12/6/11  Sale or use of synthetic drugs      9-1-5
8/7/12   Special property taxes for          1-5-7
         rehabilitated historic properties
11/13/12 Wrecker and towing services         7-3-1  -
                                             7-3-19
12/4/12  Water and sewer charges             NC
12/4/12  Business licenses for insurance     NC
         companies
                                             5-2-10 ,
                                             5-2-12 ,
                                             5-2-14 ,
                                             5-2-21 ,
9/9/13   Adoption of building codes          5-2-41 ,
                                             5-2-51 ,
                                             5-2-71 ,
                                             5-2-140 ,
                                             5-2-150
10/23/13 Stipend for non-participating       NC
         employees in state health plan
4/1/14   Council quorum and rules of order   1-3-3
4/1/14   Council committees                  1-3-8
4/1/14   City administrator                  1-4-6
6/16/14  Council public invocation           1-3-9
6/16/14  Council order of proceedings        1-3-2
6/16/14  Water and sewer service charges     NC
6/16/14  Out-of-city fire hydrant fees       NC
11/17/14 Human resources department created  1-4-2
12/2/14  Water and sewer charges             NC
5/15/15  Extending in-city water rates to    4-2-14
         out-of-city customers
                                             6-3-1,
                                             6-3-2,
6/2/15   Animal control chicken regulations  6-3-15,
                                             6-3-16,
                                             6-3-20,
                                             6-3-21
6/15/15  Voting requirements                 1-3-4
6/15/15  Fireworks                           2-4-1 -
                                             2-4-4
1/20/16  Zoning map change                   NC
                                             4-3-1 -
                                             4-3-5,
                                             4-3-21 -
4/5/16   Sewerage system                     4-3-33,
                                             4-3-40 -
                                             4-3-50,
                                             4-3-71 -
                                             4-3-102
5/16/16  Sale of water and sewer system      NC
         bonds
5/16/16  Sewer system revenue bonds          NC
                                             5-2-10,
                                             5-2-14,
         Building Regulation and Code        5-2-21,
8/2/16   Enforcement                         5-2-41,
                                             5-2-51,
                                             5-2-71,
                                             5-2-140
12/6/16  Health and Sanitation enforcement   6-1-5,
                                             6-1-6
12/19/16 Selling city water                  4-2-8
12/19/16 Stormwater management               NC
5/2/17   Water and sewer service charges     NC
5/2/17   Backflow prevention valve           4-2-16
         inspection and testing fee
5/2/17   Installation fee for backflow       4-2-15
         prevention valve
5/2/17   Budget ordinance                    NC
7/11/17  2015 International Property         5-2-12
         Maintenance Code
9/5/17   Water quality revolving fund        NC
10/3/17  Adopting ordinance                  NC
10/26/17 Salary schedule                     NC
/ /      Lexington County Registration and   1-7-5
         Election Commission
6/28/16  Hospitality tax                     1-5-8
2/6/18   Offensive odors                     9-2-12
                                             6-1-1,
2/6/18   Nuisances                           6-1-2,
                                             6-1-5
3/6/18   Water and sewer                     NC
                                             6-1-1,
4/16/18  Nuisances                           6-1-5,
                                             7-1-17
5/1/18   2018 Flood damage prevention ord.   NC
6/5/18   Amendment to flood ordinance        NC
6/5/18   Adopting ordinance                  NC
8/20/18  Zoning amendment                    NC
10/2/18  Closing portion of Hudson Street    NC
         and Carpenter Street
10/15/18 Recovery of collection costs        NC
11/19/18 Zoning amendment                    NC
11/19/18 Zoning amendment                    NC
                                            
 


NOT OFFICIAL COPY
Zoning Ordinance
2004
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1 ADOPTION, PURPOSE AND ENACTMENT
100 Authority and title
101 Purpose
102 Enactment clause
ARTICLE 2 SHORT TITLE AND JURISDICTION
ARTICLE 3 DEFINITION OF TERMS USED IN THIS ORDINANCE
300 Interpretation of words and phrases
301 List of definitions
ARTICLE 4 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
400 Division of city into districts
401 District boundaries
402 Zoning maps other than official copy
403 Rules for determining zoning district boundaries
404 Lots divided by district boundaries
ARTICLE 5 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
500 Zoning affects all lands, buildings and structures
501 Height and density
502 Yard space to one building
503 One principal building to a lot
504 Reduction of lot area
505 Street frontage
506 Inspection of required buffers
507 Compatibility with ordinances
508 Rights-of-way
ARTICLE 6 GENERAL PROVISIONS
600 Nonconforming uses
601 Continuance of nonconforming uses, structures or characteristics of use
602 Repair or maintenance of nonconforming structures
603 Nonconforming lots of record
604 Temporary nonconforming uses
605 Annexation
606 Visibility at intersections
607 Accessory buildings
608 Buildings and lot to have access
609 Structures in required yards
610 Orientation of required yards
611 Off-street automobile parking and storage
612 Off-street loading requirements
613 Mobile home parks
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
614 Satellite receiver dishes
615 Determination of solar sky space easement
616 Standard industrial classification
617 Regulation of highlighting colors on the exterior of commercial buildings
ARTICLE 7 USE REQUIREMENTS FOR DISTRICTS
700 D - Development district
701 R-1 - Residential district
702 R-2 - Residential district
703 R-3 and R-4 Residential district
704 C-1 - Intensive commercial district
705 C-2 - General commercial district
706 C-3 - Restricted commercial district
707 LM - Light manufacturing district
708 HM - Heavy manufacturing district
709 PUD - Planned unit development
710 GOLD - Gateway Overlay District
711 Redevelopment District Floating Zone
ARTICLE 8 SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
800 High-rise apartments
801 Group developments
802 Home occupations
803 Day care facilities for children
804 Historical sites and structures
805 Required separation between commercial and/or industrial lots and residential lots
806 Cluster housing development
807 Sediment control, storm drainage, and flood protection
808 Manufactured homes
809 Sexually oriented businesses
810 Communication towers and antennas
811 Landscape regulations
812 Locations standards for assisted housing
813 Regulation of the display of merchandise outdoors
814 Regulation of Shipping Containers, Cargo Containers, Tractor-Trailers, and Portable
Storage Containers
815 Regulation of Vehicle Sales, Vehicle Services, Tire Sales, and Tire Services
816 Regulation of Food Trucks
817 Food Truck Courts
818 Small Wireless Facilities
ARTICLE 9 SIGN REGULATIONS
900 Purpose
901 Scope
902 Definitions
903 General provisions
904 Design standards
905 Prohibited signs
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
906 Signs permitted in residential districts
907 Signs permitted in commercial and manufacturing districts
908 Advertising signs
909 Sign regulations in PUD-R and PUD-C districts
910 Nonconforming signs
ARTICLE 10 ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
1000 Zoning administrator and his/her designee
1001 Zoning permit required
1002 Certificates of zoning compliance
1003 Violations
1004 Records of applications and certificate
1005 Penalties for violation
1006 Expiration of zoning permit
1007 Legal remedies
ARTICLE 11 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
1100 Establishment, membership and proceedings of the board
1101 Powers and duties of the board of zoning appeals
1102 Appeals to the board of zoning appeals
1103 Appeals from the board of zoning appeals
1104 Functions of the zoning administrator, board of zoning appeals, city council and courts on
interpretation, administration and appeal
1105 Appropriations to finance work of the board
ARTICLE 12 AMENDMENTS
1200 Amendments
1201 Initiation of proposals for amendments
1202 Minimum area requirements for creation of new zoning districts
1203 Public hearing on proposed amendments
1204 Notice required
1205 Planning commission review and recommendation
1206 Action by city council
1207 Recording amendments
1208 Reconsideration of proposed amendment
ARTICLE 13 FEES AND CHARGES
1300 Schedule of fees and charges
1301 No action until fees paid
ARTICLE 14 LEGAL STATUS
1400 Separability
1401 Repeal of previous zoning ordinance
1402 Effective date
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
1 | P a g e
ARTICLE 1
ADOPTON, PURPOSE AND ENACTMENT
100 Authority and Title
This zoning ordinance is adopted pursuant to authority granted in the South Carolina Local Government
Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act of 1994, S. C. Code of Laws, Section 6-29-310, et seq. (1994 Supp.).
101 Purpose
The public health, safety, economy, good order, appearance, convenience, morals, and general welfare
require the harmonious, orderly, and progressive development of land within the municipalities of the State. In
furtherance of this general intent, the regulation of land development by municipalities is authorized for the
following purposes, among others, as stated in the South Carolina Local Government Comprehensive Planning
Enabling Act of 1994, South Carolina Code of Laws, Section 6-29-1120:
(1) to encourage the development of economically sound and stable municipalities;
(2) to assure the timely provision of required roads, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land
developments;
(3) to assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and
pedestrian, in and through new land developments;
(4) to assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land developments
through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational, transportation, and other public
purposes; and
(5) to assure, in general, the wise and timely development of new areas, or re-development of areas in
harmony with the city’s comprehensive plan.
102 Enactment Clause
Pursuant to authority conferred by the S. C. Code of Laws, and to promote the public health, safety, morals,
and general welfare, lessen congestion in the streets, secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers, provide
adequate light and air, prevent the overcrowding of land, avoid undue concentration of population, and facilitate
adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements in accordance
with the City of West Columbia Comprehensive Plan, the city council does ordain and enact into law the following
regulations:
(1) dividing the City of West Columbia into districts and establishing the boundaries thereof;
(2) regulating and restricting the height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures;
(3) regulating and restricting the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces;
(4) regulating and restricting the density of population;
(5) regulating and restricting the location and use of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry,
residence and other purposes;
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
2 | P a g e
(6) providing for the method of administration and amendment;
(7) defining powers and duties of the board of zoning appeals with respect to these regulations;
(8) providing penalties for violations of these regulations;
(9) defining certain terms used herein; and
(10) repealing the previous ordinance.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
3 | P a g e
ARTICLE 2
SHORT TITLE AND JURISDICTION
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as “The Zoning Ordinance of the City of West
Columbia, South Carolina”. These regulations shall apply to all land and improvements thereon within the
incorporated boundaries of the City of West Columbia, South Carolina.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
4 | P a g e
ARTICLE 3
DEFINITION OF TERMS USED IN THIS ORDINANCE
300 Interpretation of Words and Phrases
The following rules of construction and interpretation shall apply to the text of this ordinance:
Words used in this ordinance shall have their customary meaning as defined in a standard dictionary, unless
they are specifically defined in this ordinance.
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Singular words include the plural, and plural
words include the singular.
The word “shall” indicates a mandatory statement; the word “may” indicates a discretionary statement.
The word “lot” includes the word “plat” or “parcel”.
The word “structure” includes the word “building”, and the words “building” or “structure” include any
part thereof.
The word “person” includes an individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company,
corporation, or any other entity usually defined in legal usage as a person.
The words “used” or “occupied”, as applied to land or buildings, shall be construed to include the words
“intended”, “arranged”, or “designed” to be used or occupied.
The word “contiguous” as applied to lots or districts shall be interpreted as meaning sharing a common
boundary of ten (10) feet or more in length.
301 List of Definitions
Except when definitions are specifically included in the text of this ordinance, words shall be interpreted in
accordance with the meaning set forth in this section. Definitions are also included in the following articles
or sections of this ordinance:
Section 803 Day care facilities for children
Section 806 Cluster housing development
Section 808 Manufactured homes
Section 809 Sexually oriented businesses
Section 810 Communications towers and antennas
Section 811 Landscape regulations
Section 812 Location standards for assisted housing
Article 9 Sign Regulations
In cases of conflict regarding any definition, the zoning administrator or his/her designee shall rule on any
contested definition or on any interpretative meaning of words or phrases used in this ordinance.
Accessory Structure. A structure detached from a principal building located on the same premises and customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use. Garages, carports, and storage sheds are common urban
accessory structures. Pole barns, hay sheds and the like qualify as accessory structures on farms, and may or may
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
5 | P a g e
not be located on the same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.
Accessory Use. A use of land which is customarily incidental or subordinate to the principal use and is located on
the same lot with the principal use. Examples of accessory uses include garages, workshops, playhouses, storage
buildings, swimming pools, decks, patios, greenhouses, and other such uses.
Administrative Review. A request for a review of the zoning administrator’s or his/her designee’s interpretation of
any provision of this ordinance by the board of zoning appeals.
Alley. A public or private thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property and
not intended for general traffic circulation.
Alteration of Building. Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, beams,
columns, or girders, except such change as may be required for its safety; any addition to a building; any change in
use or any movement of a building from one location to another.
Apartment. A portion of a building consisting of one or more rooms intended to be used as a residence by an
individual or family.
Appeal (or administrative review). A request for a review of the zoning administrator or his/her designee’s
interpretation of any provision of this ordinance.
Applicant. The owner of land affected by this ordinance or a representative who shall have express written authority
to act on behalf of the owner.
Artisan Manufacturing (See Manufacturing, Artisan)
Automobile Filling Station. A building or lot having pumps and storage tanks at which fuels, oils, or accessories for
the use of motor vehicles are dispersed, sold, or offered for sale at retail and where repair service, if any, is
incidental.
Automobile Repair and Service Station. A building, lot or both in or upon which the business of general motor
vehicle repair and service is conducted, but excluding auto body repair, auto painting, junk, and/or auto wrecking
business.
Bar. See Public drinking place.
Bed and Breakfast. An owner-occupied house or portion thereof, where short-term (no more than a week at a time)
lodging rooms and meals are provided. No more than four (4) guest rooms can be available for accommodations
and breakfast service in such an establishment at any one time.
Beer Garden: A tavern with an outdoor garden area where customers are served beer and wine
Berm. Any hill or slope which represents a change of elevation of at least two (2) feet at slope of between twentyfive
percent (25%) and fifty percent (50%) and which is covered with an appropriate stabilizing vegetation.
Block. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad
rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways, or boundary lines of municipalities.
Board of Appeals. West Columbia Board of Zoning Appeals.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
6 | P a g e
Boarding House. See Rooming and boarding house.
Body Art Services. Provision of any of the following procedures: body piercing, tattooing, cosmetic
tattooing, branding, and scarificatíon. This definition does not include practices that are considered medical
procedures, which may not be performed in a body art services establishment.
Brewpub. Means a restaurant which produces on the permitted premises a maximum of two thousand barrels a year
of beer for sale on the premises. One barrel equals 31 gallons
Buffer. Open spaces, landscaped areas, fences, walls, berms, or any combination thereof used to physically separate
or screen one use or property from another so as to visually shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances.
Buffer Yard. A strip of land, improved by landscaping or fences, or both, designed to mitigate the extent of higher
intensity land uses on neighboring lower intensity uses.
Buildable Area. The portion of a lot which may be used or built upon in accordance with zoning district regulations.
Building. Any structure attached to the ground having a roof supported by columns or by walls that is designed for
the shelter, support, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind.
Building Line. A line beyond which no foundation, wall, or part of the structure of any building shall project, with
the exception of sub-surface projection of footings.
Building Permit. A document or certificate issued by the City of West Columbia authorizing construction,
enlargement, alteration, moving, or demolition of a building or structure.
Building, Principal. A building in which is conducted the main use of the lot on which said building is located.
Building Purpose. The type of business identified by SIC Code as defined in the business license application.
Business Services. Establishments primarily engaged in rendering services to business establishments on a fee or
contract basis, such as advertising and mailing, building maintenance, employment services, management and
consulting services, protective services, equipment rental and leasing, commercial research, development and
testing, photo finishing, and personal supply services.
Carport. See garage.
Certificate of Occupancy. A certificate of approval for occupancy is issued after final inspection of a building by
the applicable city official. Such a certificate must be obtained from the city before a building or structure can be
lawfully occupied.
Change of Use. Any use that substantially differs from the previous use of a building or land.
Check cashing operations. Any person or entity engaged in the business of cashing checks, drafts, or money orders
for a fee, service charge, or other consideration.
Church. Any building or structure, or group of buildings or structures that by design and construction are primarily
intended for conducting organized religious services and associated accessory uses.
Club, Lodge, Civic or Fraternal Organization. An incorporated or unincorporated association for civic, social,
cultural, religious, literary, political, recreational or like activities, but not including shooting clubs, operated for the
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
7 | P a g e
benefit of their members and not open to the general public.
Cluster Housing Development. Attached or detached single family residences permitted in certain districts with
reduced lot sizes, building setback and lot coverage in order to create a larger open space for common usage by
residents of the cluster housing development.
Commercial and Industrial Vehicles. Trucks, truck tractors, semi-trailers and straight body trucks.
Commerical kennels. A commercial establishment in which five (5) or more dogs or cats aged six (6) months or
older, are boarded or bred. The sale of these animals may be a part of the kennel use. Pet stores, pet grooming
establishments and veterinarian hospitals are not classified as commercial kennels.
Common Ownership. Ownership by the same person, corporation , firm, partnership or unincorporated associations;
or ownership by different corporations, firms, partnerships, entities, or individuals.
Community Residential Care Facility. A facility which offers room and board and which provides a degree of
personal assistance for a period of time in excess of twenty-four (24) consecutive hours for two or more persons,
eighteen (18) years old or older unrelated to the operator within a third degree of consanguinity. Included in this
definition is any facility (other than a hospital), which offers or represents to the public that it offers a beneficial or
protected environment specifically for the mentally ill or drug addicted or alcoholic, or provides or purports to
provide any specific procedure for the cure or improvement of that disease or condition. Community residential
care facilities must meet the requirements listed in the SCDHEC Regulation Number 61-84 “Standards for Licensing
Community Care Facilities”.
Convenience Store. Any retail grocery store that may have one or more of the following characteristics: is under
4,000 square feet in area; requires a beer and wind license; is open more than fifteen (15) hours a day.
Comprehensive Plan. Any legally adopted part or element of the Comprehensive Development Plan of the City of
West Columbia, South Carolina and its environs. This plan may include, but is not limited to, the Zoning
Ordinance, Land Development Ordinance, Community Facilities Plan, Capital Improvement Plan and Land Use
Plan.
Court. An open space that may or may not have a direct street access and around which is arranged a single
building or group of related buildings.
Day Care Facility. A state licensed facility providing care, supervision, or guidance for unrelated persons,
unaccompanied by their parent or guardian, on a regular basis for periods of less than 24 hours per day. This
definition includes family day care, group day care, child day care centers, and adult day care centers, but does not
include educational facilities for grades one and above, day care services operated for employees of a business, or
summer camps or schools.
DHEC. South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control.
Display Area or Lot. Any un-enclosed area for the display of merchandise
District. A part, zone, or geographic area within which the provisions and regulations of this ordinance apply
uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land.
Drive-in Restaurant. Any eating or drinking establishment which, by its structural design, site characteristics, or
manner of food service encourages consumption of food or beverages in automobiles on the premises or upon public
streets adjacent thereto.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
8 | P a g e
DSS. South Carolina Department of Social Services.
Dwelling. Any building used or intended for human habitation, including any permitted home occupation, but
excluding hotels, motels, boarding houses, and tourist courts.
Dwelling, Single Family. A dwelling unit, other than a manufactured home, designed for or occupied exclusively by
one family on a single lot.
Dwelling, Single Family Detached. A building containing not more than one (1) dwelling unit, not physically
attached to any other principal structure and specifically excluding manufactured homes.
Dwelling, Two Family (Duplex). A detached dwelling, other than a manufactured home, containing two (2)
separate dwelling units, commonly known as a duplex. These dwellings may be rental units or owner-occupied, and
generally the common areas are under one roof.
Dwelling Unit. A room or rooms, connected together, constituting a separate independent housekeeping
establishment for a family, for owner occupancy or rental, lease, or other occupancy on weekly or longer terms,
physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units that may be in the structure and containing its own
independent kitchen and sleeping facilities. Dwelling units available for rental occupancy for periods of less than
one (1) week shall be construed to be lodging units.
Easement. A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for use by the public, a
corporation, or another person or entity.
Enlargement. An increase in the size of an existing structure or use, including physical size of the property,
building, parking, and other improvements.
Establishment. Any use of a building other than for residential purposes.
Family. An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single
housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, or a group of not more than five (5) persons who need not be related by blood
or marriage.
Fence. An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose, screen, or
separate areas.
Financial institution. An institution that manages money, banking, investments, loans, and credit. The following
businesses are not a financial institution: bail bonds, check cashing operations, pawn shops, pay day loan
businesses, or title loan businesses.
Floor Area, Residential. The gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a dwelling, exclusive of carport, garages,
basement, storage areas with only outside access and open porches, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior
walls of a dwelling.
Foster Homes. A foster home provides substitute family care for a child or children by a family group consisting of
a male and female foster parent other than the child’s own parents, blood relatives or legal guardian, in return for a
monetary remuneration for such care. A foster home must be authorized or licensed by the Lexington County
Department of Social Services. Church sponsored homes, and others to be considered as a foster home under the
provisions of this ordinance, and any unauthorized or unlicensed use shall be prohibited. In no case shall more than
two (2) foster children be housed in a single bedroom or room designated for sleeping purposes. There shall be no
more than five (5) foster children in a home.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
9 | P a g e
Garage. A covered structure intended to provide shelter for passenger vehicles that is accessory to use in these
structures: houses, attached house, duplexes, or manufactured homes. It includes carports which are generally open
on three or more sides. A garage may be attached to or detached from another structure.
Gasoline Station. Any building, land area, or other premises or portion thereof, used for the retail dispensing or
sales of vehicular fuel. See “service station.”
Grading. Any stripping, cutting, filling or stockpiling of earth or land, including the land in its cut or filled
condition, to create new grades.
Group Commercial or Industrial Developments. A single lot containing more than one (1) building used for
commercial or industrial purposes and all the structures thereon.
Group Home. An institution in a single family dwelling providing room, board, and some personal assistance in
feeding, dressing, or other living activities for nine or fewer individuals not related to the operator. Group homes
may include housing for mentally or physically disabled persons, but this definition does not include hospitals,
sanitariums, rest homes, convalescent homes, boarding homes, or homes for orphans or the aged.
Group Housing Development. A single lot of record upon which is erected more than one (1) building containing
dwelling units, and all the structures thereon; or a single lot upon which is erected a single structure designed to
contain more than four (4) dwelling units on the first floor level thereof or designed to contain more than eight (8)
dwelling units throughout; except that high-rise apartments are not defined as group housing developments.
Height of Building. The vertical distance measured from the mean finished ground level adjoining the building to
the highest point of the roof.
High-rise Apartment. Any building which contains not less than twenty (20) dwelling units and exceeds five (5)
stories or fifty (50) feet in height.
High-rise Structure. Any building which exceeds five (5) stories or fifty (50) feet in height.
Historic Structure. Any structure that is: (a) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U. S. Department of the Interior [DOI]) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) certified or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c)
individually listed on the State Inventory of Historic Places; (d) individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified (1) by an approved state program
as determined by the Secretary of Interior, or (2) directly by the Secretary of Interior in states without approved
programs. Some structures or districts listed on the state or local inventories may not be “historic” as cited above,
but have been included on the inventories because it was believed that the structures or districts have the potential
for meeting “historic” structure criteria of the DOI. In order for these structures to meet historic structure criteria, it
must be demonstrated and evidenced that the South Carolina Department of Archives and History has individually
determined that the structure or district meets DOI structure criteria.
Home Occupation. A customary occupation, profession, or trade carried on by an occupant of a dwelling unit as a
secondary use which is clearly incidental and subordinate to the residential character of the dwelling unit.
Hotel or Motel. A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public and often providing
additional services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreational facilities.
Industrial, Heavy. Manufacturing, processing, assembling, storing, testing and similar industrial uses which are
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
10 | P a g e
generally major operations and extensive in character; require large sites; open storage and service areas; extensive
service and facilities; ready access to regional transportation; normally generate some nuisances such as smoke,
noise, vibration, dust, glare, air pollution, and water pollution, but not beyond the district boundary.
Industrial, Light. Wholesaling, distribution, retailing storage, processing, light manufacturing or other industrial
uses which are usually controlled operations; relatively clean, quiet, and free of objectionable or hazardous elements
such as smoke, noise, odor, or dust; operating and storing within open or enclosed structures, and generating no
nuisances.
In-Home Adult Day Care Center. A facility that provides supervision, therapy, and social development activities for
no more than six (6) impaired adults in the home of the proprietor, licensed according to regulations by DHEC.
Intensity of Use. The amount or magnitude of a use on a site or allowed in a zoning district. Generally measured by
floor area, it may also be measured by such things as number of employees, amount of production, trip generation,
or hours of operations.
Junk. Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material, or debris, whether or not stored for sale or in the process of being
dismantled, destroyed, processed, salvaged, stored, baled, disposed, or other use of disposition.
Junk, Salvage, Scrap, or Wrecking Yards. Any use involving storage or processing of inoperable, disused,
dismantled, or wrecked vehicles, equipment, or machinery or the storage or processing of scrap metal, waste paper,
rage, food processing wastes, construction wastes, industrial wastes, secondhand materials, or other scrap, salvage,
waste, or junk materials.
Lot. A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to
be separately owned, used, developed or built upon.
Lot Area. A total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any street right-of-way.
Lot, Corner. A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets. A lot abutting a curved street or streets shall
be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost point of the side lot lines to the foremost point of
the lot (or an extension of a lot where it has been rounded by a street radius) meets at an interior angle of less than
135 degrees.
Lot, Coverage. The area of the lot, which when viewed directly from above would be all the ground level floor area
of principal and accessory buildings and floor provided that such an enclosure is not built so as to render that
structure in violation of the provisions of this ordinance.
Lot Frontage. The front of an interior lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street. For the purpose of
determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be
considered frontage and yards shall be provided upon that basis. The phrase “street frontage” shall be interpreted to
have the same meaning as the phrase “lot frontage”.
Lot, Interior. A lot other than a corner lot with only one (1) frontage on a street.
Lot Line. A line of record bounding a lot that divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private street or
any other public space.
Lot Line, Rear. The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of triangular or otherwise
irregularly shaped lots, a line ten (10) feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance
from the front lot line.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
11 | P a g e
Lot of Record. An area of land clearly defined by plat or by metes and bounds description recorded with the
Register of Deeds of Lexington County.
Lot, Reversed Frontage. A lot that is at right angles or approximately right angles to the general pattern in the area
involved. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot or an interior lot or an interior lot or rarely a through lot.
Lot, Through. A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one (1) street other than an alley. Through
lots with frontage on two (2) streets may be referred to as double frontage lots.
Lot, Width. The distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured
across the rear of the required front yard, provided however, that width between side lot lines at their foremost
points (where they intersect with the street line) shall not be less than eighty percent (80%) of the required lot width;
in the case of lots fronting on a cul-de-sac, the width between side lot lines at their foremost points shall not be less
than twenty-five (25) feet.
Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area. Any finished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely
for parking vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s
lowest floor.
Manufacturing, Artisan. Means the shared or individual use of hand-tools, mechanical tools and electronic tools for
the manufacture of finished products or parts including design, processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and
packaging of products; as well as the incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products. Typical artisan
manufacturing uses include, but are not limited to: food and bakery products; non-alcoholic beverages; brewpubs;
microbreweries; micro-distilleries; printmaking; leather products; jewelry and clothing/apparel; metal work;
furniture; glass or ceramic production; and paper manufacturing. Artisan Manufacturing does not include any
activity that causes noise, odor, or vibration to be detectable on a neighboring property
Medically Related Offices. Offices for the therapeutic, preventative, or corrective personal treatment of people
normally performed by physicians, dentists, or other practitioners as well as medical testing and analysis services.
Not included in this definition would be facilities providing extended or inpatient care.
Microbrewery. Any establishment where malt liquors are manufactured and packaged on-premises or off-premises,
manufacturing no more than 30,000 barrels of malt liquor on its licensed premises each calendar year. One barrel
equals 31 gallons
Micro-distillery. Means a manufacturer who distills, blends, and bottles alcoholic liquors on the licensed premises
with an alcohol content greater than seventeen percent and who produces a maximum quantity of one hundred
twenty-five thousand cases per year at the licensed premises
Miniwarehouse. A building or group of buildings on a fenced, controlled access lot which contains individual
locked compartments for storage of personal property.
Mixed Use Development. The development of a tract of land, building, or structure with a variety of
complementary and integrated uses, such as but not limited to, residential, office, manufacturing, retail, public, or
entertainment, in a compact urban form.
Noncommercial kennels. The premises of any person who keeps more than three dogs on the premises. Pet stores,
pet grooming establishments, veterinarian hospitals, and commercial kennels are not classified as noncommercial
kennels.
Nonconforming. A term applied to lots, structures, uses of land or structures, and characteristics of use of land or
structures which were lawful before the passage or amendment of this ordinance, but which are prohibited by this
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
12 | P a g e
ordinance or which are not in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance.
Off-street Loading. Designated areas located adjacent to buildings where trucks may load and unload cargo.
Overlay District. A zoning district that encompasses one or more underlying zones and that imposes additional
requirements above that required by the underlying zone.
Park. An area or facility intended to be used for recreation, exercise, sports or similar activities or an area intended
to enhance the enjoyment of natural features or natural beauty, but specifically excluding commercially operated
amusement parks.
Parking Area. A public or private area, under or outside of a building or structure, designed and used for parking
motor vehicles including parking lots, garages, private driveways, and legally designated areas of public streets.
Parking Lot. An off-street, ground level open area, usually improved for the temporary storage of motor vehicles.
Parking, Off-street. An area adequate for an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with
properly related access to a public street arranged so that no maneuvering incidental to parking shall be on any
public street and so that an automobile may be parked or unparked therein without moving any other automobile.
Parking Space. An area which is sufficient in shape and size for parking one motor vehicle.
Pawn Shop. An establishment that lends money at a legally specified rate of interest on an article or articles of
personal property left with the licensed pawnbroker as security.
Payday loan businesses. Any person or entity engaged in the business of providing currency or a payment
instrument in exchange for a person’s check or agreement to provide access to a drawer’s account in a financial
institution and agreeing to hold that person’s check or maintain rights to access a drawer’s account for a period of
time prior to presentment, deposit or redemption.
Person. Any individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
Personal Services. Establishments primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or his or
her personal goods or apparel. These include the following: laundries, beauty and barber shops, shoe repair, and
health clubs.
Planned Unit Development. An area of land, in which a variety of housing types and/or related commercial and
industrial facilities are accommodated in a pre-planned environment under more flexible standards, such as lot sizes
and setbacks, than those restrictions that would normally apply under these regulations. The procedure for approval
of such development contains requirements in addition to those of the standard subdivision, such as building design
principles and landscaping plans. See Section 709 for more details.
Planning Commission. The Planning Commission of the City of West Columbia, South Carolina.
Principal Structure. A structure (or building) having significant or primary uses and justifying its own utilization
(such as a dwelling or office building) as contrasted to accessory structures which are incidental or subordinate to
primary structures and do not alone justify their utilization (such as a tool shed or auto garage used in conjunction
with a dwelling). Certain structures may be either principal or accessory depending upon utilization, such as a
parking garage as an accessory structure to a high-rise apartment or as a principal structure when operated
commercially in a business area.
Principal Use. The significant or primary activity carried out within a structure or upon land (such as retail sales
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
13 | P a g e
within a store or occupancy of a dwelling unit as a residence) as contrasted to accessory uses which are incidental or
subordinate to primary uses (such as sale of soft drinks at an automobile service station). Certain uses may be either
principal or accessory, depending upon their relationship with other uses, as for example a newsstand as an
accessory use within a hotel lobby or as a principal use within a separate structure.
Private Club. A non-profit organization created to provide recreational or cultural opportunities, including golf
clubs, country clubs, tennis clubs, swimming clubs, lodges and similar activities. For-profit businesses are not
included.
Private Road. A road is private unless its right-of-way has been dedicated to and accepted by the state or the
governing authority of the state, county or city.
Prohibited Use. A use that is not permitted in a zoning district.
Public Drinking Place. An establishment engaged in the retail sale of drinks, such as beer, ale, wine, liquor or other
alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises, and where the sale of food amounts to less than fifty percent
(50%) of the total receipts of such establishment.
Public Hearing. A meeting announced and advertised in advance and open to the public, with the public given an
opportunity to talk and participate.
Public Road. This means, relates to, and includes the entire right-of way of roads, avenues, boulevards, streets,
highways, freeways, lanes, courts, thoroughfares, collectors, minor roads, cul-de-sacs and other ways considered
public and both dedicated to and accepted by the state, county or municipal government.
Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle which is: (a) built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less when measured at
the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(d), designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use. A recreational vehicle shall not be considered a permanent dwelling, and this
definition shall not include manufactured homes.
Recreational Vehicle Park. A site with improvements and utilities for the temporary parking of three (3) or more
recreational vehicles for periods not to exceed ninety (90) days, which shall include services and facilities for the
recreational vehicle owner. Manufactured homes are expressly prohibited.
Residence. Same as “dwelling unit.”
Restaurant. An establishment where food and drink are prepared, served, and consumed primarily within the
principal building.
Retail Liquor Store. A store that sells liquor for off-premise consumption only and is referred to as a Package, ABC,
or Red Dot store.
Retail Sales. Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or
household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. Excluded from this definition
are “convenience stores”.
Right-of-Way. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, electrical
transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or other special use. An area or
strip of land, either public or private, on which an irrevocable right of passage has been recorded for the use of
vehicles or pedestrians or both.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
14 | P a g e
Road Frontage. Any strip of land adjacent to a public road right-of-way.
Rooming and Boarding Houses. Any dwelling, other than a hotel or motel, in which three (3) or more persons who
are not members of the owner’s or operator’s family are housed or lodged in rooms used or intended to be used for
living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes, for compensation, with or without meals being provided.
Any dwelling in which such accommodations are offered in ten (10) or more rooms shall be considered to be a hotel
or motel.
Salvage Yard. Same as “junk yard.”
Satellite Dish Antenna. A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar configured and is
in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn, or cornucopia, Such device shall be used to transmit and/or receive radio
or electromagnetic waves between terrestrial and/or orbital based uses. This definition is meant to include but not be
limited to what are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations and satellite microwave antenna.
Scrap Yard. Same as “junk yard.”
Screen Fence or Wall. For the purposes of the landscaping requirements, any structures which stands at least six (6)
feet at its lowest point is between sixty-seven percent (67%) and one hundred percent (100%) opaque and is
designed and constructed as a permanent improvement for the purpose of blocking view.
Screening. A method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by
fencing, walls, berms, or densely planted vegetation.
Service Station. A retail establishment designed to provide fuel, tires, minor adjustments, repairs and lubrication
services to automobiles, trucks, and motorcycles. Service stations may include the limited sale of groceries and
household goods and may provide auto washing services, but may not involve the storage of wrecked or dismantled
vehicles or parts.
Setback Line. The setback line is the same as the depth or width of any required yard. Note that such line defines
the minimum distance between any structure and an adjacent lot boundary and is not necessarily the same as the
building line, which is the distance between the actual structure and an adjacent lot boundary.
Shopping Center. A group of commercial establishments planned, constructed, and managed as a total entity, with
customer and employee parking provided on-site, provision for goods delivery separated from customer access,
aesthetic considerations and protection from the elements and landscaping and signage in accordance with an
approved plan.
Sight Triangle. See “visibility triangle”.
Site Plan. The development plan for one or more lots in which is shown the existing and proposed conditions of the
lot including topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, wetlands, and waterways; landscaping and open spaces;
walkways; means of ingress and egress; circulation, utility services; structures and buildings, signs and lighting,
berms, buffers and screening devices, surrounding development and any other information that reasonably may be
required in order that an informed decision can be made by the approving authority.
Solar Energy System. A complete design or assembly consisting of a solar energy collector, an energy storage
facility (where used) and components for the distribution of transformed energy (to the extent they cannot be used
jointly with a conventional energy system). Passive solar energy systems are included in this definition.
Solar Sky Space. The space between a solar energy collector and the sun that must be free of obstructions that shade
the collector to an extent which precludes its cost effective operation.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
15 | P a g e
Solar Sky Space Easement. A right, expressed as an easement, covenant, condition, or other property interest in any
land or other instrument executed by, or on behalf of any land owner that protects the solar sky space of an actual,
proposed, or designated solar energy collected at a described location by forbidding or limiting activities or land
uses that interfere with access to solar energy.
Special Exception. A use permitted in a particular zoning district upon showing to the board of zoning appeals that
such use, if
in a specified location, complies with all the conditions and standards for the location or operation of the use as
specified in this ordinance and authorized by the board of zoning appeals. The board of zoning appeals, before
authorizing such use, shall find that the location and operation of the proposed use shall not be detrimental to
adjoining land or land use.
Street. A public thoroughfare designed to provide the principal means of access to abutting property or designed to
serve as a roadway for vehicular travel, or both, but excluding alleys.
Street Line. The dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a contiguous street right-of-way.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to
something having location on the ground including, for purposes of this ordinance, carports, decks, mobile homes,
travel trailers, signs, mobile signs, and portable signs, but excluding from definition as structures minor landscaping
features such as ornamental pools, planting boxes, bird baths, paved surfaces, walkways, driveways, recreational
equipment, flagpoles and mailboxes.
Substantial enlargement. An enlargement over 25 percent of the existing area of a building.
Thoroughfare: Any major arterial road; one of the principal routes into and through the community.
Taproom: A place to taste and sample product from local breweries and microbreweries.
Title loan businesses. Any person or entity engaged in the business of making a nonpurchase money consumer loan
with an original repayment term of less than one hundred and twenty (120) days and secured by a motor vehicle.
This does not include a loan made by a financial institution.
Transfer of Ownership Control. Includes any of the following:
(a) the sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
(b) the transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business whether by sale,
exchange, or similar means;
(c) the establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control
of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
Transient. Shall refer to a structure that is not permanent in nature. Such uses are temporary and are not intended to
stay in place for more than ninety (90) consecutive days.
Travel or Camping Vehicle. A vehicular portable structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel or
recreational uses not exceeding thirty five (35) feet in length.
Truck, Straight Body. Single vehicle straight body truck with a cab section.
Truck, Tractor Trailer. Combination and semi vehicles consisting of a single or double axle tractor.
Variance. A waiver from compliance with a specific provision of this ordinance granted by the board of zoning
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
16 | P a g e
appeals to a particular property owner because of the practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship that would be
imposed by the strict application of the provisions of the ordinance.
Video Game Establishment. An establishment owned or managed by a person that is subject to the provisions of the
S. C. Code of Laws, as amended, for the location of coin-operated non-payout video machines with a free play
feature. Once legal, video game establishments are currently illegal under South Carolina law.
Video Game Machine. An electronic or computerized amusement and arcade machine, device, or table that upon
insertion of cash, or thing of value is available to play or simulate the play of games as authorized by the
Department of Revenue using a video display and microprocessors in which the player may receive free games,
credits, or thing of value that can be redeemed for cash or thing of value.
Video Machine Owner. Any person who maintains for use or permits the use of a video game machine of any video
game establishment.
Video Poker Establishments. Any establishment wherein one or more electronic video game machines that, upon
insertion of a coin or cash or tokens purchased for coins or cash, are available to play or simulate the play of games
utilizing a video display and microprocessors in which a player may receive free games or credits that can be
redeemed for cash. Any establishment wherein any device authorized under Section 16-19-60, S. C. Code, (1976, as
amended) may be located. Video poker machines shall not be considered as an accessory use to another use and
shall not be permitted as home occupations. Once legal, video poker establishments are currently illegal under
South Carolina law.
Visibility Triangle. The triangular horizontal area formed by intersecting right-of-way lines of roadways or the
intersection of right-of-way line of a roadway and the edge of a driveway, and a line connecting points located on
those lines fifteen (15) feet from the point of intersection in commercial and manufacturing districts and twenty-five
feet from the point of intersection in residential districts. See Section 606 for specific application.
Wrecking Yard: Same as “junk yard”.
Yard. An open or unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building and unobstructed by buildings or
structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted.
Yard, Front. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot of record with the principal building extending the full
width of the lot between the principal building and the front lot line and measured perpendicular to the building to
the closest point of the front lot line.
Yard, Rear. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot of record with the principal building extending the full
width of the lot between the principal building and the rear lot line and measured perpendicular to the building to
the closest point of the rear lot line.
Yard, Side. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot of record with a principal building, situated between the
building and the side lot line and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not a rear line or a front
line shall be deemed a side line.
Zone. A specifically delineated area or district within which uniform regulations and requirements govern the use,
placement, spacing, and size of land and buildings.
Zoning Administrator. The person appointed by the city administrator to administer the zoning ordinance.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
17 | P a g e
ARTICLE 4
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
400 Division of city into districts
For the purpose of this ordinance, the City of West Columbia, South Carolina, is divided into eleven (11)
districts and designated as follows:
D Development agricultural, residential, transitional
R-1 Residential high density - multi-family, duplex and single
family
R-2 Residential medium density - duplex and single family
R-3 Residential low density - single family
R-4 Residential low density - single family on large lots
C-1 Commercial intensive commercial
C-2 Commercial general commercial
C-3 Commercial restricted commercial
LM Manufacturing light manufacturing and distribution
HM Manufacturing heavy manufacturing
PUD Development planned unit development
401 District boundaries
The boundaries of the above districts are hereby established as shown on the map entitled “Zoning Map of
West Columbia, South Carolina”. The map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. The official copy of the zoning map of West Columbia shall be
maintained in the office of the zoning administrator or his/her designee. A duplicate copy shall be maintained in the
office of the municipal clerk. All zoning district boundaries shall be clearly shown on the zoning map, and
amendments to the map shall be recorded immediately after adoption. The official copies of the zoning map shall be
dated and attested by the municipal clerk, and shall be available for public inspection. The official zoning map and
any amendments adopted by West Columbia City Council shall constitute the final authority for determination of
district boundaries. It shall be unlawful for any person to make unauthorized changes to the zoning map.
402 Zoning maps other than official copy
Any copy of the official map of the City of West Columbia zoning classifications, other than the “official
copy”, is in no way warranted as correct at any time. The “official copy” shall always be the copy used for
interpretation by the zoning administrator or his/her designee, the planning commission, the board of zoning appeals
and the city council. The “official copy” shall be used in any court proceedings.
403 Rules for determining zoning district boundaries
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zoning districts, the following general rules of
interpretations shall apply. It is the duty of the zoning administrator or his/her designee to interpret the location of
zoning district boundaries. An appeal from an interpretation of finding of the zoning administrator or his/her
designee may be taken to the board of zoning appeals.
403.1 Where boundaries approximately follow streets, highways or alleys. District boundaries indicated
as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such
center lines.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
18 | P a g e
403.2 Where boundaries approximately follow platted lot lines. District boundaries indicated as
approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.
403.3 Where boundaries approximately follow city limits. District boundaries indicated as
approximately following city limits shall be construed as following such city limits.
403.4 Where boundaries follow railroad lines. District boundaries indicated as following railroad lines
shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks.
403.5 Where boundaries follow stream beds or other bodies of water. District boundaries indicated as
following stream beds or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines.
403.6 Where boundaries approximately follow flood lines. Supplementary floodplain and floodway
boundaries indicated as following the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers one hundred (100) year floodplain or
floodway line shall be construed to follow such lines.
403.7 Where boundaries approximately parallel or are extensions of above features. District boundaries
indicated as approximately parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections above shall be so
construed and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the official copy of the zoning map. Distances not
specifically indicated on the official copy of the zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
404 Lots divided by district boundaries
When a district boundary line as appearing on the zoning map divides a lot in single ownership at the time
of the adoption of this ordinance, or subsequent amendment, into two or more different districts, the board of zoning
appeals may permit, as special exception, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot, not to exceed
fifty (50) feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
19 | P a g e
ARTICLE 5
APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
Within each zoning district, the regulations set forth by this ordinance shall apply uniformly to each class
or kind of structure or land. In their interpretations and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to
be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, or general welfare.
500 Zoning affects all lands, buildings, and structures
No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part
thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered unless in conformity with
all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
501 Height and density
No building or other structure shall hereafter be created or altered to:
(1) Exceed the height limitation;
(2) House a greater number of families or occupy a smaller lot area per family or occupy a greater
percentage
of lot area;
(3) To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or other open spaces than
herein required; or
(4) In any other manner be created or altered to be contrary to the provisions of this ordinance.
502 Yard space to one building
No part of a yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection
with any building for the purpose of complying with this ordinance shall be included as part of a yard, open space or
off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building.
503 One principal building to a lot
Only one principal building and its customary accessory building(s) may hereafter be erected on any lot of
record, except as otherwise provided by this ordinance. See section 801 for exceptions permitting group
developments.
504 Reduction of lot area
No lot, even though it may consist of one (1) or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in size so
that the lot width or depth, front, side, or rear yard, lot area per family or other requirements of this ordinance, are
not maintained, except as allowed in Section 709 - Planned unit development and Section 806 - Cluster housing
development.
No lot shall hereinafter be created or altered which is below the applicable district minimum requirement.
505 Street Frontage
No principal building shall be erected on any lot which does not have immediate frontage on at least one
(1) public street or road for a distance of not less than fifty (50) feet, except as allowed in Section 801 - Group
housing development.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
20 | P a g e
506 Inspection of required buffers
In the event a screening wall, fence, planted dividing strip, or any other type of buffer is required by the
ordinance for any use or is required by the board of zoning appeals, such screen, wall, etc. will be subjected to
periodic inspections by the zoning administrator or his/her designee to determine that such required walls, fences,
etc., are being properly maintained. In the case of landscaping, all planted material shall be maintained in a healthy,
growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. Failure to maintain such required walls, fences, etc. to an
acceptable standard as determined by the zoning administrator or his/her designee may be deemed to be a violation
of this ordinance.
507 Compatibility with other ordinances
When requirements of this ordinance are at variance with requirements of any other applicable rule,
regulation, ordinance or statute, the most restrictive requirements or those imposing the highest standards shall
apply.
508 Rights-of-way
Public rights-of-way or private easements for streets and roads shall not be considered as a part of a lot or
open space, or front, rear, or side yard setback for the purpose of meeting lot dimensions or area or setback
requirements.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
21 | P a g e
ARTICLE 6
GENERAL PROVISIONS
600 Nonconforming uses
Within the districts established by this ordinance, or by amendments which may later be adopted, there
exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use which were lawful before this ordinance
was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited or regulated and restricted under the terms of this ordinance
or future amendment. It is the intent of this ordinance to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are
removed, but not to encourage their survival. Nonconforming uses are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible
with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this ordinance that nonconformities shall not
be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, reconstructed to continue nonconformity after major damage, or used as
grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. However, Article 9 regulating
signs has specific requirements that must be met over and above those contained herein.
601 Continuance of nonconforming uses, structures or characteristics of use
601.1 Change to another nonconforming use. A nonconforming use, structure or characteristic of use
shall not be changed to any other nonconforming use, structure or characteristic or use unless the board of
zoning appeals finds that the new use, structure or characteristic of use is more in character with the uses
permitted in the district; in which case, the board of zoning appeals may permit such change as a special
exception. In permitting such change, the board of zoning appeals may require appropriate conditions and
safeguards in accord with the purpose of this ordinance.
601.2 Conversion of use on nonconforming lots. The minimum yard requirements of this ordinance
shall not be construed as prohibiting the conversion of an existing building which does not meet the
minimum yard requirements to another permitted use, so long as no further encroachment is made into the
required yards.
601.3 Reconstruction. A nonconforming structure or structure containing a nonconforming use shall not
be demolished and rebuilt as a nonconforming structure or structure containing a nonconforming use.
601.4 Extension or enlargement. A nonconforming use, structure or characteristic of use shall not be
extended, enlarged or intensified except in conformity with this ordinance, provided, however, that any
nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or
designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, but no such use shall be
extended to occupy any land outside such building.
601.5 Re-establishment. A nonconforming use, or characteristic of use, shall not be re-established after
vacancy, abandonment, or discontinuance for any period of twelve (12) consecutive months, except where
Section 601.6 applies. This provision shall not apply to any accessory apartment existing at the time of the
adoption of this ordinance. “Accessory apartment” is defined as a self-contained housing unit incorporated
within or accessory to a single family dwelling complete with its own sleeping, cooking, and sanitary
facilities and a separate means of egress, which is located within a zoning district that permits residential
use as a principal use. A use as an accessory apartment within these districts may be re-established after
vacancy, abandonment, or discontinuance.
601.6 Reconstruction after damage. A nonconforming structure or structure containing a nonconforming
use shall not be rebuilt, altered or repaired except in conformity with this ordinance after sustaining damage
exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the replacement cost of the structure at the time of damage, provided that
any permitted reconstruction shall begin within six (6) months from the time of damage and shall be
completed within six (6) months after the issuance of a building permit. A nonconforming use shall not be
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
22 | P a g e
reestablished in a structure that has sustained damage exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the replacement cost
of the structure at the time of damage.
602 Repair or maintenance of nonconforming structures
On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary
repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing provided that the cubic
content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this ordinance shall not be increased.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any
building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of
such official.
603 Nonconforming lots of record
603.1 Single lots. In any district in which single family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding
limitations imposed by other provisions of this ordinance, a single family dwelling and customary
accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this ordinance. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with
other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the
requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district provided that yard
dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the
regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
603.2 Adjoining lots. If two or more adjoining lots with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at
any time after the adoption or amendment of this ordinance and such lots individually are too small to meet
the yard, width or area requirements of the district in which they are located, such groups of lots shall be
considered as a single lot or several lots of minimum permitted size and the lot or lots in one ownership
shall be subject to the requirements of this ordinance.
604 Temporary nonconforming uses
A temporary use permit may be issued by the zoning administrator or his/her designee for an appropriate
period of time not to exceed twelve (12) month increments for nonconforming buildings, structures or uses
incidental to building construction or land development or deemed to be generally beneficial, provided that the
owner of such temporary nonconforming use agrees to remove the temporary nonconforming use upon expiration of
the permit.
605 Annexation
605.1 Designation of Zoning Classification. When annexation is accomplished, the city council shall
specify an
interim zoning district classification or classifications in the annexation ordinance, with such classification
or classifications to become effective upon the effective date of the annexation.
605.2 Amendment proceedings to be initiated. Immediately after the effective date of any annexation,
the zoning administrator or his/her designee shall initiate zoning amendment proceedings as specified by
Article 10 for purposes of establishing or confirming appropriate zoning classifications for such annexed
area, and the public hearing therefor shall be scheduled to be held not more than sixty (60) days after the
effective date of annexation, further provided that the proposal to be brought before such hearing shall be to
change all or part of such annexed area to classifications as requested by the owner or as recommended by
the planning commission, to be determined by the planning commission.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
23 | P a g e
606 Visibility at intersections (Visibility triangle)
606.1 Sight clearance to be maintained. At each corner or each street intersection, a sight area shall be
maintained. Within the sight area no fence, wall, sign or other structure, no slope or embankment, no
parked vehicle, no hedge, foliage or other planting, and no other object or structure shall be placed, erected
or maintained which will obstruct visibility within the sight area.
606.2 Dimensions of sight areas. The horizontal dimensions of sight areas are defined as triangular areas
formed by the intersecting right-or-way lines at points which are fifteen (15) feet distant from the point of
intersection of the right-of-way lines in commercial and industrial districts and twenty-five (25) feet distant
from the point of intersection of the right-of-way lines in residential districts, measured along the right-ofway
lines. Such sign areas shall be established regardless of the angles of intersection of the right-of-way
lines. The vertical dimensions of sight areas are defined as that vertical space between the heights of two
and one half (2 ½ ) feet and ten (10) feet in elevation above the nearest edge of street pavement of a paved
street or above the nearest edge of riding surface of an unpaved street.
607 Accessory buildings
No accessory building shall be erected in any required yard except as herein provided, and no separate
accessory buildings shall be erected within five (5) feet of any other building.
608 Buildings and lot to have access
Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street or on a lot
adjacent to a private street which meets all standards of the Land Development Regulations of the City of West
Columbia. However, no private street or driveway shall be provided to commercial or industrial districts through
any residential district established by this ordinance.
609 Structures in required yards
The general definition of “yards” as set forth in Section 301 states that yards are unoccupied and
unobstructed by a structure or portion of a structure from thirty-six (36) inches above the finished grade level of the
ground upward. Structures are not defined to include minor landscaping features such as ornamental pools, bird
baths, paved surfaces, walkways, flagpoles, and mailboxes.
609.1 Steps and open porches without roofs shall be allowed in any required yard.
609.2 Eaves, cornices, gutters, and other minor architectural features projecting less than eighteen (18)
inches from the main portion of a building shall be allowed to project into any yard.
609.3 In C-2, LM, and HM districts, structures and devices incidental to servicing, and roofs over such
structures and devices are permitted within required front yards, provided that they do not constitute a
substantial impediment to visibility across such yards which would contribute to the creation of traffic
hazards, and further provided that servicing operations in connection therewith can be conducted so as not
to interfere with public use of adjacent sidewalks or public streets.
609.4 No fence or wall shall be permitted in any required front yard which substantially impedes vision
above a height of thirty-six (36) inches, except as provided for C-2, LM, and HM districts in 609.3 above.
609.5 Screening walls, fences, and hedges over thirty-six (36) inches in height that substantially impede
vision may be permitted in a required front yard as a special exemption, however, screening walls, fences,
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
24 | P a g e
and hedges not over seven (7) feet in height are permitted outright in side and rear yards, provided no
screening wall or fence in excess of five (5) feet is permitted within six (6) feet of a residential structure on
adjacent property. Height in excess of seven (7) feet must be approved by the board of zoning appeals as a
special exception.
609.6 Retaining walls in excess of thirty-six (36) inches in height may be permitted as a special
exception in any yard, however, retaining walls that do not project more than thirty-six (36) inches above
the grade level at the property lines of adjoining lots are permitted outright.
609.7 Signs are permitted to encroach upon required yards in certain instances as set forth in Article 9.
609.8 Screening between commercial or industrial uses and lots zoned residentially, as required by
Section 805 of this ordinance, is permitted in a required yard.
609.9 Also permitted to project into required yards from a principal or accessory structure is apparatus
needed for the operation of active and passive solar energy systems, including, but not limited to, awnings,
overhangs, movable insulating walls and roofs, detached solar collectors, reflectors, and piping, Such solar
system related projections shall not restrict vehicle driver or pedestrian visibility.
610 Orientation of required yards
In interpretation of requirements related to establishment of required yards, the zoning administrator or
his/her designee shall apply the following interpretation to the orientation of such yards.
610.1 Through lots. In the case of through lots, unless the prevailing front yard pattern on adjoining lots
indicates otherwise, front yards shall be provided on all frontages. Where one (1) of the front yards that
would normally be required on a through lot is not in keeping with the prevailing yard pattern, the zoning
administrator or his/her designee may waive the requirement for the normal front yard and substitute
therefor a special yard requirement which shall not exceed the average of the yards existing on adjacent
lots.
610.2 Corner lots with two frontages. In the case of corner lots with two (2) frontages, a front yard of
the required depth shall be provided on the frontage of the street having the higher traffic volumes. Where
the traffic volumes on both streets are approximately equal, the required depth shall be provided on the
street frontage having the minimum lot width. A second front yard of half the depth required generally for
front yards in the district shall be provided on the other frontage.
610.3 Corner lots with more than two frontages. In the case of corner lots with more than two (2)
frontages, the zoning administrator or his/her designee shall determine the front yard requirements, subject
to the following limitations:
(1) At least one (1) front yard shall be provided having full depth required generally in the
district; and
(2) No other front yard on such lot shall have less than half the full depth required generally.
610.4 Appropriateness of orientation. Notwithstanding the above, the zoning administrator or his/her
designee may determine that the most appropriate orientation for any required yard is different from the
orientation as set forth in such instance that it appears that such different orientation will further the intent
of this ordinance. When a structure is to be built which will contain more than one (1) dwelling unit, the
orientation of required yards shall be based upon both the orientation of the lot and the orientation of the
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
25 | P a g e
structure. The zoning administrator or his/her designee may impose an orientation of yards different from
the orientation set forth in this section and elsewhere in this ordinance subject to appeal from an
administrative decision of the zoning administrator or his/her designee.
611 Off-street automobile parking and storage
Off-street automobile parking and storage space shall be provided on every lot in which any of the uses
mentioned in this section are hereafter established except in the C-1 District. Such automobile parking or storage
space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley and shall be equal in area to at least the minimum
requirements for the specific uses as set forth below. Each automobile parking space, along with its necessary
maneuvering space, shall have an area of at least three hundred (300) square feet.
All off-street automobile parking and storage space except for single and two family residential uses shall
be so arranged that vehicles will not be required to back onto a public street, road or highway when leaving the
premises.
Off-street automobile parking and storage spaces shall be equal in number to at least the minimum
requirements for the specific uses set forth below.
611.1 The following general uses shall provide one (1) off-street parking space for each three hundred
(300) square feet of gross floor area.
611.1.1 Offices (excluding medical and dental offices) in all districts.
611.1.2 Financial institutions in all districts.
611.1.3 Photography studios, art studios, art galleries, art sales, interior design studios, craft
studios, craft sales, antique shops, establishments for the teaching of music, dancing, or other
performing arts in all districts.
611.1.4 Retail stores, retail sales, and display rooms in all districts.
611.1.5 Public drinking places and restaurants in all districts.
611.1.6 Automobile service stations and automobile repair garages in all districts.
611.1.7 Personal service establishments in all districts.
611.2 The following general uses shall provide one (1) off-street parking space for each 600 square feet
of gross floor area.
611.2.1 Service and repair establishments, excluding automobile service stations and automobile
repair garages in all districts.
611.2.2 Laboratories in all districts.
611.2.3 Private clubs and lodges in all districts.
611.2.4 Veterinary establishments in all districts.
611.2.5 Industrial, manufacturing, and processing uses.
611.2.6 Artisan Manufacturing
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
26 | P a g e
611.3 Special requirements. The following requirements shall apply to the following specific uses,
instead of the general requirements listed above.
611.3.1 Dwelling units
(a) Single family detached structures: two spaces
(b) All other types of structures with dwelling units: one and one-half (1.5) spaces per
dwelling unit or one (1) space for each five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area,
whichever is greater. However, at no time shall this requirement exceed two (2) parking
spaces per dwelling unit.
611.3.2 Elementary schools, junior high or middle schools: two (2) spaces per classroom plus two
(2) spaces per office plus one (1) space for every five (5) feet of maximum seating capacity in the
main assembly room.
611.3.3 Senior high schools, business schools, vocational schools: four (4) spaces per classroom
plus two (2) spaces per office plus one (1) space for every five (5) seats of maximum seating
capacity in the main assembly room.
611.3.4 Colleges and universities: Required parking shall be based upon use of each individual
structure as required for structures not in connection with colleges and universities. Classrooms
shall be considered as in 611.3.3 above.
611.3.5 Churches, auditoriums, commercial recreation establishments, other places of public
assembly excluding motion picture theaters: one (1) space for every five (5) seats of maximum
capacity in the main assembly room.
611.3.6 Motion picture theaters: ten (10) spaces for the first one hundred (100) seats plus one (1)
space for each five (5) additional seats.
611.3.7 Bowling alleys: five (5) spaces for each bowling lane.
611.3.8 Hotels, motels, rooming and boarding houses, bed and breakfast: one (1) space for each
rental unit.
611.3.9 Hospitals: one (1) space for each two patient beds.
611.3.10 Nursing homes, convalescent homes, and similar institutions: one (1) space for each one
(1) patient bed.
611.3.11 Medical and dental offices, clinics: one (1) space for each 150 square feet of gross floor
space.
611.3.12 Home occupations: in addition to spaces required for dwelling units, one (1) space for
each 200 square feet of floor space utilized in connection with such home occupations.
611.3.13 Funeral homes: five (5) spaces plus one (1) space for each two (2) seats of maximum
seating capacity in the main assembly room, or one (1) space for each 300 square feet of gross
floor area, whichever is greater.
611.3.14 Wholesaling, warehousing and distribution operations in all districts: for the first 12,000
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
27 | P a g e
spare feet, one (1) space per 600 square feet of gross floor area, and one space per 900 square feet
of gross floor area for any area in excess of 12,000 square feet.
611.3.15 Bed and breakfast: two spaces plus one space per room for rent.
611.3.16 Food Truck Court: Minimum per food truck 2 spaces
611.4 Other regulations relating to off-street parking
611.4.1 Required improvements of off-street parking areas.
(a) Off-street parking areas developed to meet minimum requirements of this ordinance,
and all off-street parking facilities located within a C-1 district, shall be within properly
graded, marked, and improved parking lots or within parking structures.
(b) Parking spaces and driveways required by this ordinance shall be paved with asphalt,
brick, or concrete or similar hard surface material; however, parking areas for singlefamily
or two-family attached or detached residential uses on individual lots may be
paved with pervious material such as crushed stone, gravel, or mulch or tire ribbons of
asphalt, brick, concrete, or some other hard surface material.
(c) Where the parking space and driveway is covered with a pervious material, such
material shall be confined to the parking space and driveway. The pervious material shall
be renewed or replaced as reasonably necessary to maintain a neat and orderly
appearance.
611.4.2 Design of parking area. All off-street parking areas with the exception of parking areas
for single and two family detached dwellings shall be so designed that vehicles will not be
required to back onto a public street or way when leaving the premises.
611.4.3 Size of required parking spaces. For purposes of this ordinance, the minimum size of
one parking space shall be nine (9) feet in width and 20 feet in depth plus sufficient areas for
access to and maneuvering for parking in any respective space.
611.4.4 Remote parking space. If the off-street parking space required by this ordinance cannot
be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is located, such space may be
provided on any land within 400 feet of the principal use; provided that the owner or authorized
agent for the land upon which such restriction shall be recorded by a declaration of restrictions
properly filed with the Register of Deeds of Lexington County, which may be released only by the
written consent of the City of West Columbia. Remote parking for nonresidential uses shall not be
established in any residential district except in accordance with the provisions of Section 611.4.5
below.
611.4.5 Parking in residential districts for commercial or industrial uses. The board of zoning
appeals may, as a special exception in residential zones, grant permission to establish parking lots
for use by commercial and industrial establishments provided:
(a) Such lots may be permitted only between a commercial or industrial use and the
nearest street in a residential district.
(b) Screening of such lots shall be established at the rear of the required front yard and
on all side and rear lot lines of such a nature that will be adequate to protect contiguous
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
28 | P a g e
lots zoned residentially and residential uses thereon from glare, noise, and dispersion of
trash or trespassing by pedestrians, and such screening shall be maintained in a proper
manner.
(c) There shall be no vehicular access to such parking lots except from the commercial
or industrial district adjacent thereto.
611.5 Travel or camping vehicles.
(a) Not more than one (1) travel or camping vehicle per family living on the premises shall be
permitted to be parked on a lot in any residential zone or on any lot used for residential purposes
in a C-3 district; however, additional travel or camping vehicles are allowed provided that they are
in completely enclosed buildings or stored in the side yard or rear yard of a lot and are not readily
visible from the public street or other public or private property.
(b) Travel or camping vehicles shall not be occupied temporarily or permanently while parked or
stored, except in an authorized mobile home park.
(c) Any travel or camping vehicle parked on a residential-use lot or parcel must be registered to a
person residing on the property and to the address of the lot or parcel on which the vehicle is
parked.
(d) At no time shall any travel or camping vehicle be parked or stored so as to obstruct the view
from public right-of-way of the front of the principal structure on the lot or parcel on which it is
parked. At no time shall any travel or camping vehicle be parked so as to obstruct the view from
public right-of-way of the front of a principal structure on an adjacent lot.
(e) Travel or camping vehicles shall not be parked or stored on any unimproved lot in commercial
and manufacturing districts unless as an approved accessory use to a properly licensed business
located on an adjacent parcel when such use meets all conditions of the district in which it is
located to include, but not limited to, screening and landscaping regulations.
(f) Travel or camping vehicles shall not be parked in public rights-of-way.
611.6 Accessibility. Parking areas shall meet the requirements of the South Carolina Board for Barrier
Free Design for accessibility to disabled persons in relation to parking spaces and sizes.
611.7 Boats.
(a) Not more than one (1) boat per family living on the premises shall be permitted to be parked
on a lot in any residential zone or on any lot used for residential purposes in a C-3 district;
however, additional boats are allowed provided that they are in completely enclosed buildings or
stored in the side yard or rear yard of a lot and are not readily visible from the public street or
other public or private property.
(b) Any boat parked on a residential-use lot or parcel must be registered to a person residing on
the property and to the address of the lot or parcel on which the boat is parked.
(c) At no time shall any boat be parked so as to obstruct the view from public right-of-way of the
front of the principal structure on the lot or parcel on which it is parked. At no time shall any boat
be parked so as to obstruct the view from public right-of-way of the front of a principal structure
on an adjacent lot.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
29 | P a g e
(d) Boats shall not be parked or stored on any unimproved lot in commercial and manufacturing
districts unless as an approved accessory use to a properly licensed business located on an adjacent
parcel when such use meets all conditions of the district in which it is located to include, but not
limited to, screening and landscaping regulations.
(e) Boats shall not be parked in public rights-of-way.
611.8 Work vehicles. No work vehicles longer that 18 feet in length will be allowed to be parked
overnight in any residential zone. The 18-foot limit is inclusive of trailers that are a part of the work
vehicle. The board of zoning appeals may allow limited variances in this rule. In no case will
tractor/trailers be allowed, either connected or unconnected.
612 Off-street loading requirements
Every building or structure hereafter erected and used for business, trade or industry, except in a C-1
District, shall provide space as indicated herein for the loading and unloading of vehicles, with access to a public
street or alley. Such space shall be so arranged that vehicles shall maneuver for loading and unloading entirely
within the property lines of the premises. Off-street loading spaces shall meet the following requirements of size
and number.
612.1 Retail and service businesses. One space ten (10) feet by 25 feet with overhead clearance of 14
feet for each 20,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.
612.2 Wholesale and industrial uses. One space ten (10) feet by fifty (50) feet with fourteen (14) feet
overhead clearance, as follows:
Sq. ft. of gross floor area in structure Number of berths
0 to 25,000 1
25,001 to 40,000 2
40,001 to 100,000 3
100,001 to 160,000 4
160,001 to 240,000 5
240,001 to 320,000 6
320,001 to 400,000 7
each 90,000 above 400,000 1
612.3 Bus and truck terminals. Sufficient spaces to accommodate the maximum number of buses or
trucks to be loading, unloading or stored at the terminal at any one time, to be determined by the zoning
administrator or his/her designee at the time of permit issuance.
613 Mobile homes parks
Creation of mobile home parks is prohibited in the City of West Columbia by previously adopted
ordinances. See Section 808 regarding placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes) in West Columbia.
614 Satellite receiver dishes
Satellite receiver dishes for television signal reception are permitted only on rooftop or in the rear yards of
principal structures in all residential districts. Satellite dishes shall be placed in the rear yards of residential districts
so that no portion of said dish is nearer than five (5) feet from any side or rear property line. In other districts,
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
30 | P a g e
satellite dishes may be located in any required yard. For hardship relief of the terms of this provision, see Section
1101.3
615 Determination of solar sky space easement
The solar sky space easement defined in Article 3 may be computed by using designated minimum yard
requirements in each zoning district in coordination with the information on sky space and shadow data in Appendix
1 of Protecting Solar Access for Residential Development, Department of Housing and Urban Development, 1979.
616 Standard Industrial Classification
The Standard Industrial Classification Manual published by the Executive Office of the President’s Office
of Management and Budget may be referenced in determining a statistical classification of a proposed use.
617 Regulation of Highlighting Colors on the Exterior of Commercial Buildings
The provisions of this article shall apply to all commercial buildings within the City limits. The purpose of this article is
to promote the general economic development and atmosphere of the City for the benefit of all businesses and citizens
located there, and no rights of individuals or individual businesses are created in this article. Further, it is to promote
city-wide property values and to preserve the aesthetic qualities and attractiveness of the City.
617.1 Percentages of highlighted colors. The exterior wall area of each side of the building may contain
non-florescent highlighting trim or dark contrasting features which utilize bright, dark, or vivid colors,
but are restricted to the following percentages: Ten (10%) percent for red, yellow, orange, pink, and
purple; and twenty (20%) for blue, green, black, and brown. In the event that more than one
highlighting color is used then the allowances for the colors will be prorated.
617.2 Approval required for changes to highlighted colors on the exterior of commercial buildings. Any
changes to highlighted colors on the exterior of a commercial building within the city limits must be
permitted by the zoning administrator pursuant to Article 10, sections 1001 and 1002.
617.3 Murals. The provisions of this section shall not apply to murals. However, any and all murals within
the city limits must be permitted by the zoning administrator pursuant to Article 10, sections 1001 and
1002. Any mural existing as of the effective date of this section must be permitted within one (1) year
from the effective date of this section.
617.4 Highlighted colors and murals on the exterior of currently existing commercial buildings. Any
commercial building lawfully operating as of the date of this ordinance that is in violation of this
section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue
for one (1) year from the effective date of this section. Such nonconforming use shall not be increased,
enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
31 | P a g e
ARTICLE 7
USE REQUIREMENTS FOR DISTRICTS
700 D Development district
This district is intended to provide for large tracts of land located primarily on the fringes of urban growth
where the predominant character of urban development has not yet been fully established, but where the current
characteristics of use are predominantly residential, agricultural, or semi-developed, with scattered related uses.
Certain structures and uses required to serve governmental, educational, religious, recreational, and other needs of
such areas are permitted outright or are permissible as special exceptions subject to restrictions and requirements
intended to assure compatibility of uses within the district and adjacent thereto. It is further recognized that future
demand for developable land will generate requests for amendments in zone designations to remove land from the D
classification and place it into other more intensely developed classifications as a natural consequence of urban
expansion.
700.1 Permitted Principal Uses and Structures
700.1.1 Agriculture, horticulture, animal husbandry, forestry, and similar agriculturally related
uses.
700.1.2 Single family detached dwellings located on individual lots.
700.1.3 Parks, playgrounds, play fields and public and private golf courses
700.1.4 Community service structures and uses such as community service centers, libraries, fire
stations, civic, cultural or recreational uses.
700.1.5 Churches and other places of worship including educational buildings related thereto.
700.1.6 Elementary schools, middle schools and high schools
700.1.7 Historic sites and structures provided that they conform to the provisions of Section 804
700.1.8 Class A manufactured homes provided they conform to the provisions of Section 808.2
700.1.9 Free-standing or guyed communication towers with heights not exceeding five hundred
(500) feet as a permitted conditional use per Section 810.2.
700.2 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
700.2.1. Dwellings, barns, sheds, maintenance buildings, storage buildings and similar structures
and uses in connection with agriculturally related uses as specified in 700.1.1 above.
700.2.2 Noncommercial greenhouses and plant nurseries, private garages, garden sheds, tool
houses, swimming pools and the like.
700.2.3 Home occupations subject to the provisions of Section 802.
700.2.4 Solar energy systems.
700.2.5 Beekeeping
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
32 | P a g e
700.2.6 Other structures and uses which:
(1) Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted uses
and structures;
(2) Do not involve the conduct of trade on the premises other than as permitted as a
principal use;
(3) Are located on the same lot as the permitted principal use or structure, or on a
contiguous lot in the same ownership;
(4) Are not likely to attract visitors in larger numbers than would be expected in the
neighborhood; and,
(5) Do not involve operations not in keeping with the character of the neighborhood, or of
a nature prohibited under Section 700.4 .
700.3 Permitted Special Exceptions
After public notice and hearing and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, the board of
zoning appeals may permit as special exceptions:
700.3.1 Single family detached dwellings located in group housing developments, subject to the
provisions of Section 801.
700.3.2 Child day care centers, family day care homes and group day care homes subject to the
provisions of Sections 803.
700.3.3 Extended care facilities, hospitals, sanitariums, rest homes, convalescent homes, homes
for orphans, homes for the aged, provided that no such facility shall have lot area of less than five
(5) acres.
700.3.4 Outdoor recreation uses in addition to those permitted outright, provided that the board of
zoning appeals shall find that the characteristics of such uses and the site design thereof will not be
incompatible with nearby uses, and further provided that motor vehicle raceways shall be
specifically excluded.
700.3.5 Cemeteries
700.3.6 Colleges and universities having minimum lot area of five (5) acres, provided the board
of zoning appeals shall find that the characteristics of such institutions and the site design thereof
will not be incompatible with nearby uses.
700.3.7 Class B and C manufactured homes provided they conform to the provisions of Section
808.3.
700.3.8 Utility substations and water tanks and sewer treatment facilities, provided that the board
of zoning appeals shall impose appropriate conditions and safeguards regarding siting or
characteristics of use potentially incompatible with nearby uses.
700.3.9 Free-standing or guyed communications towers with heights exceeding five hundred
(500) feet.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
33 | P a g e
700.4 Prohibited Uses and Structures
All uses and structures other than those specifically allowed as “Permitted Principal Uses and
Structures” in Section 700.1, “Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures” in Section 700.2, and
“Permitted Special Exceptions” in Section 700.3.
700.5 Minimum Lot Area and Width
Minimum lot area for all uses shall be forty thousand (40,000) square feet and the minimum lot
width for all uses shall be one hundred and fifty (150) feet.
700.6 Minimum Yard Requirements
The depth of front yards and rear yards and the width of side yards shall be as follows for single
family detached dwellings and for other permitted or permissible structures, unless otherwise
specified:
700.6.1 Front:
(1) The required front yard shall be thirty-five (35) feet, unless buildings on contiguous
lots fronting on the same street have front yards of twenty-five (25) feet or less, in which
case the front yard may be less than thirty-five (35) feet, but not less than average front
yards on contiguous lots fronting on the same street, and in no case shall such front yards
be less than ten (10) feet in depth.
(2) On corner lots, the secondary front yard shall be not less than seventeen and one-half
(17 ½ ) feet in depth.
700.6.2 Side yards of Interior and Corner Lots: Combined side yards shall total eighteen (18) feet
or twenty percent (20% ) of the width of the lot, whichever is least, provided that no individual
side yard shall be less than eight (8) feet in width.
700.6.3 Rear Yards:
(1) Permitted principal structures: fifteen (15) feet.
(2) Permitted accessory structures: fifteen (15) feet.
700.7 Maximum Lot Coverage to All Buildings
All permitted and permissible buildings and their accessory buildings shall not exceed a total of
twenty-five percent (25%) lot coverage.
700.8 Maximum Height of Structures
No portion of any building shall exceed forty (40) feet in height.
700.9 Minimum Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
Off-street parking and loading requirements as set forth in Sections 611 and 612.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
34 | P a g e
700.10 Signs
Signs are permitted in the D district only in accordance with the provisions of Article 9.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
35 | P a g e
701 R-1 Residential district
This district is intended as a high-density residential area permitting progressively higher population
densities, characterized by single family detached, multiple family structures, garden-type apartments, and high-rise
apartments. Certain structures and uses required to serve governmental, educational, religious, noncommercial
recreational, and other needs of such areas are permitted outright or are permissible as special exceptions subject to
restrictions and requirements intended to preserve and protect the residential character of the district.
700.1 Permitted Principal Uses and Structures
700.1.1 Single family detached dwellings and two family (duplex) detached dwellings located on
individual lots or in group housing developments subject to the provisions of Section 801.
701.1.2 Multiple family dwellings containing not more than four (4) dwelling units on the first
floor level and not more than eight (8) dwelling units throughout, provided that no more than one
(1) such principal building shall be located on any individual lot.
701.1.3 Multiple family dwellings located in group housing developments, subject to the
provisions of Section 801.
701.1.4 High-rise apartments, subject to the provisions of Section 800.
701.1.5 Historic sites and structures provided that they conform to the provisions of Section 804.
701.1.6 Class A manufactured homes provided they conform to the provisions of Section 808.2
701.1.7 Fee-standing communications towers not exceeding one hundred (100) feet in height as a
permitted conditional use per Section 810.2.
701.2 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
701.2.1 Noncommercial greenhouses and plant nurseries, private garages, garden sheds, tool
houses, private swimming pools, and the like
701.2.2 Home occupations, except beauty and barber shops, subject to the provisions of Section
802.
701.2.3 Solar energy systems.
701.2.4 Beekeeping
701.2.5 Other structures and uses which:
(1) Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted
principal uses and structures;
(2) Do not involve the conduct of trade on the premises;
(3) Are located on the same lot as the permitted principal use or structure, or on a
contiguous lot in the same ownership; and,
(4) Are not likely to attract visitors in larger numbers than would be expected in the
neighborhood: and,
(5) Do not involve operations not in keeping with the character of the area, or of a nature
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
36 | P a g e
prohibited under Section 701.4 .
701.3 Permitted Special Exceptions
After public notice and hearing and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, the board of
zoning appeals may permit, as special exceptions:
701.3.1 Parks, playgrounds, and play fields.
701.3.2 Community service structures and uses such as community service centers, libraries, fire
stations, civic, cultural, or recreational uses.
701.3.3 Churches and other places of worship, including educational buildings related thereto,
provided than the board of zoning appeals shall find that the characteristics of such places of
worship and related buildings, and the site design thereof, will be in keeping with the residential
character of the district.
701.3.4 Elementary schools, middle schools and high schools provided that the board of zoning
appeals shall find that the characteristics of such facilities and the site design thereof will be in
keeping with the residential character of the district.
701.3.5 Family day care homes and group day care homes subject to the provisions of Section
803.
701.3.6 Assisted living centers, hospitals, sanitariums, rest homes, convalescent homes, homes
for orphans, homes for the aged, provided that no such facility shall have lot area of less than five
(5) acres, that no building in connection with such facility be located closer than twenty-five (25)
feet to any lot line.
701.3.7 Utility substations and water tanks and sewer treatment facilities, provided that the board
of zoning appeals shall impose appropriate conditions and safeguards regarding siting or
characteristics of use potentially incompatible with nearby uses.
701.3.8 Cemeteries.
701.3.9 Colleges and universities having minimum lot area of five (5) acres, provided that the
board of zoning appeals shall find that the characteristics of such institutions, and the site design
thereof, will be in keeping with the character of the district.
701.3.10 Off-street parking lots in connection with uses located outside of the R-1 District but
contiguous to the R-1 District subject to the provisions of Section 611.
701.3.11 Fraternities, sororities, and denominational student headquarters, provided that the board
of zoning appeals shall find that the characteristics of such uses, and the site design thereof, will
be in keeping with the residential character of the district.
701.3.12 Rooming and boarding houses.
701.3.13 Beauty and barber shops, as home occupations, subject to the provisions of Section 802.
701.3.14 Noncommercial structures and uses to serve governmental, educational, religious and
recreational needs, subject to conditions imposed by the board of appeals intended to preserve and
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
37 | P a g e
protect the character of the zoning district in which it is located.
701.3.15 Cluster housing development subject to the terms of Section 806.
701.3.16 In-home adult day care.
701.3.17 Foster homes.
701.3.18 Bed and breakfast.
701.3.19 Fee-standing communications towers exceeding one hundred (100) feet in height.
701.4 Prohibited Uses and Structures
701.4.1 All uses and structures other than those provided under “Permitted Principal Uses and
Structures”
in Section 701.1, “Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures” in Section 701.2. or “Permitted
Special Exceptions” in Section 701.3.
701.4.2 Further prohibited is:
(1) storage in connection with trade, services or manufacturing activities outside the
district.
(2) storage or long-term parking of commercial or industrial vehicles.
(3) storage of building materials except in connection with active construction activities
on the premises.
701.5 Minimum Lot Area
701.5.1 For each dwelling unit, five-thousand (5,000) square feet for the first unit and two
thousand (2,000) square feet for each additional unit.
701.5.2 High-rise apartments: one (1) acre as provided in Section 800.
701.5.3 Uses and structures permissible as special exceptions: As required under permitted
special exceptions” for this district.
701.5.4 Other structures and uses, and uses permissible as special exceptions for which no
minimum lot area is required: No minimum except as needed to meet other requirements herein.
701.6 Minimum Lot Width
701.6.1 Single family detached or two family detached dwellings: fifty (50) feet.
701.6.2 High-rise apartments: one hundred and fifty (150) feet as provided in Section 800.
701.6.3 Uses and structures permissible as special exceptions: As required under permitted
special exceptions in Section 701.3.
701.6.4 Other structures and uses, and uses permissible as special exceptions for which no
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
38 | P a g e
minimum lot width is required: No minimum except as needed to meet other requirements herein.
701.7 Minimum Yard Requirements
701.7.1 Front yards:
(1) Primary front yards: Twenty (20) feet
(2) Corner lots: The secondary front yard shall not be less than twelve and one-half (12
½ ) feet in depth.
701.7.2 Side yards of interior and corner lots: Combined side yards shall total ten (10) feet or
twenty percent (20%) of the width of the lot, whichever is least, provided that an individual side
yard shall be no less than three (3) feet in width.
701.7.3 Rear yards: Fifteen (15) feet for permitted principal structures. Permitted accessory
structures may be located in rear yards, provided, however, that no such structure shall be located
closer than five (5) feet from the rear property line.
701.8 Maximum Lot Coverage by All Buildings
701.8.1. High-rise apartments: As provided in Section 800.
701.8.2. All other permitted and permissible buildings and their accessory buildings shall not
exceed a total of forty percent (40%) lot coverage, except as required to meet other regulations
herein.
701.9 Maximum Height of Structures
701.9.1 High-rise apartments: As provided in Section 800
701.9.2 All other buildings: thirty-five (35) feet, provided that buildings may exceed this height
if there is an increase of one (1) foot in side, front, and rear yards over the minimum side, front,
and rear yard requirements for each additional two (2) feet of height.
701.10 Minimum Off-street Parking and Loading Requirements
Off-street parking and loading requirements as set forth in Sections 611 and 612 must be met.
701.11 Signs
Signs are permitted in the R-1 district only in accordance with the provisions of Article 9.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
39 | P a g e
702 R-2 Residential district
This district is intended as a medium density residential area permitting progressively higher population
densities, characterized by single family detached and two family (duplex) detached structures. Certain structures
and uses required to serve governmental, educational, religious, noncommercial, recreational, and other needs of
such areas are permitted outright or are permissible as special exceptions subject to restrictions and requirements
intended to preserve and protect the residential character of the districts.
702.1 Permitted Principal Uses and Structures
702.1.1 Single family detached and two family (duplex) dwellings located on individual lots or in
group housing developments subject to the provisions of Section 801.
702.1.2 Historic sites and structures provided they conform to the provisions of Section 804
702.1.3 Class A manufactured homes provided they conform to the provisions of Section 808.2
702.1.4 Free-standing communications towers not exceeding one hundred (100) feet in height as
a permitted conditional use per Section 810.2.
702.2 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
702.2.1 Non commercial greenhouses and plant nurseries, private garages, garden sheds, tool
houses, private swimming pools, and the like.
702.2.2 Home occupations, except beauty and barber shops, subject to the provisions of Section
802.
702.2.3 Solar energy systems.
702.2.4 Beekeeping
702.2.5 Other structures and uses which:
(1) Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted
principal uses and structures;
(2) Do not involve the conduct of trade on the premises;
(3) Are located on the same lot as the permitted principal use or structure, or on a
contiguous lot in the same ownership.
(4) Are not likely to attract visitors in larger numbers than would be expected in the
neighborhood; and,
(5) Do not involve operations not in keeping with the character of the area, or of a nature
prohibited under Section 702.4.
702.3 Permitted Special Exceptions
After public notice and hearing and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, the board of
zoning appeals may permit, as special exceptions:
702.3.1 Parks, playgrounds, play fields.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
40 | P a g e
702.3.2 Community service structures and uses such as community service centers, libraries, fire
stations, civic, cultural, or recreational uses.
702.3.3 Churches and other places of worship, including educational buildings related thereto,
provided that the board of zoning appeals shall find that the characteristics of such places of
worship and related buildings, and the site design thereof, will be in keeping with the residential
character of the district.
702.3.4 Elementary and high schools provided that the board of zoning appeals shall find that the
characteristics of such facilities, and the site design thereof will be in keeping with the residential
character of the district.
702.3.5 Family day care and group day care, day nurseries and kindergartens, subject to the
provisions of Section 803.
702.3.6 Hospitals, sanitariums, rest homes, convalescent homes, homes for orphans, homes for
the aged, provided that no such facility shall have lot area of less than five (5) acres, that no
building in connection with such facility shall be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any
lot line.
702.3.7 Utility substations and water tanks and sewer treatment facilities, provided that the board
of appeals shall impose appropriate conditions and safeguards regarding siting or characteristics of
use potentially incompatible with nearby uses.
702.3.8 Cemeteries.
702.3.9 Colleges and universities having minimum lot area of five (5) acres, provided that the
board of appeals shall find that the characteristics of such institutions, and the site design thereof,
will be in keeping with the character of the district.
702.3.10 Off-street parking lots in connection with uses located outside of the R-2 district but
contiguous to the R-2 district subject to the provisions of Section 611.
702.3.11 Rooming and boarding houses.
702.3.12 Beauty and barber shops, as home occupations, subject to the provisions of Section 802.
702.3.13 Cluster housing developments subject to the terms of Section 806.
702.3.14 Noncommercial structures and uses to serve governmental, educational, religious and
recreational needs, subject to conditions imposed by the board of zoning appeals intended to
preserve and protect the character of the zoning district.
702.3.15 Foster homes.
702.3.16 In-home adult day care.
702.3.17 Bed and breakfast.
702.3.18 Free-standing communications tower exceeding one hundred (100) feet in height.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
41 | P a g e
702.4 Prohibited Uses and Structures
702.4.1 All uses and structures other than permitted in “Permitted Principal Uses and Structures”
in Section 702.1, “Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures” in Section 702.2, or “Permitted
Special Exceptions” in Section 702.3.
702.4.2 Further prohibited is:
(1) storage in connection with trade, service or manufacturing activities outside the
district.
(2) storage or long-term parking of commercial or industrial vehicles.
(3) storage of building materials except in connection with active construction activities
on the premises.
702.5 Minimum Lot Area
702.5.1 For each dwelling unit, five thousand (5,000) square feet for the first unit and two
thousand, five hundred (2,500) square feet for each additional unit.
702.5.2 Uses and structures permissible as special exceptions: As required under permitted
special exceptions in Section 702.3.
702.5.3 Other structures and uses, and uses permissible as special exceptions for which no
minimum lot area is required: No minimum except as needed to meet other requirements herein.
702.6 Minimum Lot Width
702.6.1 Single family detached or two (2) family detached dwellings: fifty (50) feet.
702.6.2 Uses and structures permissible as special exceptions: As required under permitted
special exceptions in Section 702.3.
702.6.3 Other structures and uses, and uses permissible as special exceptions for which no
minimum lot width is required: No minimum except as needed to meet other requirements herein.
702.7 Minimum Yard Requirements
Minimum yard requirements for all structures and uses shall be as follows:
702.7.1 Front yards:
(1) Primary front yards: Twenty-five (25) feet.
(2) Corner lots: For a corner lot, the secondary yard shall not be less than one-half ( ½ )
the depth of the primary front yard.
702.7.2 Side yards of interior and corner lots: Combined side yards shall total ten (10) feet or
twenty percent (20%) of the width of the lot, whichever is least, provided that no individual side
yard shall be less than three (3) feet in width.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
42 | P a g e
702.7.3 Rear yards: For permitted principal structures: fifteen (15) feet. For permitted accessory
structures: five (5) feet.
702.8 Minimum Lot Coverage by All Buildings
All permitted and permissible buildings and their accessory buildings shall not exceed a total of
forty percent (40%) lot coverage.
702.9 Maximum Height of Structures. No portion of any building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in
height.
702.10 Minimum Off-street Parking and Loading Requirements.
Off-street parking and loading requirements as set forth in Sections 611 and 612 must be met.
702.11 Signs.
Signs are permitted in the R-2 district only in accordance with the provisions of Article 9.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
43 | P a g e
703 R-3 and R-4 Residential districts
These districts are intended as single family residential areas with low to medium population densities. Use
regulations for the single family districts are identical, but custom has established two (2) classes of lot width and lot
area, and these dimensional differences are intended to be preserved. Certain structures and uses required to serve
governmental, educational, religious, noncommercial, recreational, and other needs of such areas are permitted
outright, within such districts or are permissible as special exceptions subject to restrictions and requirements
intended to preserve and protect their single family residential character.
703.1 Permitted Principal Uses and Structures
703.1.1 Single family detached dwellings located on individual lots.
703.1.2 Historic sites and structures provided that they conform to the provision of Section 804.
703.1.3 Free-standing communications towers not exceeding one hundred (100) feet in height as
a permitted conditional use per Section 810.2.
703.2 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
703.2.1 Noncommercial greenhouses, plant nurseries, private garages, garden sheds, tool sheds,
private swimming pools, and the like.
703.2.2 Home occupations, except beauty and barbershops, subject to the provisions of Section
802.
703.2.3 Solar energy systems.
703.2.4 Beekeeping
703.2.5 Other structures and uses which:
(1) Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted
principal uses and structures;
(2) Do not involve the conduct of trade on the premises;
(3) Are located on the same lot as the permitted principal use or structure, or on a
contiguous lot in the same ownership;
(4) Are not likely to attract visitors in larger numbers than would be expected in the
neighborhood; and,
(5) Do not involve operations not in keeping with the character of the area, or of a nature
prohibited in Section 703.4.
703.3 Permitted Special Exceptions
After public notice and hearing, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, the board of
zoning appeal may permit, as special exceptions:
703.3.1 Parks, playgrounds, and play fields.
703.3.2 Community service structures and uses such as community service centers, libraries, fire
stations, civic, cultural or recreational uses, provided that a specific determination is made by the
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
44 | P a g e
board on zoning appeals that such uses or structures are in keeping with the residential character of
the district.
703.3.3 Churches and other places of worship, including educational buildings related thereto,
provided that the board of zoning appeals shall find that the characteristics of such facilities and
the site design thereof will be in keeping with the residential character of the district.
703.3.4 Elementary schools, middle schools and high schools, provided that the board of zoning
appeals shall find that the characteristics of such facilities and the site design thereof will be in
keeping with the residential character of the district.
703.3.5 Family day care homes and group day care homes subject to the provisions of Section
803.
703.3.6 Utility substations and water tanks and sewer treatment facilities, provided that the board
of zoning appeals shall impose appropriate conditions and safeguards regarding siting or
characteristics of use potentially incompatible with nearby uses.
703.3.7 Cemeteries
703.3.8 Colleges and universities having minimum lot area of five (5) acres, provided that the
board of zoning appeals shall find that the characteristics of such institutions and the site design
thereof will be in keeping with the residential character of the district.
703.3.9 Off-street parking lots in connection with uses located outside of the R-3 and R-4 district
but contiguous to R-3 or R-4 districts without an intervening street but with or without an
intervening alley, subject to the provisions of Section 611.
703.3.10 Single family detached dwellings located in group developments, subject to the
provisions of Section 801.
703.3.11 Beauty and barbershops, as home occupations, subject to the provisions of Section 802.
703.3.12 Noncommercial structures and uses to serve governmental, educational, religious, and
recreational needs, subject to conditions imposed by the board of zoning appeals intended to
preserve and protect the character of the R-3 or R-4 zoning district in which it is located.
703.3.13 In R-3 districts, cluster housing development subject to the terms of Section 806.
703.3.14 Foster homes.
703.3.15 In-home adult day care.
703.3.16 Free-standing communications towers exceeding one hundred (100) feet in height.
703.4 Prohibited Uses and Structures
703.4.1 All uses and structures other than as provided under “Permitted Principal Uses and
Structures” in Section 703.1, “Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures” in Section
703.2, or “Permitted Special Exceptions” in Section 703.3.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
45 | P a g e
703.4.2 Further prohibited is:
(1) storage in connection with trade, service, or manufacturing activities outside the
districts.
(2) storage or long-term parking of commercial or industrial vehicles.
(3) storage of building materials except in connection with active construction activities
on the premises.
(4) storage or use of manufactured homes.
703.5 Minimum Lot Area and Width
703.5.1 Single family detached dwellings:
Lot Area (sq. ft.) Lot Width (ft.)
R-4 13,125 75
R-3 7,500 50
703.5.2 Other uses and structures permitted outright or permissible as special exceptions: No
minimum except as needed to meet other requirements herein or as specified under “Permitted
Special Exceptions”, above.
703.6 Minimum Yard Requirements
The depth of front and rear yards, and the width of side yards shall be as follows, for single family
detached dwellings and for other permitted or permissible structures, unless otherwise specified:
703.6.1 Front yards:
(1) R-4: thirty-five (35) feet
(2) R-3: twenty-five (25) feet
(3) On corner lots the secondary front yard shall equal one-half (½ ) the primary front
yard.
703.6.2 Side Yards of interior lots and corner lots:
(1) R-4: Combined side yards shall total fifteen (15) feet or twenty percent (20%) of the
width of the lot (whichever is least), provided however that no individual side yard shall
be less than five (5) feet in width.
(2) R-3: Combined side yards shall total ten (10) feet or twenty percent (20%) of the
width of the lot (whichever is least), provided however that no individual side yard shall
be less than three (3) feet in width.
703.6.3 Rear Yards in R-3 and R-4: For permitted principal structures: twenty-five (25) feet. For
permitted accessory structures: five (5) feet.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
46 | P a g e
703.7 Maximum Lot Coverage by All Buildings
703.7.1 Residential units and their accessory buildings shall not exceed a total of thirty percent
(30%) lot coverage.
703.7.2 Other permitted and permissible buildings and their accessory buildings shall not exceed
a total of twenty-five percent (25%) lot coverage.
703.8 Maximum Height of Structures
703.8.1 R-3 and R-4: Buildings of thirty-five (35) feet in height or less are permitted outright.
703.8.2 R-4: Principal buildings in excess of thirty-five (35) feet in height but not to exceed fifty
(50) feet in height, provided the minimum lot area is 26,250 square feet and there is an increase of
one (1) foot in side, front, and rear yards over the minimum side, front, and rear yard requirements
for each additional one foot of height.
703.8.3 R-4: Principal buildings in excess of thirty-five (35) feet in height but not to exceed fifty
(50) feet in height are allowed if they do not meet the requirements of 703.8.2 above, provided the
principal building on a contiguous lot fronting on the same roadway exceeds thirty-five (35) feet
in height; however, in no case will the principal structure permitted by 703.8.3 be allowed to
exceed the average height of principal residential structures on contiguous lots.
703.8.4 R-4: Principal buildings in excess of thirty-five (35) feet in height but not to exceed fifty
(50) feet in height may be allowed as special exceptions if they do not meet the requirements of
703.8.2 or 703.8.3 above. When considering a special exception, the zoning board of appeals shall
consider lot width, the average height of principal residential structures on contiguous lots, the
impact on views from nearby lots, distances between structures, and impact on fire safety and
emergency response. Structures should be compatible with the dominant horizontal or vertical
expression of surrounding structures.
703.8.5 R-3: Principal buildings in excess of thirty-five (35) feet in height but not to exceed fifty
(50) feet in height may be allowed as special exceptions provided that the minimum lot area is
26,250 square feet and the requirements of 703.8.2 or 703.8.3 are met. The Zoning Board of
Appeals shall not approve a special exception allowing the height of a principal structure to
exceed the average height of principal residential structures on contiguous lots. When considering
a special exception, the zoning board of appeals shall consider lot width, the average height of
principal residential structures on contiguous lots, the impact on views from nearby lots, distances
between structures, and impact on fire safety and emergency response. Structures should be
compatible with the dominant horizontal or vertical expression of surrounding structures.
703.9 Minimum Off-street Parking and Loading Requirements
Off-street parking and loading requirements set forth in Sections 611 and 612 must be met.
703.10 Signs
Signs are permitted in the R-4 and R-3 zones only in accordance with the provisions of Article 9.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
47 | P a g e
704 C-1 Intensive commercial district
This district is intended to accommodate those uses, which, taken together, form the intensive commercial
district, characterized by retail and intensive office core uses, often intermingled with residential uses, intended to
serve persons who shop, work or reside in the intensive commercial business district. C-1 districts are often
composed of small lots developed in such a manner that they cannot meet yard requirements and off-street parking
and loading requirements prevalent in other commercial districts. Certain related structures and uses required to
serve the needs of the area are permitted outright or are permissible as special exceptions subject to restrictions and
requirements intended to best fulfill the intent of the ordinance.
704.1 Permitted Principal Uses and Structures
704.1.1 Retail establishments, sales, and display rooms.
704.1.2 Offices.
704.1.3 Photography studios, art studios, art galleries, art sales, interior design studios, craft
studios, craft sales, antique shops, establishments for the teaching of music, dancing, or other
performing arts.
704.1.4 Financial institutions.
704.1.5 Hotels and motels.
704.1.6 Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants.
704.1.7 Personal service establishments
704.1.8 Business service establishments
704.1.9 Amusement, recreational, and entertainment establishments.
704.1.10 Wholesaling not involving storage of goods to be wholesaled in excess of three
thousand (3,000) square feet of gross floor space.
704.1.11 Laboratories and establishments for fitting, repair or production of eyeglasses, hearing
aids, or prosthetic devices.
704.1.12 Radio and television stations.
704.1.13 Medically related offices.
704.1.14 Commercial printing and job printing establishments.
704.1.15 Business schools and vocational schools not involving uses of an industrial nature
which would not otherwise be permitted in this district.
704.1.16 Elementary schools, middle schools and high schools.
704.1.17 Rehabilitation centers.
704.1.18 Hospitals.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
48 | P a g e
704.1.19Dwelling units of not less than six hundred (600) square feet each located on the second,
third, fourth, or fifth stories in structures whose first story (ground floor) is occupied by
nonresidential uses, not in a structure defined herein as a high-rise apartment.
704.1.20 Parking lots and parking garages.
704.1.21 Clubs, lodges, civic, and fraternal organizations.
704.1.22 Churches and other places of worship, including educational buildings related thereto.
704.1.23 Parks, playgrounds, play fields.
704.1.24 Community service structures and uses such as community service centers, libraries,
fire stations, civic, cultural or recreational uses.
704.1.25 Historic sites and structures provided that they conform to the provisions of Section
804.
704.1.26 Light manufacturing uses, such as a bakery, dry cleaning plants, laundries, and similar
establishments.
704.1.27 Convenience stores.
704.1.28 Bed and breakfasts.
704.1.29 Free-standing or guyed communications towers not exceeding one hundred eighty (180)
feet in height as a permitted conditional use per Section 801.2.
704.1.30 Food Truck Court as a conditional use per Section 817.
704.1.31 Artisan Manufacturing with the following conditions:
(1) Must be attached to a retail component selling the goods produced on site;
(2) Outdoor storage is permitted only in the C-1 (Intensive Commercial) and C-2
(General Commercial) district. Any activity storing materials outdoors shall
construct an opaque fence at least six (6) feet in height or two (2) feet higher
than the stored material, not to exceed 8 feet. Outdoor storage is prohibited in
the Gateway Overlay District
(3) Where the site abuts a residential district, service door openings or loading
docks oriented toward the residential zone district residential use shall be
screened with a 100% opaque screening comprised either of vegetation, a
privacy fence or combination, at least 6 feet high.
(4) Micro-distilleries must be at least 300 feet from any lot that contains a school, a
place of worship or a playground.
704.1.32 Vehicle sales in accordance with Section 815 and Section 704.4.6
704.1.33 Beer Gardens with the following conditions:
(1) Shall be closed between the hours of 12:00 AM and 10:00 AM;
(2) The onsite consumption of liquor, liqueur and spirits is prohibited;
(3) Required off-street parking shall be at a ratio of 1 space per 300 square feet of
service area. Parcels located in the C-1 district are exempted from the parking
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
49 | P a g e
standard.
(4) The perimeter of the outdoor seating area is designated by a decorative fence,
wall and/or planter.
(5) Outdoor lighting must be shielded to prevent direct lighting on the right-of-way
or adjacent property
(6) Must comply with the City of West Columbia Noise Ordinance
704.1.34Taprooms with the following conditions:
(1) At least 20% of product sold is produced by microbreweries within the State of
South Carolina;
(2) Shall be closed between the hours of 12:00 AM and 10:00 AM;
(3) The onsite consumption of liquor, liqueur and spirits is prohibited;
(4) Required off-street parking shall be at a ratio of 1 space per 300 square feet of
service area. Parcels located in the C-1 zoning district are exempt from the
parking standard.
704.2 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
704.2.1 Dwelling units in connection with permitted or permissible uses or structures, located
within the principal structure for occupancy only by owner or employees thereof.
704.2.2 Solar energy systems.
704.2.3 Beekeeping
704.2.3 Other structures and uses which:
(1) Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted
principal uses and structures;
(2) Are located wholly on the same lot as the permitted principal use or structure, or on a
contiguous lot in the same ownership;
(3) Do not involve operations not in keeping with the character of the area, or of a nature
prohibited under Prohibited Uses and Structures in Section 704.4.
704.3 Permitted Special Exceptions
After public notice and hearing, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, the board of
zoning appeals may permit, as special exceptions:
704.3.1 High-rise apartments containing both residential and nonresidential uses listed as
principal uses in the C-1 district subject to the provisions of Section 800.
704.3.2 Utilities substations and water tanks and sewer treatment facilities, provided that the
board of zoning appeals shall impose appropriate conditions and safeguards regarding siting or
characteristics of use potentially incompatible with nearby uses.
704.3.3 Family day care homes, group day care homes and day care centers subject to the
provisions of Section 803.
704.3.4 Wholesaling involving storage of goods to be wholesaled of from 3,001 to 7,500 square
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
50 | P a g e
feet of gross floor space.
704.3.5 Free-standing or guyed communications towers exceeding one hundred eighty (180) feet
in heigh
704.3.6 Food truck court within 400 feet of an R-2, R-3, R-4 subject to the conditions of Section
817.
704.4 Prohibited Uses and Structures
704.4.1 Any use or structure other than as provided under “Permitted Principal Uses and
Structures” in Section 704.1, “Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures” in Section 704.2 or
“Permitted Special Exceptions” in Section 704.3.
704.4.2 Manufacturing uses, except as specifically permitted in Section 704.1.26.
704.4.3 Bulk storage of flammable liquids, other than for retail sales on the premises.
704.4.4 Junk, salvage, scrap or wrecking yards.
704.4.5 Warehousing or storage, except as accessory to a permitted or permissible principal use
located elsewhere within the C-1 district.
704.4.6 Sales, service, display or storage of goods except in enclosed buildings.
704.4.7 Auto body repair and auto painting facilities.
704.4.8 Body Art Services
704.5 Minimum Lot Area
All permitted or permissible uses or structures: No minimum except as needed to meet other
requirements herein.
704.6 Minimum Lot Width
All permitted or permissible uses or structures: No minimum except as needed to meet other
requirements herein.
704.7 Minimum Yard Requirements
All permitted or permissible uses or structures: No minimum except as needed to meet other
requirements herein.
704.8 Maximum Lot Coverage by All Buildings
704.8.1 High-rise apartments: As needed to meet requirements of Section 800
704.8.2 All other permitted or permissible uses or structures: No maximum except as needed to
meet other requirements herein.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
51 | P a g e
704.9 Maximum Height of Structures
704.9.1 High-rise apartments: As needed to meet requirements of Section 800
704.9.2 All other permitted or permissible uses or structures: No maximum except as needed to
meet other requirements herein.
704.10 Minimum Off-street Parking and Loading Requirements
Off-street parking and loading is not required in the C-1 district.
704.11 Signs
Signs are permitted in the C-1 district only in accordance with provisions of Article 9.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
52 | P a g e
705 C-2 General commercial district
This district is intended to accommodate a variety of general commercial and nonresidential uses
characterized primarily by retail, office and service establishments or oriented primarily to major traffic arteries or
extensive areas of predominantly commercial usage and characteristics. Certain related structures and uses are
permitted outright or are permissible as special exceptions subject to the restrictions and requirements intended to
best fulfill the intent of this ordinance.
705.1 Permitted Principal Uses and Structures
705.1.1 Retail establishments, sales and display rooms.
705.1.2 Service and repair establishments.
705.1.3 Personal service establishments including such uses as beauty shops, barber shops, shoe
repair shops, dry cleaning and laundry, dressmaking and tailoring.
705.1.4 Offices.
705.1.5 Photography studios, art studios, art galleries, art sales, interior design studios, craft
studios, craft sales, antique shops, establishments for the teaching of music, dancing, or other
performing arts.
705.1.6 Financial institutions.
705.1.7 Wholesaling and distribution establishments not involving over three thousand (3,000)
square feet of area for storage of wares to be wholesaled or distributed.
705.1.8 Commercial recreation and entertainment structures and uses, such as theaters, bowling
alleys, miniature golf courses, nightclubs, and the like.
705.1.9 Motels and hotels.
705.1.10 Commercial parking lots and parking garages.
705.1.11 Commercial printing and job printing establishments.
705.1.12 Radio stations, television stations.
705.1.13 Veterinary establishments provided that all animals are kept within suitably designed,
soundproofed, air conditioned buildings.
705.1.14 Funeral homes.
705.1.15 Business and vocational schools not involving operations of an industrial nature.
705.1.16 Private clubs and lodges, civic and fraternal organizations not involving residential
uses.
705.1.17 Medical and health related centers, clinics, laboratories.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
53 | P a g e
705.1.18 Parks, playgrounds, play fields.
705.1.19 Community service structures and uses such as community service centers, libraries,
fire stations, civic, cultural or recreational uses.
705.1.20 Churches and other places of worship, including educational buildings related thereto.
705.1.21 Automobile service stations.
705.1.22 Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants.
705.1.23 Historic sites and structures provided that they conform to the provisions of Section
804.
705.1.24 Light manufacturing uses such as bakeries, dry cleaning plants, laundries and similar
establishments.
705.1.25 Public buildings.
705.1.26 Storage yards for permitted uses, provided any storage area not within a building or
structures shall be screened by a permanent fence, wall or other approved material so as not to be
visible from a public street or adjoining residential use in an adjoining residential zone. Such a
screen shall be at least six (6) feet in height or two (2) feet higher than the stored material,
whichever is higher. Storage structures are limited to 7,500 square feet of gross floor area for
storage of wares for permitted uses.
705.1.27 Public drinking places subject to the following provisions:
(1) Lots used as public drinking places shall not be located closer than four hundred (400)
feet from any other lot used as a public drinking place and shall not be closer than six
hundred (600) feet from any lot which contains a school or place of worship.
(2) The hours of operation shall be no later than 12:00 midnight when such establishment
is located adjacent to a residential zone.
(3) One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each three hundred (300) square
feet of gross floor area.
(4) Adequate ingress and egress shall be provided.
705.1.28 Dwelling units of not less than six hundred (600) square feet, each located on the
second, third, or fourth stories in structures whose first story (ground floor) is occupied by
nonresidential uses not in a structures defined herein as a high-rise apartment.
705.1.29 Group commercial developments subject to provision of Section 801.
705.1.30 Convenience stores.
705.1.31 Bed and breakfast operations.
705.1.32 Sexually oriented businesses per requirements of Section 809.
705.1.33 Free-standing or guyed communications towers not exceeding one hundred eighty (180)
feet in height as a permitted conditional use per Section 810.2.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
54 | P a g e
705.1.34 Food Truck Court as a conditional use per Section 817
705.1.35 Artisan Manufacturing with the following conditions:
(1) Must be attached to a retail component selling the goods produced on site;
(2) Outdoor storage is permitted only in the C-1 (Intensive Commercial) and C-2
(General Commercial) district. Any activity storing materials outdoors shall
construct an opaque fence at least six (6) feet in height or two (2) feet higher
than the stored material, not to exceed 8 feet. Outdoor storage is prohibited in
the Gateway Overlay District
(3) Where the site abuts a residential district, service door openings or loading
docks oriented toward the residential zone district residential use shall be
screened with a 100% opaque screening comprised either of vegetation, a
privacy fence or combination, at least 6 feet high.
(4) Micro-distilleries must be at least 300 feet from any lot that contains a school, a
place of worship or a playground.
705.1.36 Vehicle sales in accordance with Section 815.
705.1.37Beer Gardens with the following conditions:
(1) Shall be closed between the hours of 12:00 AM and 10:00 AM;
(2) The onsite consumption of liquor, liqueur and spirits is prohibited;
(3) Required off-street parking shall be at a ratio of 1 space per 300 square feet of
service area. Parcels located in the C-1 district are exempted from the parking
standard.
(4) The perimeter of the outdoor seating area is designated by a decorative fence,
wall and/or planter.
(5) Outdoor lighting must be shielded to prevent direct lighting on the right-of-way
or adjacent property
(6) Must comply with the City of West Columbia Noise Ordinance
705.1.38 Taprooms with the following conditions:
(1) At least 20% of product sold is produced by microbreweries within the State of
South Carolina;
(2) Shall be closed between the hours of 12:00 AM and 10:00 AM;
(3) The onsite consumption of liquor, liqueur and spirits is prohibited;
(4) Required off-street parking shall be at a ratio of 1 space per 300 square feet of
service area. Parcels located in the C-1 zoning district are exempt from the
parking standard.
705.2 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
705.2.1 Beekeeping
705.2.2 Structures and uses which:
(a) Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted
principal uses and structures.
(b) Are located wholly on the same lot as the permitted principal use or structure, or on a
contiguous lot in the same ownership.
(c) Do not involve operations not in keeping with the character of the area, or of a nature
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
55 | P a g e
prohibited under “Prohibited Uses and Structures” for this district.
705.2.3 Solar energy systems.
705.3 Permitted Special Exceptions
After public notice and hearing, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, the board of
appeals may permit, as special exceptions:
705.3.1 Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, rest homes, convalescent homes, homes for
orphans, homes for the aged provided that no such facility shall have lot areas of less than one (1)
acre, and that no building in connection with such facility shall be closer than twenty five (25) feet
to any lot zoned residentially.
705.3.2 Rehabilitation centers.
705.3.3 Family day care homes, group day care homes and day care centers subject to the
provisions of Section 803.
705.3.4 Cemeteries.
705.3.5 Wholesaling involving storage of goods to be wholesaled of from 3,001 to 7,500 square
feet of gross floor area.
705.3.6 Construction companies.
705.3.7 Utility substations and water tanks and sewer treatment facilities, provided that the board
of zoning appeals shall impose appropriate conditions and safeguards regarding siting or
characteristics of use potentially incompatible with nearby uses.
705.3.8 Commercial kennels and noncommercial kennels
705.3.9 Free-standing or guyed communications towers exceeding one hundred eighty (180) feet
in height.
705.3.10 Passenger terminals.
705.3.11 Truck terminals.
705.3.12 Mini warehouses.
705.3.13Pawn shops, title loan businesses, check cash operations, payday loan businesses with the
following location requirements: 1,000 feet spacing between such businesses and 1,000 feet
distance from schools and churches.
705.3.14 Food Truck Court within 400 feet of an R-2, R-3 or R-4 district subject to the provisions
of Section 817
705.4 Prohibited Uses and Structures
705.4.1 Any use other than as provided under “Permitted Principal Uses and Structures” in
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
56 | P a g e
Section 705.1, “Permitted Accessory Uses or Structures” in Section 705.2, and “Permitted Special
Exceptions” in Section 705.3.
705.4.2 Also specifically prohibited are auto body repair and auto painting facilities.
705.4.3 Body Art Services
705.5 Minimum Lot Area
705.5.1 Uses and structures permissible as special exceptions: As required under “Permitted
Special Exceptions” for this district.
705.5.2 All other structures and uses, and uses permissible as special exceptions for which no
minimum lot area is required: No minimum except to meet other requirements herein.
705.6 Minimum Lot Width
All permitted and permissible uses and structures: No minimum except to meet other requirements
herein.
705.7 Minimum Yard Requirements
Minimum yard requirements for all structures and uses shall be as set forth below.
705.7.1 Front:
(1) If frontage of lot is one hundred (100) feet or more, the required front yard shall be
twenty-five (25) feet.
(2) If frontage of lot is less than one hundred (100) feet, the required front yard shall be
twenty-five (25) feet, unless buildings on contiguous lots fronting on the same street
have provided front yards of twenty (20) feet, but not less than the average front
yards on contiguous lots fronting on the same street, and in no case shall such front
yards be less than twelve and one-half (12 ½) feet in depth.
(3) On corner lots, the secondary front yard shall not be less than twelve and one-half
(12½ ) feet in depth.
705.7.2 Side: No side yard is required if buildings are built to side lot line, otherwise, at least
three (3) feet of side yard width is required, provided, however, that where a lot zoned C-2 is
contiguous to a residential zone, a side yard of not less than twenty (20) feet shall be provided on
the side contiguous to the residential zone.
705.7.3 Rear:
(1) Permitted and permissible principal structures: ten (10) feet.
(2) Permitted accessory structures: five (5) feet except where abutting residentially zoned
property in which case, a minimum ten (10) feet rear yard will be required.
(3) See Section 805 for additional requirements.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
57 | P a g e
705.8 Maximum Lot Coverage by All Buildings
All uses and structures: No limitation except as needed to meet other requirements herein.
705.9 Maximum Height of Structures
705.9.1 Buildings up to forty (40) feet in height are permitted outright.
705.9.2 Buildings in excess of forty (40) feet in height, provided there is an increase of one (1)
foot in side, front, and rear yards over the minimum side, front, and rear yard requirements for
each additional two (2) feet of height.
705.9.3 Buildings between the height of forty (40) and seventy-five (75) feet are allowed as
special exceptions if they do not meet the requirements of 705.9.2 above.
705.10 Minimum Off-street Parking and Loading Requirements
Off-street parking and loading requirements set forth in Sections 611 and 612 must be met.
705.11 Signs
Signs are permitted in the C-2 district only in accordance with provisions of Article 9.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
58 | P a g e
706 C-3 Restricted commercial district
This district is intended to accommodate office, institutional, and residential uses in areas whose
characteristics are transitional from residential to commercial uses and is intended to accomplish the transition with
a minimum of conflict among uses. Certain related structures and uses required to serve the needs of such area are
permitted outright or are permissible as special exceptions subject to restrictions and requirements intended to best
fulfill the intent of this ordinance.
706.1 Permitted Principal Uses and Structures
706.1.1 Offices
706.1.2 Photography studios, art studios, art galleries, art sales, interior design studios, craft
studios, craft sales, antique shops.
706.1.3 Pharmacies, medical and dental laboratories, establishments for fitting and sales of
prosthetic devices.
706.1.4 Hospitals, medical, and health related clinics.
706.1.5 Nursing homes, rest homes, convalescent homes, homes for orphans, homes for the aged.
706.1.6 Auditoriums, libraries, museums, theaters.
706.1.7 Funeral homes
706.1.8 Elementary schools, middle schools, high schools, business and vocational schools not
involving operations of an industrial or retail nature.
706.1.9 Colleges and universities.
706.1.10 Churches and other places of worship, including educational buildings related thereto.
706.1.11 Single family detached dwellings and two family (duplex) detached dwellings located
on individual lots or in group housing developments, subject to the provisions of Section 801.
706.1.12 Multiple family dwellings containing not more than four (4) dwelling units on the first
floor level and not more than eight (8) dwelling units throughout, provided that no more than one
(1) such principal building shall be located on any individual lot.
706.1.13 Multiple family dwellings located in group housing developments, subject to the
provisions of Section 801.
706.1.14 High-rise apartments, subject to provisions of Section 800.
706.1.15 Commercial parking garages and parking lots.
706.1.16 Parks, playgrounds, play fields.
706.1.17 Community service structures and uses such as community service centers, libraries,
fire stations, civic, cultural or recreational uses.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
59 | P a g e
706.1.18 Historic sites and structures provided that they conform to the provisions of Section
804.
706.1.19 Private clubs and lodges.
706.1.20 Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants.
706.1.21 Motels and hotels.
706.1.22 Automobile service stations
706.1.23 Dry cleaning and laundry pick-up stations, laundromats, shoe repair shops, tailor shops,
barber shops, beauty shops.
706.1.24 Financial institutions.
706.1.25 Convenience stores and service stations.
706.1.26 Class A manufactured homes provided they conform to the provisions of Section 808.2
706.1.27 Bed and breakfast.
706.1.28 Free-standing or guyed communications towers exceeding one hundred eighty (180) feet
in height as a permitted conditional use per Section 810.2.
706.1.29 Artisan Manufacturing with the following conditions:
(1) Must be attached to a retail component selling the goods produced on site;
(2) Outdoor storage is permitted only in the C-1 (Intensive Commercial) and C-2
(General Commercial) district. Any activity storing materials outdoors shall
construct an opaque fence at least six (6) feet in height or two (2) feet higher
than the stored material, not to exceed 8 feet. Outdoor storage is prohibited in
the Gateway Overlay District
(3) Where the site abuts a residential district, service door openings or loading
docks oriented toward the residential zone district residential use shall be
screened with a 100% opaque screening comprised either of vegetation, a
privacy fence or combination, at least 6 feet high.
(4) Micro-distilleries must be at least 300 feet from any lot that contains a school, a
place of worship or a playground.
706.2 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
706.2.1 Noncommercial greenhouses and plant nurseries, private garages, garden sheds, tool
sheds, private swimming pools, and the like.
706.2.2 Home occupations subject to the provisions of Section 802.
706.2.3 Beekeeping
706.2.4 Uses and structures which:
(a) Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
60 | P a g e
principal uses and structures.
(b) Are located on the same lot as the permitted principal use of structure, or on a
contiguous lot in the same ownership.
(c) Are in keeping with the character of the district, and
(d) Are not of a nature prohibited under “Prohibited Uses and Structures”.
706.3 Permitted Special Exceptions
After public notice and hearing, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, the board of
zoning appeals may permit, as special exceptions:
706.3.1 High-rise structures containing both residential uses and nonresidential uses listed as
permitted principal uses for this district, subject to the provisions of Section 800.
706.3.2 Family day care homes, group day care homes, and day care centers subject to the
provisions of Section 803.
706.3.3 Rooming and boarding houses.
706.3.4 Utility substations and water tanks and sewer treatment facilities, provided that the board
of appeals shall impose appropriate conditions and safeguards regarding siting or characteristics of
use potentially incompatible with nearby use.
706.3.5 Cemeteries.
706.3.6 Cluster housing developments subject to the terms of Section 806.
706.3.7 Body Art Services licensed by the State of South Carolina provided that :
(a) No body art service shall be initially located within one thousand (1,000)
feet of any school, church, playground, park or day care facility for
children;
(b) No body art service shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any
other body art service;
(c) No body art service shall not be permitted as a home occupation as defined
in Section 802.
706.3.8 Fee-standing or guyed communications towers in excess of one hundred eighty (180) feet
in height.
706.4 Prohibited Uses and Structures
706.4.1 Any use other than as provided under “Permitted Principal Uses and Structures” in
Section 706.1, “Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures” in Section 706.2, and “Permitted
Special Exceptions” in Section 706.3.
706.4.2 Manufacturing.
706.4.3 Storage in connection with trade, service or manufacturing activities outside the district.
706.4.4 Storage of building materials except in connection with active construction activities on
the premises.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
61 | P a g e
706.4.5 Storage or use of mobile homes.
706.4.6 Massage parlors.
706.4.7 Auto body repair and painting facilities.
706.5 Minimum Lot Area
706.5.1 High-rise apartments: one (1) acre.
706.5.2 All other residential uses:
(1) Five thousand (5,000) square feet for the first dwelling unit.
(2) Two thousand and five hundred (2,500) square feet for each additional dwelling unit.
706.5.3 Uses and structures permissible as special exceptions: As required under “Permitted
Special Exceptions” for this district.
706.5.4 All other structures and uses, and uses permissible as special exceptions for which no
minimum lot area is required: Minimum lot area shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet.
706.6 Minimum Lot Width
All permitted and permissible uses and structures: No minimum required except as needed to meet
other requirements herein.
706.7 Minimum Yard Requirements
Minimum yard requirements for all structures and uses except high-rise apartments shall be as
follows. Minimum yard requirements for high-rise apartments are set forth in Section 800.
706.7.1 Front:
(1) If frontage of lot is less than one hundred (100) feet, the required front yard shall be
twenty-five (25) feet.
(2) If frontage of lot is less than one hundred (100) feet, the required front yard shall be
twenty-five (25) feet, unless buildings on contiguous lots fronting on the same street have
provided front yards of twenty (20) feet or less, in which case the front yard may be less
than twenty five (25) feet, but no less than the average front yards on contiguous lots
fronting on the same street, and in no case shall such front yards be less than twelve and
one-half (12 ½) feet in depth.
(3) On corner lots, the secondary front yard shall be not less than twelve and one-half (12
½ ) feet in depth.
(4) Additional setbacks required in Section 805.
706.7.2 Side yards of interior and corner lots: Combined side yards shall total ten (10) feet or
twenty percent (20%) of the width of the lot (whichever is least) provided however that no
individual side yard shall be less than three (3) feet in width.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
62 | P a g e
706.7.3 Rear
(1) Permitted principal structures: ten (10) feet.
(2) Permitted accessory structures: five (5) feet.
706.8 Maximum Lot Coverage by All Buildings
706.8.1 High-rise apartments: As needed to meet requirements of Section 800.
706.8.2 All other structures: fifty percent (50%) or as needed to meet requirements herein.
706.8.3 Parking structures to accommodate required parking may be erected to cover not more
than thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area in addition to the coverage listed in 706.8.2 above,
provided that total coverage by all structures shall not exceed eighty (80%) percent.
706.9 Maximum Height of Structures
706.9.1 High-rise apartments as required by Section 800.
706.9.2 Buildings of less than forty (40) feet in height are permitted outright.
706.9.3 Buildings in excess of forty (40) feet in height, provided there is an increase of one (1)
foot in side, front, and rear yards over the minimum side, front, and rear yard requirements for
each additional two (2) feet of height.
706.9.4 Buildings between the height of forty (40) and seventy-five (75) feet are allowed as
special exceptions if they do not meet the requirements of 706.9.3 above.
706.10 Minimum Off-street Parking and Loading Requirements
Off-street parking and loading requirements as set forth in Sections 611 and 612 6 must be met.
706.11 Signs
Signs are permitted in the C-3 district only in accordance with the provisions of Article 9.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
63 | P a g e
707 LM Light manufacturing district
This district is intended to accommodate wholesaling, distribution, storage, processing, light
manufacturing, and general commercial uses. Certain related structures and uses required to serve the needs of such
uses are permitted outright or are permissible as special exceptions subject to restrictions and requirements intended
to best fulfill the intent of this ordinance.
707.1 Permitted Principal Uses and Structures
707.1.1 Wholesaling, warehousing, storage, supply, and distribution.
707.1.2 Truck terminals, freight terminals, passenger terminals.
707.1.3 Light manufacturing and processing.
707.1.4 Outdoor storage lots and yards, except automobile junk yards, scrap yards, salvage yards,
or yards used in whole or in part for scrap or salvage operations or for processing, storage, display
or sales of junk, scrap or salvaged materials.
707.1.5 Retail establishments, sales, and display rooms.
707.1.6 Offices.
707.1.7 Photography studios, art studios, art galleries, art sales, interior design studios, craft
studios, craft sales, antique shops, establishments for the teaching of music, dancing or other
performing arts.
707.1.8 Financial institutions.
707.1.9 Hotels and motels.
707.1.10 Eating and drinking establishments, including drive-in eating and drinking
establishments and restaurants.
707.1.11 Personal service establishments.
707.1.12 Business service establishments.
707.1.13 Service and repair establishments including automobile service stations and repair
garages.
707.1.14 Amusement, recreational, and entertainment establishments.
707.1.15 Laboratories and establishments for fitting, repair or production of eyeglasses, hearing
aids or prosthetic devices.
707.1.16 Radio and television stations.
707.1.17 Veterinary establishments, commercial kennels and noncommercial kennels.
707.1.18 Commercial printing and job printing.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
64 | P a g e
707.1.19 Business schools and vocational schools not involving uses of an industrial nature
which would not otherwise be permitted in this district.
707.1.20 Rehabilitation centers.
707.1.21 Parking lots and parking garages.
707.1.22 Clubs, lodges, civic, and fraternal organizations.
707.1.23 Parks, playgrounds, play fields.
707.1.24 Utilities substations and water tanks and sewer treatment facilities, provided that the
board of zoning appeals shall impose appropriate conditions and safeguards regarding siting or
characteristics of use potentially incompatible with nearby uses.
707.1.25 Historic sites and structures provided that they conform to the provisions of Section
804.
707.1.26 Construction companies.
707.1.27 Free-standing or guyed communications towers not exceeding three hundred sixty (360)
feet in height as a permitted conditional use per Section 810.2.
707.1.28 Food Truck Court as a conditional use per Section 817
707.1.29 Vehicle sales in accordance with Section 815.
707.1.30 Beer Gardens with the following conditions:
(1) Shall be closed between the hours of 12:00 AM and 10:00 AM;
(2) The onsite consumption of liquor, liqueur and spirits is prohibited;
(3) Required off-street parking shall be at a ratio of 1 space per 300 square feet of
service area. Parcels located in the C-1 district are exempted from the parking
standard.
(4) The perimeter of the outdoor seating area is designated by a decorative fence,
wall and/or planter.
(5) Outdoor lighting must be shielded to prevent direct lighting on the right-of-way
or adjacent property
(6) Must comply with the City of West Columbia Noise Ordinance
707.1.31 Taprooms with the following conditions:
(1) At least 20% of product sold is produced by microbreweries within the State of
South Carolina;
(2) Shall be closed between the hours of 12:00 AM and 10:00 AM;
(3) The onsite consumption of liquor, liqueur and spirits is prohibited;
(4) Required off-street parking shall be at a ratio of 1 space per 300 square feet of
service area. Parcels located in the C-1 zoning district are exempt from the
parking standard.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
65 | P a g e
707.2 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
707.2.1 Beekeeping
707.2.2 Uses and structures which:
(a) Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted
principal uses and structures;
(b) Are located wholly on the same lot as the permitted principal use or structure, or on a
contiguous lot in the same ownership; and
(c) Do not involve operations not in keeping with the character of the area, or of a nature
prohibited under “Prohibited Uses and Structures” for this district.
707.2.3 Solar energy systems.
707.3 Permitted Special Exceptions
After public notice and hearing, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, the board of
zoning appeals may permit, as special exceptions:
707.3.1 Buildings between the height of forty (40) and seventy five (75) feet which do not meet
the requirements of Section 707.9.
707.3.2 Churches and other places of worship, including educational buildings related thereto.
707.3.3 Elementary schools, middle schools or high schools.
707.3.4 Community service structures and uses such as community service centers, libraries, fire
stations, civic, cultural or related uses.
707.3.5 Day care facilities for children.
707.3.6 Free-standing or guyed communications towers in excess of three hundred sixty (360)
feet in height.
707.3.7 Food truck court within 400 feet of an R-2, R-3 or R-4 subject to the provision of Section
817.
707.4 Prohibited Uses and Structures
707.4.1 Any industry or use which creates corrosive, toxic or noisome fumes, gas, smoke or
odor, or obnoxious dust, vapor, or offensive noise or vibrations.
707.4.2 Any use or structure other than as provided under “Permitted Principal Uses and
Structures” in Section 707.1, “Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures” in Section 707.2, and
“Permitted Special Exceptions” in Section 707.3.
707.4.3 Dwellings except as provided under “Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures”.
707.4.4 Outdoor display of merchandise for sale in required front yards.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
66 | P a g e
707.4.5 Body Art Services
707.5 Minimum Lot Area
All permitted or permissible uses of structures: No minimum lot area required except as needed to
meet other requirements herein.
707.6 Minimum Lot Width
All permitted or permissible uses or structures: No minimum lot width required except as needed
to meet other requirements herein.
707.7 Minimum Yard Requirements.
707.7.1 Front
(1) If frontage of lot is one hundred (100) feet or more, the required front yard shall be
twenty-five (25) feet.
(2) If frontage of lot is less than one hundred (100) feet, the required front yard shall be
twenty-five (25) feet, unless buildings on contiguous lots fronting on the same street have
provided front yards of twenty (20) feet or less, in which case the front yard may be less
than twenty five (25) feet, but not less than the average front yards on contiguous lots
fronting on the same street, and in no case shall such front yards be less than ten (10) feet
in depth.
(3) On corner lots, the secondary front yard shall not be less than twelve and one-half
(12 ½ ) feet in depth.
707.7.2 Side: No side yard is required if buildings are built to the side lot line, otherwise at least
three (3) feet of side yard width is required; provided, however, that where a lot zoned LM is
contiguous to a residential district, a side yard of not less than twenty (20) feet shall be provided
on the side contiguous to the residential district.
707.7.3 Rear: No rear yard is required if buildings are built to the rear lot line, otherwise at least
three (3) feet of rear yard depth is required, provided, however, that where a lot zoned LM is
contiguous to a residential district, a rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet shall be provided
on the rear yard contiguous to the residential district.
707.7.4 See Section 805 for required separation between residential uses and industrial uses.
707.8 Maximum Lot Coverage by All Buildings
No limitation except as needed to meet other requirements herein.
707.9 Maximum Height of Structures
707.9.1 Buildings up to forty (40) feet in height are permitted outright.
707.9.2 Buildings in excess of forty (40) feet in height, provided there is an increase of one (1)
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
67 | P a g e
foot in side, front, and rear yards over the minimum side, front, and rear yard requirements for
each additional three (3) feet of height.
707.9.3 Buildings between the height of forty (40) and seventy-five (75) feet are allowed as
special exceptions if they do not meet the requirements of 707.9.2 above.
707.10 Minimum Off-street Parking and Loading Requirements
Off-street parking and loading requirements as set forth in Sections 611 and 612 must be met.
707.11 Signs
Signs are permitted in the LM district only in accordance with provisions of Article 9.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
68 | P a g e
708 HM Heavy manufacturing district
This district is intended to accommodate primarily those uses of a manufacturing and industrial nature, and
secondarily those uses which are functionally related thereto such as distribution, storage, and processing. General
commercial uses are allowed but are considered incidental to the predominantly industrial nature of the district.
Certain related structures and uses required to serve the needs of the primary uses are permitted outright or are
permissible as special exceptions subject to restrictions and requirements intended to best fulfill the intent of this
ordinance. In addition, certain uses are permitted only as special exceptions or are prohibited in order to protect
such uses from the potentially incompatible characteristics of industrial areas.
708.1 Permitted Principal Uses and Structures
708.1.1 Wholesaling, warehousing, storage, supply and distribution.
708.1.2 Truck terminals, freight terminals, passenger terminals.
708.1.3 Light manufacturing and processing.
708.1.4 Heavy manufacturing and processing.
708.1.5 Outdoor storage lots and yards, except automobile junk yards, salvage yards, or yards
used in whole or in part for scrap or salvage operations or for processing, storage, display, or sales
of junk, scrap, or salvaged materials.
708.1.6 Retail establishments, sales, and display rooms.
708.1.7 Offices.
708.1.8 Photography studios, art studios, art galleries, art sales, interior design studios, craft
studios, craft sales, antique shops, establishments for the teaching of music, dancing or other
performing arts.
708.1.9 Financial institutions.
708.1.10 Hotels and motels.
708.1.11 Restaurants, including drive-in eating restaurants.
708.1.12 Personal service establishments.
708.1.13 Business service establishments.
708.1.14 Service and repair establishments including automobile service stations and repair
garages.
708.1.15 Amusement, recreational, and entertainment establishments.
708.1.16 Laboratories and establishments for fitting, repair, or production of eyeglasses, hearing
aids, or prosthetic devices.
708.1.17 Radio and television stations.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
69 | P a g e
708.1.18 Veterinary establishments, commercial kennels and noncommercial kennels
708.1.19 Commercial printing and job printing.
708.1.20 Business schools and vocational schools not involving uses of an industrial nature
which would not otherwise be permitted in this district.
708.1.21 Rehabilitation centers.
708.1.22 Parking lots and parking garages.
708.1.23 Clubs, lodges, civic and fraternal organizations.
708.1.24 Parks, playgrounds, play fields.
708.1.25 Historic sites and structures provided that they conform to the provisions of Section
804.
708.1.26 Construction companies.
708.1.27 Food Truck Court as a conditional use per Section 817.
708.1.28 Vehicle sales in accordance with Section 815.
708.1.29 Beer Gardens with the following conditions:
(1) Shall be closed between the hours of 12:00 AM and 10:00 AM;
(2) The onsite consumption of liquor, liqueur and spirits is prohibited;
(3) Required off-street parking shall be at a ratio of 1 space per 300 square feet of
service area. Parcels located in the C-1 district are exempted from the parking
standard.
(4) The perimeter of the outdoor seating area is designated by a decorative fence,
wall and/or planter.
(5) Outdoor lighting must be shielded to prevent direct lighting on the right-of-way
or adjacent property
(6) Must comply with the City of West Columbia Noise Ordinance
708.1.30 Taprooms with the following conditions:
(1) At least 20% of product sold is produced by microbreweries within the State of
South Carolina;
(2) Shall be closed between the hours of 12:00 AM and 10:00 AM;
(3) The onsite consumption of liquor, liqueur and spirits is prohibited;
(4) Required off-street parking shall be at a ratio of 1 space per 300 square feet of
service area. Parcels located in the C-1 zoning district are exempt from the
parking standard.
708.2 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. Structures and uses which:
708.2.1 Are customarily accessory and clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted principal
uses and structures;
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
70 | P a g e
708.2.2 Are located wholly on the same lot as the permitted principal use or structure, or on a
contiguous lot in the same ownership;
708.2.3 Do not involve operations not in keeping with the character of the area, or of a nature
prohibited under “Prohibited Uses and Structures” for this district.
708.2.4 Beekeeping
708.3 Permitted Special Exceptions
After public notice and hearing, and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, the board of
zoning appeals may permit the uses listed below. In so doing, the board shall consider that the intent of
allowing such uses only as special exceptions is to protect such uses from potentially incompatible
characteristics of other uses located in the heavy industrial district, external to the uses permitted only as
special exceptions, and not vice versa.
708.3.1 Vocational schools.
708.3.2 Rehabilitation centers.
708.3.3 Churches and other places of worship including educational buildings related thereto.
708.3.4 Buildings between the height of forty (40) and seventy-five (75) feet which do not meet
the requirements of Section 709.9 below.
708.3.5 Free-standing or guyed communications towers in excess of three hundred sixty (360)
feet in height.
708.3.6 Food Truck Court within 400 feet of an R-2, R-3, or R-4 subject to the provisions of
Section 817.
708.4 Prohibited Uses and Structures
708.4.1 Any use and structure other than as provided under “Permitted Principal Uses and
Structures” in Section 708.1, “Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures” in Section 708.2, and
“Permitted Special Exceptions” in Section 708.3.
708.4.2 Elementary schools, middle schools, high schools, colleges, and universities, homes for
the aged, homes for orphans.
708.4.3 Day care facilities for children.
708.4.4 Hotels and motels.
708.4.5 Funeral homes.
708.4.6 Body Art Services
708.5 Minimum Lot Area
708.5.1 Structures and uses permitted as special exceptions: As provided under “Permitted
Special Exceptions” for this district.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
71 | P a g e
708.5.2 Structures and uses permitted as special exceptions for which no minimum lot area is
specified, and all other permitted uses and structures: No minimum lot area except as needed to
meet other requirements herein.
708.6 Minimum Lot Width
All permitted and permissible structures and uses: No minimum lot width required except as
needed to meet other requirements herein.
708.7 Minimum Yard Requirements
708.7.1 Front.
(1) If frontage of lot is one hundred (100) feet or more, the required front yard shall be
twenty-five (25) feet.
(2) If frontage of lot is less than one hundred (100) feet, the required front yard shall be
twenty five (25) feet, unless buildings on contiguous lots fronting on the same street have
provided front yards of twenty (20) feet or less, in which case, the front yard may be less
than twenty five (25) feet, but not less than the average front yards on contiguous fronting
on the same street, and in no case, shall front yards be less than ten (10) feet in depth.
(3) On corner lots, the secondary front yard shall be not less than twelve and one-half
(12 ½ ) feet in depth.
708.7.2 Side. No side yard is required if buildings are built to the side lot line; otherwise, at least
three (3) feet of side yard width is required; provided, however, that where a lot zoned HM is
contiguous to a residential district, a side yard of not less than twenty (20) feet shall be provided
on the side contiguous to the residential district.
708.7.3 Rear. No rear yard is required if buildings are built to the rear lot line; otherwise, at least
three (3) feet of rear yard depth is required; provided, however, that where a lot zoned HM is
contiguous to a residential district, a rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet shall be provided
on the rear yard contiguous to the residential district.
708.7.4 See additional regulations in Section 805.
708.8 Maximum Lot Coverage by all Buildings
No limitation except as needed to meet other requirements herein.
708.9 Maximum Height of Structures
708.9.1 Buildings up to forty (40) feet in height are permitted outright.
708.9.2 Buildings in excess of forty (40) feet in height, provided there is an increase of one (1)
foot in side, front, and rear yards over the minimum front, rear, and side yard requirements for
each additional three (3) feet of height.
708.9.3 Buildings between the height of forty (40) and seventy-five (75) feet are allowed as
special exceptions if they do not meet the requirements of 708.9.2 above.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
72 | P a g e
708.10 Maximum Off-street Parking and Loading Requirements
Off-street parking and loading requirements as set forth in Sections 611 and 612 must be met.
708.11 Signs
Signs are permitted in the HM district only in accordance with the provisions of Article 9.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
73 | P a g e
709 PUD Planned unit development districts
The intent of the planned unit development districts is to derive the benefits of efficiency, economy, and
flexibility by encouraging unified development of large sites, while also obtaining the advantage of creative site
design, improved appearance, compatibility of uses, optimum service by community facilities, and better
functioning of vehicular access and circulation.
It is the intent of these regulations to allow development of large sites subject to specific regulations
concerning permitted uses, but only subject to regulations concerning lot area, building coverage, yard spaces, and
building height insofar as the city council shall deem appropriate to fulfill the intent of this ordinance, upon
presentation of certification from the owners, developers or other parties at interest in the development of such sites
that they will adhere to development policies which will fulfill the intent of this ordinance.
A tract or tracts of land is eligible for a PUD if the tract or tracts of land under consideration total four (4)
or more contiguous acres. A PUD may include less than four (4) acres if City Council, upon a recommendation of
the Planning Commission, determines the PUD is an appropriate zoning classification because of the unique
constraints of the land owing to the size, shape, topography or other physical conditions of the tract or tracts or
because the proposed PUD is consistent from a land use and development perspective with an adjoining PUD.
709.1 Types of Planned Unit Development Districts. Two types of planned unit development districts
accommodating residential and nonresidential uses are created as follows:
709.1.1 PUD-R Planned Unit Development --Residential: The PUD-R district is intended to
accommodate primarily residential uses with nonresidential uses integrated into the design of such
districts as secondary uses.
709.1.2 PUD-C Planned Unit Development--Commercial: The PUD-C district is intended to
accommodate primarily nonresidential uses with residential uses integrated into the design of such
districts as secondary uses.
709.1.3 Intent. The types of residential dwelling units, and the types of nonresidential uses
allowed to be established in such districts increase with increasing site size of such districts, based
upon the premise that increased site size will allow proper design including functional
interrelations, buffer treatments separating uses with potentially incompatible characteristics of
use, design of access patterns, and relationships of uses within such planned unit developments
with uses in adjacent districts. It is the intent of the ordinance that such design and planning
features be incorporated properly into any PUD district hereafter created, and that the planning
commission and city council shall consider the existence and appropriateness of such features
before any amendment to the zoning map is adopted to create such district.
709.2 Permitted Principal Uses and Structures. Permitted uses and structures vary with increasing size
and are different for PUD-R and PUD-C districts. Such uses are permitted as per the uses enumerated for
specific districts in Sections 300 through 708 above. Where uses for more than one (1) district are
permitted, the uses of the less restrictive district shall be permitted. Permitted principal uses and structures
for various site sized and types of PUD districts are as follows:
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
74 | P a g e
PUD-R PUD-C
Site Size in Acres Uses Permitted as for Uses Permitted as for
the Following Districts the Following Districts
Less than 4 R-1, C-3 C-3, C-2
4 but less than 8 R-1, C-3 C-3, C-2
8 but less than 15 R-1, C-3 C-2, R-1
15 but less than 25 R-1, C-3 LM, R-1
25 or more LM, R-1 LM, R-1
709.3 Maximum Area of Commercial or Industrial Uses in the PUD-R Districts. In PUD-R districts in
which commercial or industrial uses are permitted, the total gross floor area of such commercial or
industrial uses shall not exceed the percentages listed below as related to gross floor area of all structures
within the PUD at any time. In addition, in PUD-R district in which commercial or industrial uses are
permitted, the area of land devoted to such uses, including land coverage of structures, parking, and related
characteristics and accessory uses thereto, shall not exceed the percentages listed below as related to total
PUD site size at any time.
Maximum Percentages of Gross Floor Area
Total PUD And Maximum Percentage of Site Area for
Site Size in Acres Commercial or Industrial Structures and Uses
Less than 4 20
4 but less than 8 20
8 but less than 15 20
15 but less than 25 30
25 or more 40
Provided however, that these percentages shall apply to commercial and industrial uses, and not to other
nonresidential uses, such as schools, parks, community buildings or public facilities.
709.4 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted as for
the least restrictive districts indicated in Section 709.3 for any specific site size.
709.5 Permitted Special Exceptions. No special exception actions are required to establish any specific
use. Uses and structures permitted in the least restrictive districts indicated in Section 700.2 for any
specific site size are permitted outright; provided, however, that the planning commission shall ascertain
that the effects and benefits usually derived from safeguards and conditions normally imposed upon special
exceptions permissible for districts as listed in Sections 700 through 708 will substantially be met by the
terms of the proposed planned unit development.
709.6 Prohibited Uses and Structures. Certain uses and structures shall be prohibited as for the least
restrictive districts indicated in Section 709.3 for any specific site size.
709.7 Minimum Lot Area. No minimum lot area is required for any specific structure; however,
minimum site size to accommodate specific uses shall be as listed in Section 709.3
709.8 Minimum Lot Width, Minimum Yard Requirements, Maximum Lot Coverage, Maximum Height
of Structures. Minimum setbacks, minimum lot width, minimum yard size, maximum lot coverage, and
maximum height are not regulated within PUD districts; provided however, that the planning commission
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
75 | P a g e
shall ascertain that the characteristics of building siting shall be appropriate as related to structures within
the planned unit development and otherwise fulfill the intent of this ordinance.
709.9 Minimum Off-street Parking and Loading. Off-street parking and loading requirements as set
forth in Article 7 shall be met as for the least restrictive districts indicated in Section 708.3 for any specific
site size. If warranted by unique characteristics, or documented parking demand for similar developments,
or both, the city may allow reductions in the number of parking spaces, including a shared parking plan. A
parking study shall be submitted to justify the reduction in parking being requested
709.10 Signs. A common signage plan shall be submitted with the Descriptive Statement. The Common
Signage Plan must describe the location, size and design of the proposed signs. Exterior signs should
provide for modest, coordinated and complimentary exterior sign locations, configurations and color
throughout the site and should not be visually dominating. All freestanding signage within the PUD should
complement signage affixed to the structures within the site. The Planning Commission may require that
signs for multiple businesses within the PUD be integrated and consolidated into one or more sign
structures. Except as specifically excluded in the Descriptive Statement, the provisions of Section 905 shall
apply. The provisions of Section 908 shall apply to all PUD’s..
709.11 Administrative Application and Review Procedures.
709.11.1 General. The establishment of a PUD district shall be by amendment to the zoning map
accompanied by certain sureties that the development will be in harmony with the intent of this
ordinance and that the public interest in adequate site design, access, and community facilities and
amenities will be defended. Application for amendment to establish a PUD district shall be
subject to the provisions of Article 10, “Amendments” and in addition, the procedures described
below shall apply. It is the intent of this ordinance that the public interest will be served not only
by consideration of those specific criteria set forth herein, but also by consideration of the total
anticipated effect of the planned unit development upon the community at large. The provisions
of the PUD district represent a relaxation of specific site design requirements as applied to other
districts herein, and in return for the design flexibility granted thereby, the applicant for
amendment to PUD district classification, but requesting the PUD designation and making
application therefore shall agree to furnish information about the proposed development, and later
to abide by certain conditions and safeguards as may be imposed by the planning commission in
establishing such developments. To that end, the regulations set forth herein are minimum
requirements and it is the intent of this ordinance that the planning commission may impose
conditions and safeguards in excess of, or in addition to, the specific requirements set forth herein,
and that guarantee of meeting the minimum requirements set forth herein does not per se create an
indication that an applicant should be entitled to such an amendment, and notice is hereby given to
that effect.
709.11.2 Pre-application Conference. The applicant is encouraged to communicate his intentions
to establish a planned unit development and the proposed characteristics thereof, to the planning
commission prior to initiating an application for amendment in order to avoid undue delay in the
review process after initiating such application, and in order to facilitate review of materials which
may be in preliminary form, and in order to avoid unnecessary expense in preparation of materials
in final form which may later be found to be unacceptable or incomplete.
709.11.3 Application for Amendments. The applicant shall make application for an amendment
to PUD classification as specified by Article 9 herein.
709.11.4 Site Development Plans to be Submitted to Planning Commission for Review. The
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
76 | P a g e
applicant shall submit site development plans to the planning commission for review, which shall
be similar in content and format to preliminary plats required for review by the subdivision
regulations of the City of West Columbia, South Carolina, and in addition, shall show locations of
all buildings proposed to be constructed in such planned unit development, drawn approximately
to scale, and in addition shall indicate the proposed uses of all such buildings, and in addition,
shall contain such other information as may be deemed reasonably appropriate for planning
commission review.
709.11.5 Descriptive Statement to be Submitted to Planning Commission for Review. The
applicant shall also submit a descriptive statement describing the characteristics and standards to
be followed in developing the proposed planned unit development. The descriptive statement
shall generally include, but not be limited to the following:
(1) Legal description of proposed development boundaries.
(2) Total number of acres in the development area.
(3) Number of acres devoted to residential, commercial, industrial, and other
nonresidential uses to reflect requirements of Section 709.3.
(4) Number of dwelling units of various types and overall density thereof.
(5) Number of off-street parking and loading spaces as needed to meet requirements of
individual buildings as required by Section 709.9.
(6) If commercial development is proposed, indication of economic feasibility and
justification for size of facilities.
(7) Description of open space uses and area proposed, adequacy thereof to serve
anticipated demand, and if dedication of open space is proposed, procedures and
conditions thereof in detail.
(8) If a homeowners association or other group maintenance or group ownership features
are to be included, a detailed description of the proposed procedures and operation
thereof.
(9) An outline of development phasing indicating the timing of development of all
proposed facilities, and justification of development phasing with respect to
nonresidential facilities in relation to residential facilities.
(10) Design standards, administrative procedures, and other characteristics which will
guarantee the development of the project as an integrated, functionally operable, well
planned whole.
(11) Other such information or descriptions as may be deemed reasonably appropriate for
planning commission review.
709.11.6 Planning Commission and City Council Hearing. A public hearing shall be held in
accordance with procedures set forth in Article 12, except that such hearing shall be a joint hearing
before the planning commission and the city council simultaneously.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
77 | P a g e
709.11.7 Planning Commission Recommendation. The planning commission shall make a
recommendation upon the proposal which shall be advisory to the city council. Requirements of
Article 12 are applicable if the planning commission should fail to report within the time limit
established by Article 12.
709.11.8 City Council Approval. The city council may, after fulfilling the applicable
requirements of this section and all applications for amendment, approve the PUD submitted to it
by the planning commission.
709.11.9 Issuance of Zoning or Building Permits. The zoning administrator or his/her designee
shall not issue any zoning permit and the building official shall not issue any building permit for
work to commence within any PUD district until the applicant for amendment which established
such districts shall have:
(1) Filed with the city clerk and recorded with the Register or Deeds of Lexington
County plats showing all proposed features of the planned unit development as approved
by the city council which approval shall be certified by the city clerk.
(2) Completed any necessary agreements with the city that the city may become a party
to deed restrictions and other restrictive covenants related to the planned unit
development, and recorded such agreement with the city clerk and the Register of Deeds
of Lexington County.
(3) Recorded with the Register of Deeds of Lexington County all required deed
restrictions or other restrictive covenants as required by the city council upon approval of
the amendment establishing the planned unit development district.
(4) Recorded with the city clerk and with the Register of Deeds of Lexington County, the
descriptive statement as approved by city council setting forth and committing the
developer to certain design standards, development phasing schedules, and other
pertinent matters.
(5) Completed the posting of a bond or giving of other surety that adequate progress will
be made in developing the project as may be required by Section 709.3.
709.12 Changes of Plans for Planned Unit Developments. Changes which do not require changes of the
boundaries of an established PUD district or establishment of a new PUD district are not considered
amendments to the zoning ordinance. Any change in boundary of such PUD district shall be accomplished
only by following procedures as set forth in Article 12 herein. Changes in the approved characteristics or
agreements relating to a PUD district, but not involving change in the boundary thereof shall be classed as
either major changes or minor changes and shall be approved or disapproved as follows:
709.12.1 Minor Changes: Revisions of minor characteristics of the planned unit development,
such as relocation of driveways or revision of floor plans of specific structures, may be authorized
by the planning commission, provided that such authority is granted to the planning commission
by the approved and recorded descriptive statement concerning development of the planned unit
district. If the planning commission fails to approve a request for a minor change, the developer
or other party at interest may then seek a change by the regular amendment process as outlined
below for major changes.
709.12.2 Major changes. Major changes which materially affect the characteristics of the
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
78 | P a g e
planned unit development shall follow the same procedural requirements as for the amendment
originally establishing the planned unit district, including commission review, public hearing, and
the city council determination, as set forth in Article 12 herein.
709.12.3 It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator or his/her designee to determine whether
any specific request shall be considered a major change or a minor change, provided, however,
that the applicant for change shall have the right to have any request for change processed as a
major change.
709.12.4 The zoning administrator or his/her designee shall issue no zoning permit or certificate
of occupancy and the building official shall issue no building permit in connection with any action
related to such changes until such changes have been duly recorded as for the original documents
recorded as set forth in Section 709.11.9 above.
709.13 Failure to Begin, Failure to Complete or Failure to Make Adequate Progress. The descriptive
statement as approved by the planning commission and duly recorded shall set forth the development
schedule for the project including phasing of development of non-residential uses in relationship to
residential use. The planning commission shall require the posting of a bond with a corporate surety to
guarantee that the schedule as set forth in the descriptive statement will be materially adhered to in order to
guarantee construction of streets, utilities, and other facilities and amenities or to allow for re-certification
or improper development characteristics such as failure to develop areas designated as common open
spaces. If there is failure to begin, or failure to complete, or failure to make adequate progress as agreed in
the descriptive statement, the planning commission may enforce and collect upon such bonds or sureties as
described above, or may change the district classification of the planned unit development in accordance
with the provisions of Article 10, and thus terminate the right of the applicant to continue development, or
may initiate action to charge the developers with specific violation of the zoning ordinance subject to the
penalties set forth in Article 11 or any appropriate combination of the above remedies may be taken.
709.14 Terms of this Section to Prevail. In case of any conflict of the terms of Section 709 with the
terms of other sections of this ordinance, the terms of Section 709 shall prevail.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
79 | P a g e
ARTICLE 7
USE REQUIREMENTS FOR DISTRICTS
SECTION 710 Gateway Overlay District
710.1 Creation of the Gateway Overlay District
The City of West Columbia hereby authorizes the creation of the Gateway Overlay District (“the
District”).
The intent of this District is to uphold and improve aesthetic qualities, promote good urban design, to
establish and maintain and provide for a unified, improved identity, and for the proper physical, social,
and economic development of the City’s Vista Area in order to protect, promote, and improve public
health, safety, morals, convenience, order, appearance, prosperity and general welfare, including, but
not limited to, safeguarding the cultural, scenic, economic, environmental, and social heritage of West
Columbia’s Vista Area on behalf of the City, the County, and the State; providing for adequate light,
air and public open space; encouraging efficiency and economy in the process of development and
redevelopment; making adequate provisions for pedestrian and vehicular traffic; supporting the wise
and efficient expenditures of public funds; promoting attractive and economically beneficial
community and architectural appearance; promoting economic prosperity for the District and the City;
and, providing for adequate public access to the Congaree river and its public shores.
710.2 Purpose
The purposes of the District regulations shall be as follows:
(1) Encourage high quality development as a strategy for investing in the City’s future;
(2) Emphasize Meeting Street as a major entryway into the City from the City of Columbia;
(3) Establish and maintain a unified, improved identity for the District;
(4) Recognize and support the significance of the river front and other unique areas, and to
minimize the negative impacts of development in their vicinity;
(5) Maintain and enhance the quality of life for the citizens of West Columbia;
(6) Shape the District’s appearance, aesthetic quality and spatial form;
(7) Reinforce civic pride of citizens through appropriate development;
(8) Increase awareness of aesthetic, social and economic values;
(9) Protect and enhance property values;
(10) Minimize negative impacts of development on the natural environment;
(11) Provide property owners, developers, architects, engineers, builders, business owners, and
others with a clear and equitable set of regulations for developing land; and
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
80 | P a g e
(12) Shape and develop the District in a manner that is beneficial to the City and its citizens.
710.3 District Boundaries
The boundaries of the District shall be as follows:
Properties located from Meeting Street to Shull Street between Ninth Street to Leaphart Street; properties
located from Meeting Street to Center Street between Ninth Street and State Street; Properties located from
Leaphart Street to the Congaree River between Jarvis Klapman and Meeting Street; properties located from
State Street to Alexander Road between Meeting Street and Court Avenue and the 100 block of Oliver Street;
properties adjacent to the east side of State Street between Court Avenue and B Avenue. The two properties
located immediately to the east side of State Street and adjacent to the south side of B Avenue. Properties
located on the west side of State Street between Center Street to Augusta Street which are currently in the C1
district. Also, properties adjacent to the west side of State Street between Augusta Street and C Avenue. The
property located at the southwest corner of State Street and C Avenue.
These boundaries shall be more fully delineated and shown on the official zoning map for the City of West
Columbia.
710.4 Definitions
(1) Massage Parlors: An establishment where, for any form of consideration, massage, alcohol rub,
fomentation, electric or magnetic treatment, or similar treatment or manipulation of the human body is
administered, unless such treatment or manipulation is administered by a medical practitioner,
chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical therapist, or similar professional person licensed by the state.
This definition does not include an athletic club, health club, school, gymnasium, salon, spa, or similar
establishment where massage or similar manipulation of the human body is offered as an incidental or
accessory service.
710.5 Permitted Uses
(1) Permitted uses within the District are restricted to the following: retail establishments, residences,
sales and display rooms, photography and art studios, art galleries and sales, interior design studios,
craft studios and sales, antique shops, establishments for teaching music, dance or other performing
arts, financial institutions, hotels, motels, bed and breakfast establishments, restaurants, personal
service establishments, amusement, recreational and entertainment establishments, offices, parking
lots, parking garages, utility substations, municipal water/sewer facilities, clubs, lodges, civic and
fraternal organizations, churches, and other places of worship, including educational buildings related
thereto, parks, playgrounds and play fields, community service structures and uses such as community
centers, libraries, fire stations, and civic cultural and recreational uses, historic sites and structures
provided that they conform to the provisions of Section 804 of the West Columbia Zoning
Ordinances, convenience stores and funeral homes. Food Truck Courts as a Special Exception per
Section 817. Artisan Manufacturing as a Special Exception with the following conditions:
(a) Must be attached to a retail component selling the goods produced on site;
(b) Outdoor storage is permitted only in the C-1 (Intensive Commercial) and C-2 (General
Commercial) district. Any activity storing materials outdoors shall construct an opaque fence
at least six (6) feet in height or two (2) feet higher than the stored material, not to exceed 8
feet. Outdoor storage is prohibited in the Gateway Overlay District
(c) Where the site abuts a residential district, service door openings or loading docks oriented
toward the residential zone district residential use shall be screened with a 100% opaque
screening comprised either of vegetation, a privacy fence or combination, at least 6 feet high.
(d) Micro-distilleries must be at least 300 feet from any lot that contains a school, a place of
worship or a playground.
Beer Gardens with the following conditions:
(a) Shall be closed between the hours of 12:00 AM and 10:00 AM;
(b) The onsite consumption of liquor, liqueur and spirits is prohibited;
(c) Required off-street parking shall be at a ratio of 1 space per 300 square feet of service
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
81 | P a g e
area. Parcels located in the C-1 district are exempted from the parking standard.
(d) The perimeter of the outdoor seating area is designated by a decorative fence, wall and/or
planter.
(e) Outdoor lighting must be shielded to prevent direct lighting on the right-of-way or
adjacent property
(f) Must comply with the City of West Columbia Noise Ordinance
Taprooms with the following conditions:
(a) At least 20% of product sold is produced by microbreweries within the State of South
Carolina;
(b) Shall be closed between the hours of 12:00 AM and 10:00 AM;
(c) The onsite consumption of liquor, liqueur and spirits is prohibited;
(d) Required off-street parking shall be at a ratio of 1 space per 300 square feet of service
area. Parcels located in the C-1 zoning district are exempt from the parking standard.
However, all permitted uses must also meet the requirements of the underlying Zoning District.
(2) The following uses are declared to be incompatible with the intent and purposes of this district as
stated in 710.1 and 710.2, and are therefore disallowed, irrespective of primary or underlying Zoning
District regulations permitting such uses:
(a) Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in Section 809;
(b) Massage Parlors;
(c) Pawn Shops;
(d) Body Art Services;
(e) Check Cashing, Title Loan and Pay Day Loan Businesses;
(f) Mini-warehouses and Storage Units;
(g) Automotive Repair Shops; and
(h) New & Used Car Dealerships and Motorcycle Dealerships.
710.6 General Design Standards for Commercial Development, Group Housing Development and High-Rise
Apartment Developments
At a minimum, the following general design standards shall be considered by the Zoning Administrator or
his/her designee when considering a proposed project in the District:
(1) Height: The height of any proposed alteration or construction should comply with the underlying
zoning restrictions.
(2) Exterior Building Material: Brick, brick veneer, wood siding, wood look-alike siding, stucco, etc. are
the preferred exterior building materials for buildings in the District. No portion of a building
constructed of metal siding should be visible from the street.
(3) Utility Lines: All utility lines should be placed underground.
(4) Scale: The scale of the structure after alteration, construction, or partial demolition should be
compatible with surrounding structures.
(5) Directional Expression: Facades should blend with other structures with regard to directional
expression. Structures should be compatible with the dominant horizontal or vertical expression of
surrounding structures.
(6) Architectural Details: Architectural details including materials, colors, and textures should blend in
and be compatible with surrounding development. Roofing materials and pitches, as well as glass
components will be in keeping with the architectural integrity of the area.
(7) Parking: Generally, parking requirements will be enforced.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
82 | P a g e
(8) Landscaping: Generally, the Landscaping ordinance will be enforced. Chain link, woven wire or barb
wire fencing shall be prohibited in any area visible from the public right-of-way.
(9) Setbacks
(a) The following properties shall be allowed a 12.5' front yard setback from the road: properties
located between Leaphart Street and the Congaree River and Klapman Boulevard and
Meeting Street; and properties between State Street and Alexander Road and Meeting Street
and Court Avenue and the 100 block of Oliver Street. However, building placement on the
property cannot interfere with pedestrians and vehicular safety as it pertains to visibility
triangles located at intersections or the ingress and egress to the property. These properties
shall be more fully delineated on the official zoning map for the City of West Columbia.
(b) Otherwise, all setbacks shall comply with the underlying zoning districts.
710.7 Certain Work Exempt
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any building or any
structure which does not require a building permit.
710.8 Review Process
(1) Any property owner(s) or developer(s) proposing a project within the District, which would create a
new plat of record or combine or re-combine existing lots, or would substantially alter or renovate an
existing structure, must submit site plans of the proposed project, along with sketch plans of front, side
and rear elevations, dimensions and exterior materials and color chart and such other information
concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this
ordinance are being upheld to the Zoning Administrator or his/her designee.
(2) The Zoning Administrator or his/her designee shall review the proposed plans to determine if it
adheres to the District’s purpose, intent and guidelines. The Zoning Administrator may require
additional information as is necessary to determine compliance with this ordinance, including existing
or proposed buildings or alterations, existing or proposed uses of buildings and land, number of
families, housekeeping units, rental units and existing conditions of adjacent property. If the
proposed project is consistent with the District’s guidelines, intent and purposes, the Zoning
Administrator or his/her designee shall approve the project and shall issue the appropriate permits.
(3) Variances from the standards and requirements set forth herein shall be as provided in Article 11 of
the City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinances.
710.9 Appeals
Any person who may have a substantial interest in any decision by the Zoning Administrator or his/her
designee relating to a project in the District may file an appeal with the Board of Zoning Appeals pursuant to
the provisions of Article 11 of the City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinances.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
83 | P a g e
711 Redevelopment District Floating Zone
711.1 Purpose: The purpose of the Redevelopment Floating Zone is to provide opportunities for redevelopment in the
City of West Columbia through a land development process designed to encourage context sensitive redevelopment.
711.2 Applicability: The zoning district applies to proposed projects for which the applicant plans to seek redevelopment
status under the guidance of the Gateway Overlay District Redevelopment Plan, any subsequent redevelopment plan
or TIF District adopted by the West Columbia City Council, or any Redevelopment Area identified by the West
Columbia City Council.
Redevelopment projects outside approved redevelopment plans must comply with Section 515.5 and are subject to modified
and expedited site plan and subdivision review as provided in Section 515.6.
711.3 Pre-application process: Prior to submitting an application under this district, the applicant must participate in a
preliminary conference with the zoning administrator in order to discuss the nature of the proposed project, the
conformance with project eligibility, the desired results and submittal requirements.
711.4 Definitions
A. Casual dining: A restaurant that provides tables service and serves moderately priced food in a casual
atmosphere
B. Fine dining: A full-service restaurant with specific, dedicated meal courses.
C. Specialty Retail: A small retail outlet that focuses on selling a particular product range and associated
items.
711.5 District Standards
A. Project design
(1) Eligible Projects:
a) The redevelopment project shall be laid out and developed as a unit in accordance with a
concept plan in an approved redevelopment plan, or
b) Projects that at a minimum include:
I. A parcel or contiguous parcels of at least 2 acres;
II. At least two of the following:
• A casual or fine dining restaurant;
• A specialty retail store;
• Entertainment space (i.e. movie theater, live theater, concert hall);
• At least 50 jobs.
III. And at least three of the following:
• At least 10% of the gross floor space as live/work space;
• At least 10% of public space (square, park, or plaza);
• Bike and pedestrian facilities that connect to existing or planned public
facilities;
• Enhanced landscape features;
• Green infrastructure standards.
c) Through bylaws, covenants, private associations or other means, the redevelopment
project shall ensure the continued maintenance of the properties and of the various
amenities, conservation and design features of the redevelopment project in its entirety
and in perpetuity
d) The landscape in the redevelopment project shall be conserved and enhanced, insofar as
practical, by minimizing tree and soil removal and the conservation of special landscape
features such as streams, wetlands, ponds, groves and land forms. The addition or use of
trees, shrubs, flowers, fountains, ponds, special paving materials, benches and seating
area, special lighting fixtures and other amenities will be encouraged to the extent of their
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
84 | P a g e
appropriateness and usefulness to the development and the likelihood of their continued
maintenance.
e) The impact on the community from on-site lighting and noise shall be minimized.
Utilities serving the redevelopment project shall be underground.
f) Exposed storage areas, trash, and garbage containers, exposed machinery installation,
service areas and structures shall be accounted for in the design of the project and made
as unobtrusive as possible while maintain accessibility to equipment for maintenance.
They shall be subject to such setbacks, special planting or other screening methods as
shall be required by the planning commission to prevent them from being incongruous
with the existing or contemplated environment and the surrounding properties.
B. Permitted uses
The uses permitted in the Redevelopment Floating Zone include any combination of the following:
retail establishments, residences, sales and display rooms, photography and art studios, art
galleries and sales, interior design studios, craft studios and sales, antique shops, establishments
for teaching music, dance or other performing arts, financial institutions, hotels, motels, bed and
breakfast establishments, restaurants, personal service establishments, amusement, recreational
and entertainment establishments, offices, parking lots, parking garages, parks, playgrounds and
play fields, civic cultural and recreational uses, historic sites and structures provided that they
conform to the provisions of Section 804 of the West Columbia Zoning ordinances, and artisan
manufacturing
Each development application shall submit a list of specific permitted uses for the redevelopment project
under consideration.
C. Prohibited uses
The following uses are prohibited in a Redevelopment District:
(a) Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in Section 809;
(b) Massage Parlors;
(c) Pawn Shops;
(d) Body Art Services;
(e) Check Cashing, Title Loan and Pay Day Loan Businesses;
(f) Mini-warehouses and Storage Units;
(g) Automotive Repair Shops; and
(h) New & Used Car Dealerships and Motorcycle Dealerships.
(i) Hookah lounge, vape lounge, smoke shop, vape shop, and CBD oil shop
D. Maximum height
(a) Buildings up to forty (40) feet in height are permitted outright.
(b) Buildings in excess of forty (40) feet in height, provided there is an increase of one (1) foot in side,
front, and rear yards over the minimum side, front, and rear yard requirements for each additional two (2)
feet of height.
(c) Buildings between the height of forty (40) and seventy-five (75) feet are allowed as special exceptions if
they do not meet the requirements of 515.5D(b) above.
E. Lot size, Lot Width, Setback, Parking, Lot Coverage and Landscaping
Lot size, lot width, setbacks, parking, lot coverage and landscaping will be set in accordance with an
approved site plan, but must conform to the applicable case study in an approved redevelopment plan
(when applicable)
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
85 | P a g e
F. Signs: A common signage plan shall be submitted with the application. The Common Signage Plan must
describe the location, size and design of the proposed signs. Exterior signs should provide for modest,
coordinated and complimentary exterior sign locations, configurations and color throughout the site and
should not be visually dominating. All freestanding signage within the Redevelopment Project should
complement signage affixed to the structures within the site. The Planning Commission may require that
signs for multiple businesses within the Redevelopment Project be integrated and consolidated into one or
more sign structures. Except as specifically excluded in the application, the provisions of Section 905 shall
apply. The provisions of Section 908 shall apply to the Redevelopment Projects.
711.6. Planning Commission Review: Once a completed application is submitted, staff shall schedule the request for the
next regular Planning Commission meeting for review. In conjunction with the application review, the Planning Commission
shall conduct a public hearing using the notice requirements described in Section 1204.
A. Content of the Application: The following items constitute the minimum required for the contents of a
Floating Zone Redevelopment District Plan. The developer may supplement the list with whatever
materials deemed appropriate to illustrate compliance with the regulations and intent of this section. The
planning commission may require the applicant submit any information necessary to determine the
compatibility of the proposed project to the conditions in the surrounding neighborhood such as density,
height, site conditions, building form, and area requirements.
(1) A legal description of the site.
(2) A boundary line survey of the site prepared and certified by a registered land surveyor showing
the dimensions of the property’s boundaries and all existing rights of way adjacent to the property.
(3) Existing zoning and land uses on and adjacent to the site.
(4) Municipal boundaries on or adjacent to the site.
(5) A utility concept plan, including location of all existing sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and water
lines on the site and on property immediately adjacent to the site.
(6) Existing and proposed topography of land with contours shown at intervals no greater than two
feet (2’). Topographic data shall refer to USGS North American Datum-Mean Seal Level
Elevation.
(7) A circulation plan including locations of all existing and proposed streets.
(8) Typical arrangement of existing and proposed buildings and structures.
(9) The shape, dimensions and location of all buildings existing and proposed with proposed uses.
(10) The location and dimensions of off-street parking and loading spaces and the means of ingress and
egress to and from such spaces.
(11) Existing and proposed landscape features including significant tree groupings, isolated trophy
trees, scenic views and other natural features such as wood lots, lakes, ponds, springs, waterways,
wetlands, floodplains, etc.
(12) Wetlands delineation, including a plan for their preservation, enhancement or mitigation.
(13) Identification of all areas to be dedicated as common Open Space, designated for easements and
all sites to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved for parks, playgrounds, school sites, public
buildings and similar public and quasi-public uses, together with the proposed plan for permanent
maintenance of such common Open Space areas.
(14) A plan for the phasing and sequencing of development improvements, including utilities, site and
structures.
(15) A table of permitted uses.
711.7 Plan Approval
Once the application is approved by the Planning Commission, the Planning Commission shall forward a recommendation to
City Council for Consideration. If approved by resolution of City Council, the properties within the proposed Redevelopment
Project shall be shown on the Official Zoning Map as being located within the Redevelopment District Floating Zone.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
86 | P a g e
711.8 Revocation of Approval
The City of West Columbia will comply with the State of South Carolina Vested Rights Act. The Redevelopment Plan
approval shall be revoked, and Redevelopment District Floating Zone designation is removed if:
A. Authorized work has not commenced within the vested right period, or
B. Any conditions of Section 515.5 or Section 515.6 are not met as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
87 | P a g e
ARTICLE 8
SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
800 High-rise apartments
High-rise apartments are permitted or permissible in certain districts as indicated in Article 7, “Use Requirements
for Districts”, subject to the following regulations:
800.1 High-rise Apartments Permitted Outright or as Special Exceptions.
800.1.1 High-rise apartments are permitted outright in the following districts: R-1 and C-3.
800.1.2 High-rise apartments with commercial uses on the first and second floors are permitted as special
exceptions in the following districts: C-1 and C-3.
800.2 Permitted Uses in High-rise Apartments.
800.2.1 Dwelling units.
800.2.2 Any uses permitted in the district in which the high-rise apartment is located, provided that in C-3
districts non-residential uses including “accessory commercial uses” as described below, plus all other nonresidential
uses, shall not occupy more than thirty percent (30%) of the gross floor area of the building
exclusive of any portion of the building devoted to parking.
800.2.3 In addition to non-residential uses, permitted or permissible in the district in which the high-rise
apartment is located, such structures may contain “accessory commercial uses” which are defined as:
(1) Commercial establishments for the sale of convenience goods.
(2) Personal and professional service establishments.
(3) Private clubs and lodges.
(4) Restaurants.
800.2.4 Provided however, that in R-1 districts, such “accessory commercial uses” as described above,
shall meet the following requirements:
(1) They shall be designed, constructed, and operated with orientation toward the interior of the
structure.
(2) There shall be no external evidence of such “accessory commercial uses”.
(3) Such accessory commercial uses shall not occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the gross
floor area of the building exclusive of any portion of the building devoted to parking.
800.3 Dimensional Requirements
R-1 C-1 C-3
Minimum lot area 1 acre 1 acre 1 acre
Minimum lot width 150 feet 150 feet 150 feet
Required front yards 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet
Required side yards 25 feet 15 feet 25 feet
Required rear yards 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet
Maximum lot coverage 25 percent 35 percent 25 percent
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
88 | P a g e
800.4 Increase of Allowable Lot Coverage
800.4.1 Additional lot coverage may be allowed on a foot-for-foot basis equal to the number of square feet
provided on the structure above the first floor level in the form of landscaped roof gardens, solariums,
recreational spaces, and the like made available generally to residential tenants but in no case shall such
increase in coverage exceed an amount equal to ten percent (10%) of the total lot area upon which such
high-rise apartment is located.
800.4.2 In any district in which high-rise apartments are allowed, parking structures to accommodate
required parking may be erected to cover not more than thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area in addition
to the coverage listed in 800.3 and 800.4(1) above.
800.5 Maximum Height of High-rise Apartments. In any district in which high-rise apartments are allowed, no
portion of any high-rise apartment shall project through imaginary planes leaning inward over the lot from the
exterior lot lines of the lot angles representing four (4) feet in height for each one (1) foot of horizontal distance
from such lot lines.
800.6 Required Off-street Parking and Loading for High-rise Apartments. Off-street parking requirements must
be met for the district in which the high-rise apartment is located as required by Section 611 herein. Off-street
loading must be met as required by Section 612 herein.
800.7 Signs for High-rise Apartments. Signs are permitted in connection with the high-rise apartments in
accordance with the requirements of Article 9 for the district in which structures are located.
800.8 Requirements Concerning Planning Commission Review. All proposals for construction or enlargement of
high-rise apartments where high-rise apartments are permitted as special exceptions shall be reviewed by the
planning commission prior to the board of zoning appeals action on such proposals, as follows:
800.8.1 The applicant for special exception shall submit to the planning commission such site plans,
architectural plans, descriptions, and other information as the planning commission may deem reasonably
necessary to review such proposal.
800.8.2 The planning commission shall review such proposal to determine if the requirements stipulated in
this ordinance have been met and also that the high-rise apartments as proposed are in harmony with the
intent of this ordinance. The specific design, use, and dimensional requirements of this ordinance shall be
binding upon the planning commission, which shall not have the authority to approve any variation
therefrom.
800.8.3 The planning commission shall certify findings of its review to the board of zoning appeals. Such
certification shall be made within forty-five (45) days of submission of all required information. If such
certification is not made within the time specified, the board of zoning appeals may act upon such proposal
as if the planning commission had made affirmative finding in favor of the applicant on all aspects of the
proposal.
800.9 Board of Zoning Appeals Action Upon High-rise Apartments. The recommendations of the planning
commission shall be advisory only to the board of zoning appeals. Upon receipt of the recommendation, the board
may act to grant such special exceptions as are provided for herein. Even though the board may impose such
safeguards and conditions as deemed appropriate in the granting of a special exception, the specific design, use, and
dimensional requirements of this ordinance as regards high-rise apartments are binding upon the board, and in no
case shall the board vary requirements established by this ordinance for a high-rise apartment, whether permitted
outright or as a special exception.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
89 | P a g e
801 Group developments
801.1 Types of Group Developments.
801.1.1 Group commercial or industrial developments consist of more than one (1) commercial or
industrial structure erected on a single lot.
801.1.2 Group housing developments consist of:
(1) Any structure containing more than four (4) dwelling units on the first floor level thereof or
containing more than eight (8) dwelling units throughout, except that high rise apartments are not
considered to be group housing developments.
(2) More than one (1) structure containing dwelling units erected on a single lot.
801.2 Regulation of Group Commercial or Industrial Developments. Group commercial or industrial
developments may be established in any district provided that:
801.2.1 They house only permitted or permissible uses for the district in which they are located;
801.2.2 They meet all lot, yard, and other requirements of this ordinance.
801.3 Regulation of Group Housing Developments.
801.3.1 Establishment. Group housing developments may be established as follows:
(1) Containing single family detached dwellings only, as special exceptions in D-1, R-3 and R-4
districts.
(2) Containing single family detached, two (2) family detached or multiple family dwellings,
permitted outright in R-1, R-2, or C-3 districts.
801.3.2 Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit. A group housing development shall conform to the minimum lot
area per dwelling unit for the district in which it is located, provided, however, that any group housing
development containing more than one (1) structure shall have lot area of at least twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet.
801.3.3 Street Access. Any building established in connection with such group housing development
which does not face directly on a public street shall be provided with access to a public street by a paved
driveway having a pavement width of not less than twenty (20) feet, exclusive of parking spaces.
801.3.4 Setback Requirements. All buildings and structures established in connection with such group
housing developments shall comply with all front, side, and rear yard setback requirements for the district
in which they are located.
801.3.5 Orientation of Yards. The orientation of yards for structures within group housing developments
shall be based upon the orientation of the lot and upon the orientation of individual structures, as further set
forth in Section 610.4.
801.3.6 Position of Dwelling Structures. No dwelling structure established in connection with a group
housing development shall be situated on a lot as to face the rear of another building or structure within the
development within a distance of one hundred (100) feet.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
90 | P a g e
801.3.7 Uses Prohibited. In no case shall a use be permitted in connection with such development that is
prohibited by this ordinance in the district in which such group housing development is to be
located.
801.3.8 Elevators or Escalators. Any residential structures within a high-rise group housing development
or defined as being a group housing development containing more than three (3) stories above or below the
level of the principal entrance shall contain elevators or escalators.
801.3.9 Review by Planning Commission. Before the board of zoning appeals may act on a proposal for
construction or enlargement of any group housing development requiring a special exception therefor, the
planning commission shall review site plans, descriptions, and other such materials as deemed appropriate
in order to determine that the requirements listed above will be met by such proposed development, and
further shall find that such development is in harmony with the intent and purposes of this ordinance and
shall certify such findings to the board of zoning appeals. In the event that the planning commission shall
fail to report its findings to the board of zoning appeals within sixty (60) days from the time that all
required materials are submitted, the board of appeals may act upon such proposal as if the planning
commission had reported favorably on all aspects therefor.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
91 | P a g e
802 Home occupations
Home occupations, except beauty and barber shops, are permitted accessory uses in all residential districts. Beauty
and barber shops as home occupations are permitted special exceptions in all residential districts subject to approval by the
board of zoning appeals.
The following requirements shall apply to home occupations:
(1) Only members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in the home occupation;
(2) The occupation shall not involve the retail sale of merchandise manufactured off the premises, except for the
sale of goods incidental to the provision of services;
(3) No display of merchandise shall be displayed for advertising purposes or be visible from outside the dwelling;
(4) The occupation shall not, in the opinion of the zoning administrator or his/her designee, create a nuisance or
cause undue disturbance in the neighborhood due to noise, fumes, or other impacts from the operation of the
occupation;
(5) No sign shall be permitted, except one (1) non-illuminated nameplate not more than one (1) square feet in area
mounted flat against the wall of the principal building in which the occupation is conducted. Sign regulations are
included in Article 9.
(6) No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a
residential neighborhood.
(7) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 611.3.12.
(8) The use of the dwelling unit for home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for
residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the floor area of the dwelling
unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation. The home occupation must be carried on wholly with the
principle residential building.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
92 | P a g e
803 Day care facilities for children
803.1 Definitions
Child Day Care Center. Provides care for 13 or more children at any given time. Must be approved by the
board of zoning appeals and pass a fire inspection prior to being approved by, license by, or registered with
the South Carolina Department of Social Services. Due to the scope of their operations, child day care
centers are permitted special exceptions only in commercial districts, except for child day care centers
sponsored by and housed in churches located in residentially zoned areas.
Family Day Care Home. Provides care for up to six (6) children at any given time. Must be approved by
the board of zoning appeals prior to being registered with or licensed by the South Carolina Department of
Social Services. Licensed family day care homes must also pass a fire inspection. A family day care center
must be located in an occupied residence and have a working, listed telephone number. Family day care
homes are permitted as special exceptions in all residential and commercial districts.
Group Day Care Home. Provides care for seven (7) to twelve (12) children at any given time. Must be
approved by the board of zoning appeals and pass a fire inspection prior to being licensed by the South
Carolina Department of Social Services. A group day care must be located in a residence or in a separate
building if permitted in the applicable zoning district. Group day care homes are permitted in R-1 and R-2
residential districts and all commercial districts.
803.2 General Requirements
803.2.1 Meeting State Requirements. Before granting a special exception for establishment of a day
nursery or kindergarten, the board of zoning appeals shall determine that such facility can meet the
requirements set forth in the South Carolina Department of Social Services “Rules and Regulations
Relating to Licensing Day Care Facilities and Childcare Centers”. The day nursery or kindergarten may
not open for business until it is fully registered or licensed by the South Carolina Department of Social
Services.
803.2.2 Fencing for Play Areas. Fenced play area shall be a minimum of one thousand and five hundred
(1,500) square feet for any child day care center. For family day care homes and group day care homes, the
South Carolina Department of Social Service requirement for fenced play area shall be met. No fence shall
be less than five (5) feet in height or greater than seven (7) feet in height.
803.2.3 Loading and Unloading. An area adequate for loading and unloading of children to be
accommodated shall be provided and such area shall not be located within any public right-of-way.
803.2.4 Signs. Notwithstanding provisions of Article 9 of the zoning ordinance, signs in connection with
any day care facilities from children located in any residential district shall be limited to one (1) sign for
each facility, not to except two (2) square feet of display area, and not illuminated.
803.2.5 Play Equipment. No play equipment shall be closer than twenty (20) feet to any residential lot
line.
803.2.6 Facilities, operation, and maintenance shall meet requirements of the appropriate health
department.
803.2.7 Additional Conditions. The board of zoning appeals shall determine if additional safeguards and
conditions are appropriate in order to protect children accommodated from detrimental characteristics of
use of adjacent areas, or to protect similar facilities on adjacent properties.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
93 | P a g e
804 Historical sites and structures
For the purposes of this ordinance, historical sites and structures include those listed in the National Register of
Historic Places and those listed in Central Midlands Historic Preservation Survey by Central Midlands Council of
Governments. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, the board of zoning appeals may, after due
notice and public hearing, authorize as a special exception the use of any historical site or structure which is not
otherwise permitted in the district in which it is located upon finding that:
804.1 A normally permitted use is not economically or practically feasible or would not be in the interest of
historical preservation, and
804.2 The proposed use will tend to promote the maintenance or restoration of the unique historical or
architectural qualities of the property.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
94 | P a g e
805 Required separation between commercial and/or manufacturing lots and residential lots
When the rear or side lot line of a lot zoned and used for commercial or industrial purposes adjoins the rear or side
lot line of a lot zoned for residential purposes, the commercial or industrial development shall comply with the following
requirements.
805.1 The required setback line for buildings on the commercial or industrial lot shall be increased to twenty (20)
feet from the property line of the residential lot.
805.2 A vision screening buffer shall be provided along the rear or side lot line used and zoned for commercial or
industrial purposes. This buffer shall consist of a vegetative, opaque screen at least four (4) feet deep and six (6)
feet tall, a solid wall or fence at least six (6) feet tall, or any combination of the above offering equal protection.
Slatted fences must provide ninety percent (90%) opaqueness at the time of installation. Durable wooden fences
must be approved by the zoning administrator or his/her designee.
805.3 These provisions shall not apply when the aforesaid side or rear lot lines do not meet due to the presence of
an easement, water course, or other right-of-way greater than twenty-five (25) feet in width. In such cases, said
easement, water course or other right-of-way shall be deemed a sufficient buffer for the purpose of this ordinance.
The provisions of this section do not apply to storage yards.
805.4 Parking facilities or driveways shall not be permitted in the side or rear yard setbacks for a distance of four
(4) feet from any property zoned R-4, R-3, R-2, or R-1.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
95 | P a g e
806 Cluster housing development
Cluster housing developments containing single family detached or attached dwelling units are allowed in R-1, R-2,
R-3, and C-3 zoning districts as permitted special exceptions subject to approval by the board of zoning appeals and
subsequent review and approval of development plans by the planning commission. Land development regulations of the
City of West Columbia shall apply to all cluster housing developments.
806.1 Definitions
806.1.1 Detached Cluster House. A single family dwelling unit which has no common wall with any
building other than its accessory structure or structures.
806.1.2 Attached Cluster House. A single family dwelling unit in a building that has not less than two (2)
or more then eight (8) single family housekeeping units intended for owner occupancy which are erected as
a single building on adjoining lots each being separated from any other building by space on all sides. No
attached cluster house shall be more than one hundred and fifty (150) feet in length.
806.1.3 Attached Cluster Housing Development. A minimum of two (2) attached cluster houses wherein
specified real property will be subdivided and sold wherein other specified real property will be owned in
common and managed and maintained by a homeowners association or by a developer.
806.1.4 Combination Cluster Housing Development. A cluster housing development may contain both
attached and detached houses.
806.1.5 Architectural Style in Cluster Housing Developments. In all cluster housing developments,
exterior elevations of all houses must be architecturally compatible and may be mixed in design.
806.2 Material to be Submitted for Planning Commission Review. All applicants for cluster housing
developments shall submit architectural plans including details such as number, location, and orientation of dwelling
units, site plans, landscaping plans, plans for off-street parking and service areas, ingress and egress arrangements,
elevations of all portions of proposed structures, perspective drawings showing the relationship between the
proposed structures, perspective drawings showing the relationship between proposed structures within fifty (50)
feet of the exterior property lines of the proposed cluster housing development.
Also a copy of the legal documentation for land in common ownership and public ownership must accompany the
application for planning commission review and be approved by the planning commission prior to being recorded in
the Lexington County Register of Deeds. The planning commission may require additional information, if the
members feel there is a need.
806.3 Requirements Concerning Planning Commission Review. The materials required in Section 806.2 must be
approved by the planning commission prior to issuing a building permit. The planning commission as a condition of
approval may require screening or modifications to the landscaping, parking, and circulation plans. The required
screening as determined by the planning commission and the placement of curb cuts as approved by the planning
commission along with the arrangement of land in private ownership, common ownership, and public ownership are
binding upon the applicant.
The zoning administrator or his/her designee shall issue no zoning permit for the erection of any attached or
detached cluster house or any alteration to any cluster house, which (1) increases its height or coverage of land, (2)
increases the total number of residential units in the approved cluster housing development, (3) alters the parking
requirements or reduces the number of off-street parking spaces, or (4) infringes on the common ownership property
or the designated exterior buffer areas along the fringes of the identified cluster housing development until the
planning commission shall have reviewed the application and documents required to be submitted therewith and
reported concerning conformity with the provisions, intent, and purposes of this ordinance.
At his direction, the zoning administrator or his/her designee may approve minor changes in materials required for
submission.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
96 | P a g e
806.4 Minimum Site Size for Cluster Housing Development
Zoning District Acres
R-3 3
R-2 3
R-1 1.5
C-3 1.5
Density for a cluster housing development shall be determined as follows:
806.4.1 In a R-3 district, structures and/or building coverage shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of
the buildable area.
806.4.2 In R-1, R-2, or C-3 districts, structures and/or building coverage shall not exceed forty percent
(40%) of the buildable area.
806.4.3 Street right-of-way shall not be included in computing buildable area in R-, R-2, R-3, and C-3
districts.
806.5 Minimum Setback from Exterior Property Lines of Cluster Housing Development.
Distance from Right-of Way Other Exterior
Zoning District Along Existing Public Street Property Lines
R-3 35 feet 10 feet
R-1, R-2, C-3 25 feet 10 feet
A minimum yard setback of twenty (20) feet is required in the primary front yard and a minimum yard
setback of ten (10) feet is required in secondary front yards (or side yards facing a street).
806.6 Minimum Spacing Between Principal Buildings
Front Front Side Rear Rear Rear
Zoning to to to to to to
District Front Side Side Front Side Rear
R-3 30 ft. 20 ft. 10 ft. 100 ft. 10 ft. 20 ft.
R-1, R-2
and C-3 30 ft. 20 ft. 6 ft. 100 ft. 10 ft. 20 ft.
The side, rear, and front of each structure shall be designated on a site plan of each cluster development
submitted to the planning commission for approval.
806.7 Minimum Required Open Space. Open space for the purpose of cluster housing development is defined as
the land area in common ownership of the homeowners, exclusive of parking areas and roadways which is designed
to meet the primary objective of supplying passive or active recreation needs. Only twenty-five percent (25%) of
the water surface of a natural or man-made body of still or moving surface water shall be counted toward
determination of required open space.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
97 | P a g e
Minimum Open Space
Percent of Land in Open Space
Zoning District In Common Ownership
R-3 30 %
R-2 20 %
R-1, C-3 10%
806.8 Minimum Off-street Parking Spaces.
806.8.1 Where a cluster housing development is dependent completely on off-street parking grouped in
concentrations of greater than four (4) spaces and under common ownership, two (2) off-street parking
spaces per dwelling unit; or,
806.8.2 Two (2) off street parking spaces per dwelling unit on an individual privately owned driveway and
appropriate visitor parking as determined by the planning commission.
806.9 Requirements for Paving of Streets and Parking Areas.
806.9.1 Streets designed for public maintenance must meet the requirements of the land development
regulations. Streets designed for private maintenance must meet paving quality as provided in the land
development regulations. Private streets designed for two-way traffic must meet the same construction
standards as any publicly maintained roadway. Rights-of-way are not required for private streets or
roadways. Private streets must meet all other design requirements of Article 5 of the Land Development
Regulations of the City of West Columbia.
806.9.2 The quality of paving standards for off-street parking areas containing more than four (4) parking
spaces are the same as the quality of paving standards set forth in the city’s land development regulations.
806.9.3 All dwelling units and appropriate community facilities must be provided adequate access to
streets meeting the standards of the city’s land development regulations.
806.10 Other Lot Requirements. Notwithstanding other provisions of this ordinance, lots within cluster housing
developments are not subject to minimum lot area, lot width, and lot setback requirements. District height
requirements of the zoning ordinance will apply to buildings and structures in cluster housing developments.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
98 | P a g e
807 Sediment control, storm drainage, and flood protection.
In order to protect the lands and waters under its control from the harmful effects of sedimentation, storm water, and
flooding, the West Columbia City Council has adopted a Sediment Control and Storm Drainage Ordinance. That
ordinance requires that a sediment control and storm drainage plan be submitted for any new development. Under
an engineering agreement with Lexington County, the plan is reviewed by the county’s engineering staff who
provides technical advice to the West Columbia building official. The building official must approve the sediment
control and storm drainage plans before issuing a land disturbance permit. If construction or land disturbance is
located in a designated flood hazard area as shown on the city’s flood insurance rate map, a flood control measures
must be approved by the building official prior to the issuance of any construction permits.
This section is not intended to incorporate the sediment control and storm drainage ordinance by reference but to
call attention to the existence of development regulations relating to the city in general and to the floodway and
floodplain areas indicated on the city’s flood insurance rate map in particular.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
99 | P a g e
808 Manufactured homes
808.1 Definitions.
Manufactured Home or Mobile Home: A movable or portable dwelling unit over thirty-five (35) feet in
length and at least ten (10) feet in width, constructed to be towed on its own chassis, designed without a
permanent foundation, capable of supporting year round occupancy, which may include one (1) or more
components that can be retracted for towing purposes and subsequently expanded or which may consist of
two (2) or more units separately towed but designed to be joined into one (1) integral unit. The home must
be permanently attached to the ground once moved to its site of occupancy and all transportable features
used to move the house to the site of occupancy must be removed. For the purpose of this ordinance
“mobile homes” will be referred to a “manufactured homes”.
Mobile Home Park or Subdivision. A lot used, designed or intended to be used for the purpose of
supplying parking space for two (2) or more occupied mobile homes and which includes buildings,
structures, vehicles or enclosures used or intended to be used as a part of such mobile home park or
subdivision. Sales or storage lots for unoccupied mobile homes are not considered to be mobile home
parks.
Modular Home. A structure consisting of two or more prefabricated components designed to be
transported to a lot and placed on a permanent foundation, and which is certified by the South Carolina
Building Codes Council as conforming to the International Building Code standards for site built units. A
mobile home, house trailer, or manufactured home is not a modular home.
808.1.1 Classes of Manufactured Homes.
(1) Class A. New manufactured homes certified as meeting the 1976 Construction and Safety
Standards of the Department of Housing and Urban Development and approved by the zoning
administrator or his/her designee as meeting “acceptable similarity” appearance standards in
accordance with Section 811.2(g).
(2) Class B. New manufactured homes certified as meeting HUD 1976 Construction and Safety
Standards, but not approved by the zoning administrator or his/her designee as meeting
“acceptable similarity” appearance standards.
(3) Class C. Manufactured homes certified as meeting the Standards for Manufactured Homes --
Body and Frame Construction, Installation of Plumbing, Heating and Electrical Systems, NFPA
No. 501B, ANSI A119.1, 1968-69 or later edition, or used manufactured homes certified as
meeting either the HUD standards specified above or such proper code, found on inspection to be
in excellent condition and safe and fit for residence.
808.2 Class A Manufactured Homes -- Intent and Effect of Approval Procedures; Guides and Standards.
808.2.1 Intent. It is the intent of these regulations to encourage the provision of moderate and middle
income housing in a general residential environment by permitting the use of Class A manufactured homes,
as defined herein, in the D, R-1, R-2, and C-3 districts subject to the requirements and procedures set forth
herein to assume acceptable similarity in exterior appearance between such manufactured homes and
dwellings that have been or might be constructed under these and other lawful regulations on adjacent lots
in the same district.
808.2.2 Effect of Approval of Class A Manufactured Homes; Limitations. Manufactured homes approved
as Class A, either individually or specified model, shall be permitted in any district in which similar
residential occupancy is permitted, subject to requirements and limitations applying generally to such
residential use in the district, including minimum lot, yard, and building spacing dimensions, percentage of
the lot that may be covered by building, transitional provision at district boundaries, and off-street parking
requirements, and subject to the following additional requirements and limitations.
808.2.3 Approved Permanent Foundation and Curtain Wall Required. No manufactured home shall be
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
100 | P a g e
placed or occupied for residential use on a separate site in any district permitting the use of Class A
manufactured homes, except with a permanent foundation and permanent curtain wall.
808.2.4 Approval of Permanent Foundation and Curtain Wall. The zoning administrator or his/her
designee may, on his own initiative, establish general approval for specified types, brands, varieties or
design of permanent foundation and brick curtain wall to be used in connection with installation of Class A
manufactured homes in areas where such homes are permitted on their own sites. Such general approval
shall be based on a determination of acceptable similarity in appearance to foundations for housing built on
the site and on durability adequate to preserve such appearance with proper maintenance.
On application for similar approval for specified types, brands, varieties or designs, the zoning
administrator or his/her designee shall make similar determinations.
Where approval is granted for permanent foundations or brick curtain walls in connection with applications
on individual Class A manufactured homes, the same type, brand, variety or design shall hereafter be
constructed to be generally approved.
If the zoning administrator or his/her designee shall find that a specific type, brand, variety or design of
permanent foundation or brick curtain wall that has been approved fails to preserve acceptable appearance
with proper maintenance, he shall order necessary correction and/or shall suspend or remove the type,
brand, variety or design from the generally approved listing, with reasons stated in writing.
808.2.5 Application for Class A Determination; Material to be Supplied. Application for approval of
manufactured homes as Class A shall be submitted to the zoning administrator or his/her designee in such
form as he may reasonably require to make determinations. In particular, in addition to such information as
is generally required for permits and is necessary for administrative purposes, such application shall include
all information necessary to make determination as to their conformity with Standards for Determinations
of Acceptable Similarity in Exterior Appearance, Class A Manufactured Homes, including elevation or
photographs of all sides of the manufactured home, exterior dimensions, roof slopes, exterior finish, and the
like.
808.2.6 Action by Zoning administrator or his/her designee; Time Limitation on Determination; Nature of
Determinations. Within five (5) working days of receipt of the application and all required supporting
material, the zoning administrator or his/her designee shall notify the applicant of approval, conditional
approval, or denial of the application. Conditional approval shall be granted only when the conditions and
reasons therefor are stated in writing and agreed to by the applicant, and such conditions shall be binding
upon the applicant. In case of disapproval, the reasons therefore shall be stated in writing.
808.2.7 Standards for Determination of Acceptable Similarity of Exterior Appearance; Class A
Manufactured Homes. The following standards shall be used in determination of acceptable similarity in
appearance between manufactured homes and residences constructed on the site to assure that such
manufactures homes, with permanent foundation or skirting approved (as provided at Approval of
Permanent Foundation) will be compatible in appearance with site built housing that has been or may be
constructed on adjacent or nearby locations. In addition to meeting the following specific standards, no
manufactured home to be approved as Class A shall have an arrangement or appearance of windows and
doors or other features or use colors or color combinations that would be incompatible in a neighborhood in
which most residences are site built.
(1) Minimum Width of Structure. Minimum width of the manufactured home as assembled on the
site shall not be less than twenty (20) feet, as measured across the narrowest portion.
(2) Minimum Roof Pitch; Minimum Distance, Eaves to Ridge; Roofing Materials. The pitch of
the main roof shall be not less than two and one half (2 2) inches of the rise for each twelve (12)
inches of horizontal run. Minimum distances of eaves to ridge shall be ten (10) feet. In general,
any roofing material may be used that is generally acceptable for housing built on the site, if
applied in such a manner as to be similar in appearance.
(3) Exterior Finish; Light Reflection. Materials that are generally acceptable for housing built on
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
101 | P a g e
the site may be used for exterior finish if applied in such a manner as to be similar in appearance;
provided however, that reflection from such exterior shall not be greater than from siding coated
with clean, white, gloss exterior enamel.
808.3 Class B and C Manufactured Homes -- Intent and Approval Procedures. Class B and C manufactured
homes are permitted in development districts as special exceptions subject to approval by the board of zoning
appeals subject to the terms of Section 808.3. The zoning administrator or his/her designee must have a
determination of the construction standards of the manufactured home as well as its structural conditions prior to
hearing by the board of zoning appeals.
808.3.1. Intent. It is the intent of these regulations to encourage the provision of moderate and middle
income housing in low density, primarily undeveloped locations by permitting the location of Class B and
C manufactured homes as special exceptions on separate lots in development districts subject to basic
review requirements.
808.3.2 Effect of Approval of Class B and C Manufactured Homes; Limitations. Manufactured homes,
approved as Class B and C, either individually or by specific model, shall be permitted as special
exceptions in the development districts in which similar residential occupancy is permitted, subject to
requirements and limitations applying generally to such residential use in the district, including minimum
lot, yard, and building spacing dimensions, percentage of the lot that may be covered by buildings,
transitional parking requirements, and subject to the following additional requirements and limitations.
808.3.3 Approved Permanent Foundation and Curtain Wall. No manufactured home shall be placed or
occupied for residential use on a separate site in a development zone except with a permanent foundation
and brick curtain wall generally approved for such use, or upon special approval by the zoning
administrator or his/her designee of the appearance and durability of the permanent foundation and brick
curtain wall proposed as being acceptably similar in appearance to foundations or residences built on the
site.
808.3.4 Approval of Permanent Foundation and Curtain Wall. The zoning administrator or his/her
designee may, on his own initiative, establish general approval for specified types, varieties or design of
permanent foundation and brick curtain wall to be used in connection with installation of Class B and C
manufactured homes in the development district. Such general approval shall be based on a determination
of acceptable similarity in appearance to foundations of housing built on the site and on durability adequate
to preserve such appearance with proper maintenance.
On application for similar approval for specified types, brands, varieties or design, the zoning administrator
or his/her designee shall make similar determinations. Where approval is granted for permanent foundation
and brick curtain wall in connection with applications on individual Class B and C manufactured homes,
the same types, brands, varieties or designs shall be thereafter constructed to be generally approved.
If the zoning administrator or his/her designee shall find that a specified type, brand, variety or design of
permanent foundation and brick curtain wall that has been approved fails to preserve acceptable appearance
with proper maintenance, he shall order necessary correction and/or shall suspend or remove the type,
brand, variety or design from the generally approved listing, with reasons stated in writing.
808.3.5 Application for Class B and C Determination; Materials to be Supplied. Application for approval
of manufactured homes as Class B and C authorized for location by special exception in the development
district shall be filed with the zoning administrator or his/her designee.
The application for special exception shall include material attesting the standards to which the
manufactured home was manufactured as well as an appraisal of the condition of the manufactured home
by a building official. The applicant shall certify also that the manufactured home will be attached to all
utilities except gas and telephone.
808.3.6 Actions by the Board of Zoning Appeals on Class B and C Manufactured Homes Special
Exception in Development Districts. Upon receipt of an application with all required supporting material,
the zoning administrator or his/her designee will notify the chairman of the board of zoning appeals so that
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
102 | P a g e
a hearing on the special exception can be held at one of the board’s regular meetings. At the advertised
public hearing, the board shall receive all required information submitted by the applicant to the zoning
administrator or his/her designee. The board shall rule on the application submitted and may attach
conditions to the request for manufactured home placement to bring it into conformity with the
requirements of Section 808.3.2 through 808.3.5.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
103 | P a g e
809 Sexually oriented businesses
809.1 Purpose and Intent
It is the purpose of this section of the zoning ordinance to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote
the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to prevent the continued deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the city. The provisions of this ordinance have neither the purpose or effect of imposing
a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials including sexually oriented
materials. Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of this ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and
exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent or effect of
this ordinance to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
809.2 Definitions
Adult arcade - Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slugoperated
or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons
per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the
depicting or describing of “specified anatomical areas”.
Adult bookstore or adult video - A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business
purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
(a) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion picture,
video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or
describe “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”; or
(b) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with
“specified sexual activities”. A commercial establishment may have other principal business
purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” and still be categorized as adult
bookstore or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such
commercial establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store so
long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the
specified materials or devices which depict or describe “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas”.
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering
for sale or rental of material depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas” and still be categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store so long as one of its principal
business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified material which depicts or
describes “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” and still be categorized as adult
bookstore or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or
rental for consideration the “specified anatomical areas”
Adult cabaret - A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features:
(a) Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity; or
(b) Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of “specified anatomical areas”
or by “specified sexual activities”; or
(c) Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas”.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
104 | P a g e
Adult motel - A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
(a) Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with
closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slide, or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”; and has a sign visible from the public right-ofway
which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions or;
(b) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or
(c) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is
less than ten (10) hours.
Adult motion picture theater - A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which
are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas”.
Adult theater - A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities”.
Business purpose - The commercial reason for which the proposed trade, commerce, exchange or offering
of goods and services exists or the reason for which the proposed trade, commerce, exchange or offered
goods and services is done, made or used. A business purpose exists when goods or services are offered for
sale or rental with an expectation of the offer receiving any form of consideration, or when the material is
advertised, marketed or made readily available to the public as material in which “specified sexual
activities” and “specified anatomical areas” are depicted or described and may be obtained in exchange for
any form of consideration as part of a commercial agreement. A commercial establishment may have other
apparent, significant, substantial, or principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or
rental of material depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
Such other non-sexually oriented business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial
establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore so long as one of its apparent, significant ,
substantial, or principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified
materials or devices which depict or describe “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
Escort - A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another
person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
Escort agency - A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish
escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
Establishment - Means and includes any of the following:
(a) The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
(b) The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any
sexually oriented business; or
(c) The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
Lap dances, table dances, private dances and the like performances - Whether for remuneration or
consideration of any kind or not, wherein the performer(s) or patrons or volunteers are having any physical
contact or touching whatsoever with another.
Nude model studio - Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays “specified
anatomical areas” is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
105 | P a g e
similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
Nudity or a state of nudity - The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals,
or female breast. Appearance means the actual fact of, the outward show of seeming to be, or the
semblance of.
Bare means without covering, partially uncovered, open to view or unconcealed. Buttock means either of
the two fleshy protuberances in the rear of the human form from the waist down to the joining of the thigh,
including the gluteal folds forming the crease between the thigh and the buttock muscle mass. If no portion
of the bare buttock muscle mass, gluteal fold or indentation separating the buttock is in appearance, the
buttock is not considered bare. Anus means the opening at the lower end of the alimentary canal. Male
genitalia means the scrotum and penis. Female genitalia means the vulva. Female breasts means organs on
the front of the thorax of the woman, including the nipple, areola and the mass of muscle tissue which
projects from the thorax, as a protuberance. If no portion of a bare breast below the visible ring of the
areola is in appearance, the breast is not considered bare.
Permittee and/or licensee - A person in which name a permit and/or license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit
and/or license.
Person - An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
Semi-nude - A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic regions, and areola
of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
Sexual encounter center - A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business
purposes, offers for any form of consideration;
(a) Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or
(b) Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more
of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
Sexually oriented business - An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult
motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter
center.
Specified anatomical areas - Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic regions,
buttocks and female breasts below a point immediately above the areola, or the covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.
Specified sexual activities - Means and includes any of the following:
(a) The fondling or other erotic touching of the human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or
female breasts;
(b) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or
sodomy;
(c) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
(d) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (a) through
(c) above.
Substantial enlargement of sexually oriented business - The increase in floor areas occupied by the
business by more than twenty five (25) percent, as the floor areas exist on April 1, 1993.
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business - Means and includes any of the
following:
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
106 | P a g e
(a) The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
(b) The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by
sale, exchange, or similar means; or
(c) The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal devise which transfers the ownership or
control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of
the person possessing the ownership or control.
809.3 Classification
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
(1) Adult arcades;
(2) Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
(3) Adult cabarets;
(4) Adult motels;
(5) Adult motion picture theaters;
(6) Adult theaters;
(7) Escort agencies;
(8) Nude model studios; and
(9) Sexual encounter centers.
809.4 Permit and/or License Required
809.4.1 A person commits a misdemeanor if he operates a sexually oriented business without a valid
permit and/or license, issued by the city for the particular type of business.
809.4.2 An application for a zoning permit and business license must be made on a form provided by the
West Columbia zoning department and business license department. The application must be accompanied
by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space
occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but must be dawn to
a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus
or minus six (6) inches.
809.4.3 The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter and the premises must
be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the health department, fire department, and
building official. The health department, fire department, and building official shall complete their
inspections and certify same to the deputy administrator/license inspector within twenty one (21) days of
the receipt of the application by said license inspector.
809.4.4 If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the
application for a permit and/or license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is other than an individual, each individual who has a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the
business must sign the application for a permit and/or license as applicant. If a corporation is listed as
owner of a sexually oriented business or as the entity which wishes to operate such a business, each
individual having a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the corporation must sign the application for a
permit and/or license as applicant.
809.4.5 The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city or county permits and/or licenses does
not exempt him from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business permit and/or license.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
107 | P a g e
809.4.6 If the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is to be operated is owned by
someone other than the applicant, an application for a permit must be accompanied by a notarized written
statement signed by the owner of the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is to be
located disclosing the name and address of the owner and acknowledging that the owner has been informed
of the fact that the property is to be used for a sexually oriented business and that the owner consents to
such use of the property.
809.5 Issuance of Permit and/or License
The West Columbia zoning administrator or his/her designee shall approve the issuance of a zoning permit
and the West Columbia license inspector shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant within thirty
(30) days after receipt of an application unless he finds one or more of the following to be true:
(1) An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
(2) An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue in his payment to the county or city of taxes, fees,
fines, or penalties assessed against him or imposed upon him in relation to a sexually oriented business.
(3) An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the permit and/or
license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the applicant form.
(4) An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a permit and/or license by the city or county
to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding twelve (12) months, or residing with a person
whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12)
months.
(5) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the health
department, fire department, and the building official as being in compliance with applicable laws and
ordinances.
(6) The permit and/or license fee required by this ordinance codified in this section has not been paid.
(7) An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the
provisions of the ordinance codified in this section.
(8) An applicant has been registered as a sex offender in the South Carolina Central Registry, has
committed a felony, and/or has committed a crime of moral turpitude.
(9) The permit and/or license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it
is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The permit and/or license
shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to a sexually oriented business so that it may
be easily read at any time.
809.6 Fees
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit and/or license is as set forth in the Business and
Professional License Ordinance of the City of West Columbia.
809.7 Inspection
809.7.1 An applicant or permittee and/or licensee shall permit representatives of the city police
department, health department, fire department, zoning (planning management) department, or other city or
county departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.
809.7.2 A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits a
misdemeanor if he refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or
open for business.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
108 | P a g e
809.8 Expiration of Permit and/or License
809.8.1 Each permit and/or license shall expire December 31 of the year in which it is issued and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in Section 809.5.
809.8.2 When the West Columbia license inspector denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be
issued a permit and/or license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the West
Columbia license inspector finds that the basis for denial of the renewal permit and/or license has been
corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a permit and/or license if at least ninety (90) days have
elapsed since the date denial became final.
809.9 Suspension
The West Columbia license inspector shall suspend a permit and/or license for a period not to exceed thirty
(30) days if he determines that a permittee and/or licensee or employee of a permittee and/or license has:
(1) Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this ordinance;
(2) Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business
premises;
(3) Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this
chapter;
(4) Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises;
(5) Violated any city or state nudity/indecency statute or ordinance.
809.10 Revocation
809.10.1 The West Columbia license inspector shall revoke a permit and/or license if a cause of
suspension in Section 809.9 occurs and the permit and/or license has been suspended within the preceding
twelve (12) months for willful and knowing violation of the ordinance codified in this section.
809.10.2 The West Columbia license inspector shall revoke a permit and/or license if he determines that:
(1) A permittee and/or licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to
the zoning (planning management) department during the application process;
(2) A permittee and/or licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of
controlled substances on the premises;
(3) A permittee and/or licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises;
(4) A permittee and/or licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business
during a period of time when the permittee’s and/or licensee’s permit and/or license was
suspended;
(5) A permitted and/or licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sexual conduct to occur in or on the
permitted and/or licensed premises;
(6) A permittee and/or licensee is delinquent in payment of the city, county, or state for any taxes
for fees past due.
809.10.3 When the West Columbia license inspector revokes a permit and/or license, the revocation shall
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
109 | P a g e
continue for one year, and the permittee and/or licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented permit
and/or license for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the
West Columbia license inspector finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the
applicant may be granted a permit and/or license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the
revocation became effective.
809.11 Transfer of Permit and/or License
A permittee and/or licensee shall not transfer his permit and/or license to another, nor shall a permittee
and/or licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a permit and/or license at any place other
than the address designated in the application.
809.12 Location of Sexually Oriented Business
809.12.1 Reserved
809.12.2A person commits a misdemeanor if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business outside C-2 district. All sexually oriented businesses shall be located within a C-2 district.
809.12.3 A person commits a misdemeanor if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business within eight hundred (800) feet of:
(1) A church or worship center of any denomination of faith;
(2) A public or private elementary or secondary school;
(3) A boundary of any residential district;
(4) A public park or outdoor recreational facility at which minor children are likely to congregate,
adjacent to any residential district;
(5) The property line of a lot devoted to residential use.
(6) A day care facility;
(7) A public library;
(8) A cemetery;
(9) A hospital or other medical care facility;
(10) A long term retirement, extended care, nursing care, or assisted living facility.
809.12.4 A person commits a misdemeanor if he causes or permits the operation, establishment,
substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within eight
hundred (800) feet of another sexually oriented business.
809.12.5 A person commits a misdemeanor if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, or
maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof,
or the increase of floor areas of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof
containing another sexually oriented business.
809.12.6 For the purpose of this ordinance, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the
premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a
church or public or private elementary or secondary school, or nursery school or day care or to the nearest
boundary of an affected public park, residential district, or residential lot.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
110 | P a g e
809.12.7 For purposes of Section 809.12.4 of this section, the distance between any two (2) sexually
oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regards to intervening structures or objects,
from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
809.12.8 Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on April 1, 1993, that is in violation of
Subsection 809.12.1 through 89.12.7 of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The
nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed two (2) years, unless sooner
terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such
nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be
changed to a conforming use. If two (2) or more sexually oriented businesses are within eight hundred
(800) feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was
first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later
established business(es) is nonconforming.
809.12.9 A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a
nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business
permit and/or license, of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, residential
district, or residential lot within eight hundred (800) feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision
applies only to the renewal of a valid permit and/or license, and does not apply when an application for a
permit and/or license is submitted after a permit and/or license has expired or has been revoked.
809.13 Exemptions
It is a defense to prosecution under Sections 809.5 and 809.12 that a person appearing in a state of nudity
did so in a modeling class operated:
(1) By a propriety school, licensed by the State of South Carolina; a college, junior college, or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation in a structure:
a. which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no advertising that indicates a nude
person is available for viewing; and
b. where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of
the class; and
c. where no more than one (1) nude model is on the premises as any one time.
(2) By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs n which credits
are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation and in
a structure:
a. which has no sign visible form the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates
a nude person is available for viewing; and
b. where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of
the class; and
c. where no more than one (1) nude model is on the premises at any one time.
809.14 Additional Regulations for Adult Motels
809.14.1 Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishment has been
rented and vacated two (2) or more times in a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours creates a
rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter.
809.14.2 A person commits a misdemeanor if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel,
motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented permit, he/she rents or
sub-rents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, he/she
rents or sub-rents the same sleeping room again.
809.14.3 For purposes of Subsection 809.14.2 of this section, the terms “rent” or “sub-rent” mean the act
of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
111 | P a g e
809.15 Additional Regulations for Exhibition of Sexually Explicit Films or Videos
809.15.1 A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult
motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of
floor space, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified activities or
specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Upon application for a sexually oriented permit and/or license, the application shall be
accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one
or more manager’s stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any
portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station may not
exceed thirty two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at
which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professional prepared diagram in the
nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram
should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a
designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of
all areas of interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The West
Columbia zoning administrator or his/her designee may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal
applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the
configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
(3) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s station may be made without the
prior approval of the zoning administrator or his/her designee or his designee.
(4) It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is
on duty and situated in each manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the
premises.
(5) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose excluding rest rooms. Rest rooms may not contain video reproduction
equipment. If the premise has two or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the
premise shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the
premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the
manager’s stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the
manager’s station.
(6) It shall be the duty of the owners and operators, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and
employees present in the premises to ensure that the view area specified in Subsection 809.15.1(5)
remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all
times and in every booth or room in which viewing of videos, as defined in Subsection
e809.15.1(a), is taking place, the bottom of the door must be at least eighteen (18) inches above
the floor level, to ensure 2that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has
been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application file pursuant
to subsection 809.15.1 of this section.
(7) No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
(8) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to
illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one
foot candle as measured at the floor level.
(9) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and
employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described above, is maintained at
all times that any patron is present in the premises.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
112 | P a g e
809.15.2 A person having a duty under Subsection 809.15.1 above commits a misdemeanor if he/she
knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
809.16 Additional Requirements for Adult Cabarets
809.16.1 No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised
sexually oriented business establishment without a valid sexually oriented business license issued pursuant
to this ordinance.
809.16.2No later than March 1 of each year, an adult cabaret permittee shall file a verified report with the
city administrator of his/her designee showing the gross receipts and amounts paid to performers for the
preceding calendar year, either as non-employee performers or as employees of the permittee / licensee.
For the purposes of this ordinance, a performing employee receives a W-2 form, while a non-employee
performer receives a 1099 form. A non-performing employee would be any other person employed by the
permittee or his/her agents to perform any other business function, such as wait staff, greeters, host /
hostesses and kitchen or bar service staff.
809.16.3 An adult cabaret permittee shall maintain and retain for a period of two (2) years the names,
addresses, social security numbers, proof of individual business licenses and ages of all persons who agree
or contract to appear as performers. An adult cabaret permittee shall maintain and retain for a period of
two (2) years the names, addresses, social security numbers, and ages of all employees who appear as
performers.
809.16.4 No adult cabaret permittee or his/her agent shall employ a person to perform or contract with a
non-employee performer under the age of 18 years.
809.16.5All performers, if considered employees for tax purposes, must have individual business licenses.
Proof of individual business licenses by non-employee performers must be obtained by the permittee or
his/her agents prior to any performance. All non-employee performer business licenses must be displayed
during the performance. It is unlawful for a non-employee to perform without a properly displayed
business license. It is unlawful for a permittee, his/her agents or the non-employee performer(s) to fail to
display the individual business license(s) of the performer during the performance.
809.16.6It is unlawful for an owner, permittee/licensee, operator or manager to fail to obtain proof of
individual business licensing by non-employee performers prior to performance.
809.16.7No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be admitted to an adult entertainment
establishment.
809.16.8No sexually oriented business purpose shall be made available to the public except between the
hours of 8:00 AM and 2:00 AM.
809.16.9An adult entertainment establishment permittee shall conspicuously display all permits and
licenses required by this ordinance and all business licenses for all non-employee performers, as required
by this ordinance.
809.16.10 All performances, including but no limited to dance, shall occur on a platform intended for that
purpose which is raised at least 24 inches from the level of the floor.
809.16.11 No performance, including but not limited to dance, shall occur closer than six (6) feet to any
patron.
809.16.12 No non-employee performer or employee performer or employee shall fondle or caress any
patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any performer, employee, or another patron.
809.16.13 No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any performer.
809.16.14 No performer or employee shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any partron.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
113 | P a g e
809.16.15 All areas of an establishment licensed under this section shall be fully lighted at all times
patrons are present.
809.16.16 It shall be the duty of the permittee and his/her agents to ensure compliance by all performers
and employees with the provisions of this ordinance.
809.16.17 A person having a duty to ensure compliance with this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
809.17 Employee Tips
809.17.1 It shall be unlawful for any employee or non-employee of a sexually oriented business to receive
tips from patrons except as set forth in Subsection 809.17.3 of this Section.
809.17.2 A permittee that desires to provide for tips from its patrons shall establish one or more boxes or
other containers to receive tips. All tips for such employees shall be placed by the patrons of the sexually
oriented business into the tip box.
809.17.3 A sexually oriented business that provides tip boxes for its patrons as provided in this Section
shall post one or more signs to be conspicuously visible to the patrons on the premises in letters at least one
(1) inch high to read as follows: “All tips are to be placed in tip boxes and not handed directly to the
performer. Any physical contact between the patron and the performer or employee is strictly prohibited
by law and punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or thirty (30) days
imprisonment.”
809.17.4 It shall be the duty of the permittee, his/her agents, employees and performers present in the
premises to ensure compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and any person who has a duty to
ensure compliance with this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if he/she knowingly fails to fulfill that
duty.
809.18 Unlawful Operation Declared a Nuisance
Any adult entertainment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this ordinance
shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu
of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the
abatement, removal or enjoyment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall
apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment
establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment
establishment contrary to the provisions of this ordinance. In addition, violation of the provisions of this ordinance
shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder.
809.19 Exterior Portions or Regulated Establishments
809.19.1 It shall be unlawful for a permittee, his agents or employees of a regulated establishment to allow
the merchandise or activities of the regulated establishment to be visible from any point outside such
regulated establishment.
809.19.2 It shall be unlawful for the property owner, permittee, his/her agents or employees of a regulated
establishment to allow exterior portions of the regulated establishment to be painted any color other than a
single chromatic color. This provision shall not apply to any regulated establishment if the following
conditions are met:
(1) The regulated establishment is part of a commercial multi-unit center; and
(2) The exterior portions of the regulated establishment are painted the same color as one another or are
painted in such a way so as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the
commercial multi-unit center.
809.19.3 Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to require the painting of an otherwise unpainted
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
114 | P a g e
exterior portion of a regulated establishment.
809.19.4 It shall be the duty of permittee, his/her agents and employees present in the premises to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, and any person whose duty to ensure compliance with
this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if he/she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
809.20 Signage
809.20.1Notwithstanding any other city ordinance, code, or regulation to the contrary, it shall be unlawful
for the permittee or licensee or his/her agent or employee of a regulated establishment or any other
person to erect, construct, or maintain any sign for the regulated establishment other than one (1)
primary sign and one (1) secondary sign, as provided herein. A person commits a misdemeanor if
he posts such signage or allows the posting of such signage not expressly permitted by this
ordinance.
809.20.2Primary signs shall have no more than two (2) display surfaces. Each surface shall:
(1) Not contain any flashing lights;
(2) Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
(3) Not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet in area; and
(4) Not exceed ten (10) feet in height or ten (10) feet in length.
809.20.3Primary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of
any manner, and may contain only:
(1) The name of the regulated establishment; and/or
(2) One or more of the following phrases:
a. Adult Arcade
b. Adult Bookstore
c. Adult Video Store
d. Adult Cabaret
e. Adult Motel
f. Adult Movie Theater or Adult Motion Picture Theater
g. Adult Entertainment
809.20.4 Primary signs for Adult Movie Theaters or Adult Motion Picture Theaters may contain the
additional phrase “Movie Titles Posted Within Premises”. A person commits a misdemeanor if
he allows the
posting of movie titles in such a way as to be visible from outside the premises.
809.20.5 Each letter forming a word on a primary sign shall be of solid color, and each such letter shall be
of the same print-type, size and color. The background behind such lettering on the display
surface of a primary sign shall be of a uniform solid color.
809.20.6 Secondary signs shall have only one (1) display surface. Such display surface shall:
(1) Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape;
(2) Not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area;
(3) Not exceed five (5) feet in height and four (4) feet in width; and
(4) Be affixed or attached to any wall or door of the establishment.
809.20.7 The provisions of Subsection 809.20.2 and Subsections 809.20.3 and 809.20.4 shall also apply to
secondary signs.
809.20.8 It shall be the duty of the permittee, his agents and employees present in the premises to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, and any person who has a duty to ensure
compliance with this section shall be guilty if he/she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
115 | P a g e
809.21 Respondent Superior
809.21.1 It is the duty of the permittee and his/her agents to insure that the provisions of this ordinance are
made known to its employees and performers.
809.21.2 Every act or omission by an employee or performer constituting a violation of the provisions of
this ordinance shall be deemed the act of omission of the permitted and his agent if such act or
omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the permittee or his/her
agent or as a result of the failure to inform the employee or performer of the provisions of this
ordinance or a result of the failure to supervise the employee’s or performer’s conduct. The
permittee and his/her agent shall be held liable for such act or omission in the same manner as if
the permitted and his/her agent committed the act or caused the omission.
A permittee and his/her agents shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees or performers
while on the licensed premises and any act or omission of any employee or performer constituting
a violation of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed the act or omission of the permittee
and his/her agents for the purposes of determining whether the permit shall be revokes, suspended
or renewed.
809.22 Injunction and Violations
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid permit and/or
license or in violation of Section 809.12 of this ordinance is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for
criminal violations. Such violations shall be punishable by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per offense or
thirty (30) days imprisonment.
A sexually oriented business is subject to any and all city and state nudity/indecency statutes or ordinances,
existing now or in the future; nothing contained herein shall be intended to allow any activities contrary to the
statutes or the ordinances.
809.23 Violations constitute misdemeanors
It shall be unlawful for any owner, licensee, manager, employee or contract performer to violate the
conditions, requirements and regulations imposed by this ordinance. Each violation shall constitute a separate
offense. Each violation is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or thirty (30) days
imprisonment.
809.24 Severability
The provisions of this section of the zoning ordinance regulating sexually oriented businesses are hereby
declared to be severable and if any section, subsection, sentence, phrase, or clause of this ordinance shall be held or
declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, the validity of the remaining sections,
subsections, provision, sentences, clauses or phrases shall not be affected thereby.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
116 | P a g e
Section 810 Communication towers and antennas
810.1 Definitions
In addition to the definitions set forth in Article 3 of this ordinance, the following definitions relate to
communication towers and antennas.
Communications Tower. As used in this ordinance shall mean a tower, pole, or similar structure which
supports a telecommunications antenna operated for commercial purposes above ground in a fixed location,
freestanding, guyed, or on a building.
Telecommunications. As defined in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, means the transmission
between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change in the
form or content of the information as sent and received.
Antenna. Any device for radiating or receiving electromagnetic waves, including, but not limited to, radio,
television, telephone, communication, microwave, and satellite dish antennae.
Height of a Communication Tower. The distance from the base of the tower to the top of the structure.
810.2 Communications tower and antenna permitted as conditional use.
A Communications tower and/or antenna may be permitted by the zoning administrator or his/her designee
without further review upon determination that all of the applicable conditions in this ordinance are met.
810.2.1 Districts in which conditional uses are permitted; height limitations.
Districts Permitted Height--Free Standing or Guyed Tower
R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 Free-standing tower with height not exceeding 100 feet is permitted conditional
use; height exceeding 100 feet requires special exception.
C-1, C-2, C,3 Free-standing or guyed tower with height not exceeding 180 feet is permitted
conditional use; height exceeding 180 feet requires special exception.
LM, HM Free-standing or guyed tower with height not exceeding 360 feet is a permitted
conditional use; height exceeding 360 feet requires special exception.
D Free-standing or guyed tower with height not exceeding 500 feet is a permitted
conditional use; height exceeding 500 feet requires special exception.
Permitted Height Above Structure
All Districts Tower and/or antenna mounted on building, water tank or structure other than a
free-standing or guyed communications tower must not extend more than 30 feet
above the highest part of the structure.
Special Exceptions and Variances
All Districts Except Free-standing or guyed tower and/or antenna exceeding height PUD
limitations may be permitted by the board of appeals as a special
exception.
All Districts Variances from conditions imposed by this section may not be granted by the
board of appeals. Variances from other general district regulations may be
granted under standards in S. C. Code 6-29-800.
810.2.2 Application Requirements. The applicant for a conditional use zoning permit for construction of a
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
117 | P a g e
communications tower or placement of a commercial telecommunication antenna on an existing structure
other than a tower previously permitted must file with the zoning administrator or his/her designee an
application accompanied by a fee of $200 and the following documents, if applicable.
(a) One copy of typical specifications for proposed structures and antennae, including description
of design characteristics and material.
(b) A site plan drawn to scale showing property boundaries, tower locations, tower height, guy
wires and anchors, existing structures, photographs or elevation drawings depicting typical design
of proposed structures, parking, fences, landscape plan, and existing land uses on adjacent
property; (site plan not required if antenna is to be mounted on an approved existing structure);
(c) A current map, or update for an existing map on file, showing locations of the applicant’s
antennae, facilities, existing towers, and proposed towers which are reflected in public records,
serving any property within the city;
(d) A report from a structural engineer registered in South Carolina showing the tower antenna
capacity by type and number, and a certification that the tower is designed to withstand winds in
accordance with ANSI/EIA/TIA 222 (latest revision) standards.
(e) Identification of the owners of all antennae and equipment to be located on the site;
(f) Written authorization from the site owner for the application;
(g) Evidence that a valid FCC license for the proposed activity has been issued;
(h) A line of sight analysis showing the potential visual and aesthetic impacts on the adjacent
residential districts;
(i) A written agreement to remove the tower and/or antenna within 180 days after cessation of use.
(j) Evidence that applicable conditions in subsection 810.2.3 are met; and,
(k) Additional information by the zoning administrator or his/her designee for determination that
all applicable zoning regulations are met.
810.2.3 Conditions. Applicant must show that all applicable conditions are met.
(a) The proposed communications tower, antenna or accessory structure will be placed in
reasonably available location which will minimize the visual impact on the surrounding area and
allow the facility to function in accordance with minimum standards imposed by applicable
communications regulations and applicant’s technical design requirements.
(b) Applicant must show that a proposed antenna and equipment cannot be accommodated and
function as required by applicable regulations and applicant’s technical design requirements
without unreasonable modifications on any existing structure or tower under control of applicant.
(c) Applicant for a permit in a residential district must show that the area cannot be adequately
served by a facility placed in a non-residential district for valid technical reasons.
(d) Prior to consideration of a permit for location on private property which must be acquired,
applicant must show that available publicly owned sites, and available privately owned sites
occupied by a compatible use, are unsuitable for operation of the facility under applicable
communications regulations and applicant’s technical design requirements.
(e) Applicant must show that a new tower is designed to accommodate additional antennae equal
in number to applicant’s present and future requirements.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
118 | P a g e
(f) Applicant must show that all applicable health, nuisance, noise, fire, building and safety code
requirements are met.
(g) A communication tower must not be painted or illuminated unless otherwise provided by state
or federal regulations.
(h) A permit for a proposed tower site within 1,000 feet of an existing tower shall not be issued
unless the applicant certifies that the existing tower does not meet applicant’s structural
specifications and applicant’s technical design requirements, or that a collocations agreement
could not be obtained.
(i) Applicant must show by certificate from a registered engineer that the proposed facility will
contain only equipment meeting FCC rules, and must file with the zoning administrator or his/her
designee a written indemnification of the municipality and proof of liability insurance or financial
ability to respond to claims up to $1,000,000.00 in the aggregate which may arise from operation
of the facility during its life, at no cost to the municipality, in form approved by the municipal
attorney.
(j) Land development regulations, visibility, fencing, screening, landscaping, parking access, lot
size, exterior illumination, sign, storage, and all other general zoning district regulations except
setback and height, shall apply to the use. Setback and height conditions in this section apply.
(k) A tower must be a minimum distance equal to one-half the height of the tower from property
designated historic or architecturally significant, and must be set back from all lot lines distances
equal to the district setback requirements of 25 percent of the tower height, whichever is greater.
(l) Prior to issuing a permit, the zoning administrator or his/her designee may make use of
technical services of the Municipal Association of South Carolina to determine that the standards
in this section of the ordinance are met.
810.2.4 Appeal to the Zoning Board. Applicant may appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals as follows:
(1) Failure of the zoning administrator or his/her designee to act on an application which is
determined to be complete under this section within 45 days, unless extended by agreement, may
be considered by applicant to be a denial of permit which is subject to appeal to the board of
appeals.
(2) Applicant may appeal to the board for a variance from general zoning district regulations in
this section, but not from any other conditions in this section. Towers exceeding height limitations
may be permitted only by special exception pursuant to Section 810.3.
(3).. Applicant may apply directly to the board for a permit for any tower as a special exception
pursuant to Section 810.3.
810.3 Special Exceptions.
A tower, pole, or antenna may be permitted by special exception granted by the board of zoning appeals
after public hearing and findings of fact based on the following criteria:
Special Exception Criteria: The Board of Appeals must find and conclude:
Application conditions 1. All application requirements and conditions imposed by Section
810.2 of this ordinance for conditional uses are met except height
limitations and setbacks.
Height limitations 2. If additional tower height is requested, total tower height will not
exceed 150% of the maximum height permitted in the district as a
conditional use.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
119 | P a g e
Necessity for additional height 3. Applicant has demonstrated that additional height above that
permitted by conditional use regulations is necessary for service to
occupants of an area within the municipality.
Setback requirements; additional 4. Setback requirements and such additional conditions are conditions
established by the board as it deems necessary to remove
danger to health and safety, and to protect adjacent property.
MASC technical assistance required 5. Prior to approving a permit by special exception or on
on special exception or appeal from appeal from action of the zoning administrator or his/her
action on conditional use designee on an application for a conditional use, the board may make
use of technical services of the Municipal Association of South
Carolina to determine that the standards in Section 810.2 are met.
Denial on substantial evidence 6. The Telecommunications Act of 1996 requires that a denial of a
permit be supported by substantial evidence.
Variance prohibited 7. The board may not grant a variance from the standards imposed for
a communication tower or antenna in connection with granting a
special exception, except as permitted by Section 810.2.4.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
120 | P a g e
Section 811 Landscaping Regulations
811.1 Scope of Landscaping Regulations
811.1.1 Applications
Unless otherwise designated in this section, the regulations set forth herein apply to development and
improvements of all real property within the following zoning districts:
D Development
R-1 Residential (high-density)
C-1 Intensive Commercial
C-2 General Commercial
C-3 Restricted Commercial
LM Light Manufacturing
HM Heavy Manufacturing
811.1.2 Definitions
In addition to the definitions set forth in Article 3, the following terms shall have the following definitions:
Activity – The performance of a function or operation which constitutes the use of land; specific activities
shall be considered as defined in this zoning ordinance.
Berm – A hill or slope (man-made or natural) that represents a change in elevation and serves as a
screening tool.
Buffer – A landscaped area designed to provide separation and screening between land uses of different
intensities by reducing the effects of traffic, noise, glare, trash, activity, vibration, odor, visual disorder and
any other harmful or noxious effect associated with more intensive uses.
Caliper – The diameter of nursery stock, measured at six (6) inches above the ground for up to and
including four-inch caliper size, and measured at twelve (12) inches above ground for nursery stock larger
than four-inch caliber size.
Circumference – The external surface of the trunk of a tree, measured at breast height, and divided by 3.14
(pi) to determine tree diameter.
Critical Root Zone – A protection zone measured as one (1) foot in radius around a tree for every one (1)
inch in diameter of the tree.
Deciduous – Not evergreen, shedding leaves annually.
Diameter at Breast Height (DBH) – The accepted measurement of established trees in the ground is their
diameter at breast height, measured at four and one-half (4 ½) feet above grade. To obtain the DBH,
measure the circumference of the tree in inches and divide by 3.14 (pi).
Display Area or Lot – Any unenclosed area which exceeds ten thousand (10,000) square feet for the display
of merchandise including, but not limited to automobiles trucks, boats, and travel trailers.
Evergreen – A tree, shrub, or other plant whose leaves remain green throughout all seasons; as opposed to
“deciduous.”
Ground Cover – See “Stabilizing Vegetation.”
Hardwood Tree – A broad-leaved tree, so called because its wood is harder and more tightly grained than
that of a softwood or needle-bearing conifer. Examples are oak, hickory, beech and poplar.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
121 | P a g e
Landscape Administrator – The official or officials assigned to administer, interpret and enforce the
landscape regulations.
Masonry Wall – A wall whose face is constructed of brick, stones or stucco.
Natural Condition – Refers to a native, indigenous, unpruned, unaltered setting or planting.
Parking Lot – Any parcel of land, or portion thereof, which is used for parking, loading, or associated
circulation of vehicles, whether paved or unpaved.
Screen (Screening) – Any approved structure or vegetative stand, or combination of both, which is used for
the purpose of blocking views, noise, light or glare from neighboring properties and, where required, road
rights-of-way.
Shrub – Any hard-wooded perennial plant of a species which normally reaches or is maintained at a height
between twelve (12) inches and eight (8) feet.
Softwood Tree – A coniferous (cone-bearing) tree such as pine, cedar or bald cypress.
Slatted Fence – Any wire or similar fence with the view through such fence obstructed with material
interwoven into the fencing.
Stabilizing Vegetation – Any plant material that serves to prevent soil erosion by covering large areas of
ground, and which does not grow beyond twelve (12) inches in height; may also be referred to as “ground
cover.”
Street Frontage – An area of land adjacent to and fronting along a street right-of-way.
Thoroughfare – Any major arterial roadway, one of the principle routes into and through the community.
Tree – A self-supporting woody perennial plant with a trunk diameter of at least two (2) inches measured at
six (6) inches above ground level, with a mature height of at least twelve (12) feet, and usually having one
main stem or trunk and many branches.
Tree, Canopy – Any single-stem tree of a species which normally reaches a height of thirty (30) feet or
more and has a crown spread of twenty (20) feet or more at maturity.
Tree, Trophy – A tree of significance due to its size, relative to its species, which should be preserved and
protected. Guidelines detailed within this section address the circumstances in which preservation of
trophy trees is feasible. The specifications for determining trophy trees are as follows:
Type Minimum Size Examples
Hardwoods 24” DBH Oak, Hickory, Beech, Poplar
Softwoods 30” DBH Pine, Cedar, Bald Cypress
Understory 12” DBH Dogwood, Redbud, American Holly
Tree, Understory – A single- or multi-stem tree of a species which normally reaches a height between eight
(8) feet and thirty (30) feet and has a crown spread of less than twenty (20) feet at maturity.
Underbrush – Naturally occurring vegetation and vines that are not necessarily shrubs or trees.
Visibility Triangle – Necessary sight lines maintained at street intersections as described in Section 606.
811.2 General Landscaping Requirements
811.2.1 Pre-Development Activity
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
122 | P a g e
A. The appropriate land disturbance permit(s) must be obtained prior to the removal of any stumps,
roots systems, or stabilizing vegetation.
B. Clearing and landscape plans are required as part of the review process for construction or
expansion of high-density residential uses, commercial uses and manufacturing uses permitted
specifically or as special exceptions in the zoning districts listed in Section 811.1.1. At the
determination of the Landscape Administrator, any other uses permitted in the zoning districts
subject to the landscaping requirements may be required to prepare clearing and landscape plans.
The plans must demonstrate how the proposed development will meet the requirements of the
ordinance as well as show various existing conditions. Clearing and landscape plans shall contain,
at a minimum, the following information:
• The name of the proposed development.
• The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the property owner, developer and project
designer.
• A location map showing the proposed project and its relationship to the roadway network.
• Identities and uses of adjacent properties.
• Total acreage of the parcel.
• Location of any existing and proposed structures.
• Location of any service areas, utilities, storage areas, parking lots.
• Location and identification of all trophy trees, canopy trees with a DBH of eight (8) inches or
greater, and all understory trees with a DBH of four (4) inches or greater.
• The effect of the clearing plan, if any, on the trees identified above.
• All proposed landscaping and watering systems required by these landscape regulations, with
all plant species labeled and scaled to show location and canopy spread at time of installation.
• A table of planting materials that states species, number, and size of trees and shrubs at the
time of planting.
C. The scale of the clearing and landscaping plan must be appropriate to convey all required
information, but no smaller than one inch equals one hundred feet (1 to 100), and must show the
true size, shape and location of all existing and proposed features and landscaping.
D. Two copies of the clearing and landscaping plan shall be submitted to the Landscape
Administrator prior to construction or development. The Landscape Administrator will review the
plan and verify that it contains all the required information and conforms to the terms and intent of
this section within fifteen (15) days after submission, prior to certifying in writing that the clearing
and landscaping plan is approved.
E. Once necessary development approvals have been granted and permits obtained (prior to the
commencement of any clearing, grading, tree removal or construction on a site), the developer
shall cause all protected trees to be marked with surveyor’s flagging tape in a uniform manner that
clearly identifies those trees to be retained. At the discretion of the Landscape Administrator,
passive forms of marking may be used (continuous rope or flagging for areas that are heavily
wooded).
811.2.2 Preservation Standards
A. To the extent possible, existing canopy and understory trees located and identified in the clearing
and landscaping plans shall be utilized in meeting the landscaping requirements of this section.
B. Except as otherwise provided in Section 811.2.6, all trees identified as trophy trees shall be
preserved.
C. The thinning of understory trees and other vegetation may be approved or required by the
Landscape Administrator to encourage the healthy maturation of preferred trees. In addition,
utility companies may require the thinning of trees and shrubs pursuant to their regulations in
order to maintain power and telephone rights-of-way. Such required thinning by a utility
supersedes any authority granted to the Landscape Administrator.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
123 | P a g e
811.2.3 Planting and Maintenance
A. To the greatest extent possible, development plans shall address the location of excavation for
activities such as utilities to avoid root damage to trees being preserved or planted.
B. There shall be no construction, paving, grading, trenching, digging, excavation, operation of
equipment or vehicles, cement rinsing, chemical usage or storage of materials within the critical
root zone of any tree being preserved.
C. New trees must be planted properly, to include soil / site preparation and protection of roots.
D. Watering methods (irrigation and otherwise) must be adequate to maintain plant material in a
healthy growing condition at all times.
E. New trees and preserved trees must be properly maintained. Any trees required by these
Regulations that die must be replaced within forty-five (45) days. The Landscape Administrator
may extend this replanting period based upon climate and planting conditions of the season, or
other unusual conditions.
F. The property owner or tenant shall be responsible for regular weeding, mowing, fertilizing,
irrigating, pruning or other maintenance of all plant materials that are required to comply with the
landscaping regulations.
G. The planting of stabilizing vegetation is encouraged to minimize erosion, add color and diversity
to the landscaped areas, and minimize maintenance.
811.2.4 Species Selection
A. The Landscape Administrator shall approve the number, type, size and location of all
required trees in consultation with the developer or landowner. Together, they shall
ensure creativity and variety in design, height, texture and color, and discourage single
rows of identical plants, with the exception of street trees along thoroughfares that may
have been planted or maintained in a single row. To the greatest extent possible, required
landscaping shall replicate the surrounding natural conditions.
B. Tree specimens proposed for planting shall be hardy for the particular soil and climate
conditions they will encounter and shall be located in such a manner as to encourage
mature growth. In order to limit the potential for maintenance problems and poor growth,
hybrids, non-native species, and aggressive or invasive species should be avoided, as well
as species outside their normal hardiness range.
C. The minimum required caliper of trees to be planted as required by these regulations shall be
twelve (12) feet tall with a minimum two (2) inch caliper for canopy trees, and six (6)
feet tall with a minimum one and one-quarter (1¼”) inch caliper for understory trees.
D. At the time of installation, all shrubs shall be a minimum of twelve (12) inches tall as
measured from the ground to the highest point on the shrub.
E. To encourage diversity and flexibility of design, no more than sixty percent (60%) of any one
species of tree may be used in the overall development plan.
811.2.5 Location
A. These provisions are not intended to conflict with signs or entrances to any residential,
commercial or industrial development. All signs and entranceways should be designed and
located in such a manner as to be enhanced by the landscaping requirements and existing
vegetation. All locations of signs and driveways must meet the requirements of the zoning
ordinance.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
124 | P a g e
B. Trees, berms, shrubs, planted and raised islands and service areas shall be placed outside
the Visibility Triangle as described in Section 606 at any intersection with a road right-ofway,
with the full mature size of the plant taken into account. In addition, these features shall
be located in such a manner as to not create a vision hazard for those citizens navigating
internal travel lanes, driveways or parking lots. Regular maintenance of these features to
ensure a clean line of sight is required.
C. The presence of underground or overhead utilities shall be taken into consideration when
determining the type and placement of required trees. Consultation with SCE&G, City of
West Columbia Water and Sewer Department, BellSouth, Time-Warner Cable, Palmetto
Utility Protection Service and any other utility shall be required if the Landscape
Administrator deems if necessary.
811.2.6 Exceptions to Tree Preservation Requirements
A. In the event that a trophy tree is located on a lot within the proposed building footprint
and no reasonable or practical redesign of the building to preserve the tree can be identified,
the Landscape Administrator has the authority to allow the tree to be removed.
B. Any tree that has been certified in writing by the appropriate federal, state, county, or city
agency or department or by a public utility as being hazardous to public health, safety or
welfare shall be removed, to include trees identified as trophy trees. Such determination by
the appropriate federal, state, county or city agency or department or by a public utility shall
be provided to the Landscape Administrator prior to the removal of such tree.
811.3 Land Use Compatibility
811.3.1 Application
Buffer yards shall be required in all zoning districts whenever:
• A use classified as industrial is adjacent to non-industrial use.
• A use classified as commercial is adjacent to any residential use.
• A use classified as multi-family is adjacent to any single-family residential use
811.3.2 Location
A. Buffer yards are to be located on the property of the proposed or changing land use that is to
be screened. Such buffer yards are to be located between the property line and any
vehicular use areas, buildings, storage areas, service areas or other areas of activity on the
property to be screened and shall extend along the entire property line abutting the less
intensive land use.
B. No vegetative screening or fencing required by this section shall be planted inside utility and
drainage easements, excluding overhead easements, without the written approval of the
easement holder. Any tree planted within the right-of-way of overhead utility lines shall
be an understory tree.
C. Where front, side and rear yards (building setbacks) are required by the zoning ordinance,
buffer yards may be established within such setbacks. If the setback requirement is less
than the buffer yard requirement, the buffer yard width requirement shall prevail.
811.3.3 Determination of Buffer Yard Requirements
A. To determine whether a buffer yard is required between two different land uses, and what
the buffer width and landscaping requirements are, the following procedure is used:
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
125 | P a g e
1. Identify the proposed new or expanding land use and each existing adjacent land use.
Determine the impact factor of each of the identified uses as set forth in the Land Use
Impact Table (Table 1). A proposed land use is considered to exist on an adjacent
property when a building permit is issued for its use. If an adjacent property is vacant,
and no building permit has been issued for its use, its use shall be determined by
assigning it the highest level of use in its zoning classification.
2. Determine the type of buffer yard required as set forth in the table on Buffer Yard Types
(Table 2).
3. Identify the buffer yard width and planting requirements for the required yard type in the
Buffer Yard Description Table (Table 3). The simplified formula determines the number
of trees and shrubs required in a buffer yard. The variable scale permits a wide buffer
with fewer plants, or a smaller buffer that is more heavily planted.
4. Notwithstanding the required buffer yard widths as set forth in this section, any buffer
yard of less than fifteen (15) feet in width shall have a six-foot masonry wall along the
length of such buffer yard.
B. This process must be applied to each property line, except street frontages. See Section 811.7
for landscaping requirements for street frontages.
811.3.4 Buffer Yard Reductions
Notwithstanding any of the provisions set forth in this section, no property on which a buffer yard is
required shall have a yard less than ten (10) feet in width. Any buffer yard that is less than fifteen (15) feet
in width must contain a six (6) foot tall masonry wall along the entire length of such yard.
The width of a buffer yard and the required plantings may be reduced as follows by the addition of a fence
or masonry wall, or if there are grade elevation changes.
A. Fences. The addition of a closed wooden fence in the required transition yard allows the reduction
of the required width of the applicable buffer yard by twenty-five percent (25%) if the solid fence
meets the following requirements:
1. Height and arrangement. The fence must be a minimum of six (6) feet in height, measured
on the side facing away from the property to be screened. Such fence must also have its
finished side facing away from the property to be screened.
2. Materials. Rot-resistant wood is the acceptable material. Chain link fences, even with slats
installed, does not meet buffer yard requirements.
3. Required Plantings. The number of required shrubs is reduced by fifty percent (50%) in a
buffer yard in which a fence is installed.
B. Masonry Walls. The addition of a masonry wall along the length of the required buffer yard
allows reduction of the required yard by fifty percent (50%) and the amount of required planting
as follows, if the wall meets the following standards:
1. Height. The wall must be at least six (6) feet in height measured on the side of the wall
facing away from the property to be screened.
2. Materials. Face materials shall be brick, stone, or stucco. Cinder block may be used for
support, but is not acceptable as a face surface.
3. Required plantings. If a masonry wall that meets the above standards is installed, the
planting of shrubs shall be optional and understory trees may replace one-half of the
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
126 | P a g e
required canopy trees. The requirement of Section 811.3.2 (B) that one-half of the buffer
yard’s canopy trees must be evergreen still applies.
C. Grade Elevation Changes. The existence of a natural or man-made grade separation in the
required buffer yard allows reduction of such yard by twenty-five percent (25%) in width if said
elevation change achieves a screening effect similar to a wall or fence and meets the following
standards:
1. Elevation. The grade change must be at least six (6) feet in elevation.
2. Slope. The side slopes of such grade shall not be greater than three to one (3:1).
3. Retaining Wall. A greater slope is allowable if it is retained by a structurally sound
retaining wall that meets engineering standards for such a wall.
4. Relationship to Adjacent Properties. The developing property must be located at an
elevation lower than the properties from which it is to be screened.
5. Location of Required Plantings. In order to maximize the effectiveness of the screen, the
required plantings shall be located at the top of the slope in the reduced buffer yard.
811.3.5 Buffer Yard Specifications
Except as provided above in Section 811.3.4 (Buffer Yard Reductions), trees planted in a buffer
yard shall be canopy trees unless planted in an area under overhead power lines, in which case
understory trees shall be used.
A. Species. One-half of the required trees shall be locally adapted evergreen species.
B. Distribution. Trees shall be distributed throughout the yard so as to minimize gaps between
them. Trees counted to meet the required number shall be spaced at least ten (10) feet
apart.
C. Shrubs. All shrubs must be evergreen and shall be a minimum of three (3) feet in height
when planted and shall be expected to reach a height of six (6) feet or greater within five
(5) years of planting.
811.3.6 Land Use Changes
A change in land use to a more intense use requires full compliance with the buffer yard and
screening requirements.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
127 | P a g e
Table 1
Land Use Impact
Land Use Impact
1. Residential Uses:
Single-family and duplexes low
Multi-family, three to ten units medium
Multi-family, more than ten units high
2. Institutional Uses (schools, churches, etc.):
25,000 square feet or less medium
Over 25,000 square feet high
3. Office/Commercial Uses:
25,000 square feet or less medium
Over 25,000 square feet high
4. Industrial Uses:
All industrial uses high
5. Other Uses:
For any land uses not listed, the Landscape Administrator will determine the land use impact based upon
classification of similar uses.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
128 | P a g e
Table 2
Buffer Yard Types
Existing Adjacent Land Use
Proposed
Use
Low Impact
Residential
Medium Impact
Residential
Medium Impact
Commercial/
Institutional
High Impact
Residential
High Impact
Commercial/
Institutional
Low Impact
Residential None None None None None
Medium Impact
Residential B None None None None
Medium Impact
Commercial/
Institutional
C B None A None
High Impact
Residential C B A None A
High Impact
Commercial/
Institutional
D C A B None
Table 3
Buffer Yard Description
Width of Buffer
Transition Yard
(in feet).
200’----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------
190’------
180’------
170’------
160’-------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------
150’------
140’------
130’------
120’----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------
110’------
100’------
90’------
80’----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------
70’------
60’------
50’------
40’-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------D-----
30’------ C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20’------ B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10’------ A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
0’------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80
Shrubs/100 linear feet .
6 in. 12 in. 14 in. 16 in. 20 in.
The number of inches of tree caliper or diameter at breast height required per 100 linear feet.
There are no planting requirements beyond a 200-foot buffer transition yard.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
129 | P a g e
811.4 Parking Lots
811.4.1 General Requirements
A. This article shall apply to the following zoning districts:
D Development
R-1 Residential (high-density)
C-1 Intensive Commercial
C-2 General Commercial
C-3 Restricted Commercial
LM Light Manufacturing
HM Heavy Manufacturing
B. Within these zoning districts, these requirements shall apply to:
1. All surface parking lots that contain eight (8) or more spaces for vehicle parking, loading,
or access to parking or loading areas.
2. All display lots exceeding ten thousand (10,000) square feet for display and storage of
automobiles, boats, recreational vehicles and travel trailers.
3. All new and refurbished parking lots shall also meet the street frontage requirements of
Section 811.7.
4. These requirements shall not apply to existing parking lots unless:
a. Their surface area is increased by more than twenty-five percent (25%); or
b. The parcel is the subject of major renovation or rebuilding which affects the parking
lot in any manner, in which case the requirements of Section 811.7 shall be installed
along street frontages and the existing portion of the lots shall be up-fitted to meet the
requirements of this section.
811.4.2 Design Requirements
A. A parking lot design plan shall be included in the landscaping plan submitted to the
Landscape Administrator as part of the review process.
B. Parking spaces that are adjacent to a sidewalk, pedestrian / bike path, or road right-of-way
shall be designed such that there is some natural or man-made element to prevent bumpers,
fenders or doors of vehicles from intruding into the path of pedestrian or vehicular traffic
outside the parking space.
C. All parking lots shall adhere to the requirements of Section 611 (Off-street Automobile
Parking and Storage).
811.4.3 Islands
Parking lots with planted or raised islands shall include an obvious means of pedestrian egress
through or between islands at reasonable intervals. The location of such islands shall not interfere with the
opening of vehicle doors in adjacent spaces.
811.4.4 Tree Requirements
A. The use of large canopy trees is required throughout the parking area. In no case shall a
parking space be greater than fifty (50) feet from the trunk of a tree. Trees shall be provided
at a minimum average density of one (1) tree for every eight (8) parking spaces. No tree shall
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
130 | P a g e
be planted closer than three and one-half (3½) feet from the back of a curb or the paved
portion of the parking lot.
B. Where overhead utilities exist or are planned, understory trees may be required instead of
large canopy trees, at a replacement density of two (2) understory trees for each large canopy
tree. Such a substitution in the landscape plan shall be by written approval of the Landscape
Administrator.
811.4.5 Planting and Maintenance Requirements
All trees must be planted in protective tree grates with adequate provisions for watering,
oxygenation, and maintenance of both trees and tree grates as the tree matures.
811.5 Service Areas and Storage Yards
811.5.1 Applications
A. These requirements shall apply to all service areas, storage yards, equipment and structures
related to garbage collection, utilities and communication areas in all zoning districts,
including all residential classifications.
B. This section shall not be construed to deny access by vehicles and equipment to service areas
or storage yards or applicable utility areas.
811.5.2 Service Areas, Storage Yards and Utilities
A. Service areas, storage yards, equipment and/or structures related to garbage collection,
utilities, and communication (i.e. voice, data, or visual) must be screened from view from
public rights-of-way and adjoining properties through the use of landscaping, berms
and/or fences, or a combination thereof that is one hundred percent (100%) opaque.
B. All garbage collection sites and containers shall be shielded on all sides by screening that is
one hundred percent (100%) opaque and at least twelve inches (12”) higher than the
collection container being screened, but not less than six feet (6’) in height, regardless of
the height of the container. One side may remain open to accommodate container pickup,
provided the open side is positioned to have the least visible impact on surrounding
properties and roads while still permitting servicing of the containers.
C. Slatted fences that do not provide one hundred percent (100%) opaqueness are not acceptable
for screening. Such fences can be used in coordination with vegetative screening to
achieve one hundred percent (100%) opaqueness.
D. Non-power utility fixtures, substations and exposed metal cabinets greater than five (5) feet
in height shall be screened from view from any private or public street and from
adjoining developed property to the extent practicable after consideration of proper
equipment operation, code compliance, security, access and maintenance.
811.6 Building Landscape Design
811.6.1 Application
A. This section shall apply to any new constructions or renovations in the following zoning
districts:
D Development
R-1 Residential (high-density)
C-1 Intensive Commercial
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
131 | P a g e
C-2 General Commercial
C-3 Restricted Commercial
LM Light Manufacturing
HM Heavy Manufacturing
B. Where it is determined by the Landscape Administrator that a building is designed to have all
visible facades architecturally enhanced by use of window treatments, lighting features or
other enhancements, landscape elements may not be required or may be reduced. The
Landscape Administrator must approve such reductions or exemptions in writing.
811.6.2 Design Elements
A. Developments whose buildings include one hundred (100) linear feet or more of unadorned,
blank walls typical of industrial, retail or warehouse use shall include a landscape design
plan to screen all walls visible from a roadway as part of the development review process.
B. Required landscape designs shall contain at least one of the following groupings of plant
materials at a minimum average density of one group for every forty (40) linear feet, or
portion thereof, of unadorned blank wall:
1. One large canopy tree and three understory trees;
2. One large canopy tree and three large evergreen shrubs;
3. One large canopy tree, two understory trees and one large evergreen shrub;
4. One large canopy tree, one understory tree and two large evergreen shrubs; or
5. Two large canopy trees.
C. Where existing overhead power lines preclude sufficient space for large canopy spread, then
two (2) understory trees shall be substituted for each large canopy tree.
D. Acceptable architectural elements in lieu of landscaping, which are approved in writing by
the Landscape Administrator, shall relate to surrounding building materials and scale.
E. Landscape design is not intended to hide signage or entrances, but frame, enhance and invite.
Signs and driveways shall be located in such a manner so as not to be obstructed by
landscaping or architectural features.
811.7 Street Frontages
811.7.1 General Requirements
This section shall apply to the following zoning districts:
D Development
R-1 Residential (high-density)
C-1 Intensive Commercial
C-2 General Commercial
C-3 Restricted Commercial
LM Light Manufacturing
HM Heavy Manufacturing
811.7.2 Design Requirements
Whenever developments adjoin or front on public streets, large canopy trees shall be provided in planting
groups in accordance with the following:
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
132 | P a g e
A. Tree planting groups shall extend along the full length of the street frontage of the parcel,
exclusive of:
1. Driveways and access ways at points of ingress and egress to and from the parcel; and
2. Visibility triangles.
B. The minimum density for tree groupings shall average one tree group for every forty (40) feet
of street frontage.
C. Tree groupings shall be located within thirty (30) feet of actual or proposed street curbs.
811.7.3 Tree Groupings
A. Required tree groupings shall comply with one or more of the following design standards:
1. One large canopy tree and three small understory trees;
2. One large canopy tree and three large evergreen shrubs;
3. One large canopy tree, two small understory trees and one large evergreen shrub;
4. One large canopy tree, one small understory tree and two large evergreen shrubs; or
5. Two large canopy trees.
B. Where existing overhead power utility lines preclude sufficient space for large mature canopy
spread, then two understory trees shall be substituted for each large canopy tree.
811.7.4 Adjustments
Trees provided to meet the requirements of this section shall also be counted toward the requirements of
Section 811.4 (Parking Lots), provided street trees are within twenty (20) feet of the paved area of the
parking lot.
811.8 Nonconformities
811.8.1 Intent
The intent of this section is to improve or terminate activities that do not conform to the provisions
of these landscape regulations. Therefore, all conforming activities must comply with these regulations,
unless allowed to continue under the provisions of Section 811.8.2.
811.8.2 Continuation of Non-conformities
A. All parcels which are subject to Section 811.3 (Land Use Compatibility) and Section 811.5
(Service Areas and Storage Yards), but do not comply with those provisions on the date of their
adoption are allow to continue as non-conformities until the earliest of the following three
occurrences:
1. The parcel’s zoning designation is changed to one of the following designations:
D Development
R-1 Residential (high-density)
C-1 Intensive Commercial
C-2 General Commercial
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
133 | P a g e
C-3 Restricted Commercial
LM Light Manufacturing
HM Heavy Manufacturing
2. A building permit for substantial alteration to the parcel or any existing or proposed
structure is issued. For the purpose of this section, a substantial alteration to the parcel
would include a contemplated increase or decrease in the heated square footage of
improvements; or
3. The passage of sixty (60) months from the date of adoption of this section or the adoption
of any subsequent amendments thereto.
B. For parcels that cannot meet the buffer yard requirements due to existing location of buildings,
accessory structures or parking areas, the screening requirements of Section 811.3.4 requiring
masonry walls or wooden fences must be met.
C. All parcels which are subject to Section 811.4 Parking Lots, Section 811.6 Building Landscape
Design, or Section 811.7 Street Frontages but do not comply with those provisions on the date of
their adoption are allowed to continue as non-conformities until the earliest of the following two
occurrences:
1. The parcel’s zoning designation is changed to one of the following designations:
D Development
R-1 Residential (high-density)
C-1 Central Business District
C-2 General Commercial
C-3 Transitional Office and Institutional
LM Light Manufacturing
HM Heavy Manufacturing
2. A building permit for substantial alteration to the parcel, parking lot, or any existing or
proposed structure is issued. For the purpose of this section, a substantial alteration to the
parcel or parking lot would include a contemplated increase or decrease in the heated
square footage of the improvements or parking lot size.
811.9 Administration
811.9.1 Landscape Administrator
A. The administration and enforcement of these regulations shall be the responsibility of the
Landscape Administrator, who shall be designated by the West Columbia City Administrator.
B. The duties of the Landscape Administrator are as follows:
1. Interpret and administer all applicable provisions of the landscape regulations;
2. Receive, review and act upon all required landscape plans;
3. Investigate violations of this section and enforce compliance;
4. Administer and enforce all actions of the board of zoning appeals as related to the
landscape requirements;
5. Attend all meetings of the board of zoning appeals related to the landscape
requirements;
6. Maintain current and permanent records relative to the adoption, amendment,
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
134 | P a g e
administration, and enforcement of these regulations; and
7. Provide information to the public on all matters relating to the landscaping regulations.
C. The Landscape Administrator, or other persons engaged by him/her to perform tests or any
other duties, may enter upon any land within the West Columbia city limits and make
examinations and surveys. He/she may also place or remove public notices as required by these
regulations. However, there shall be no right of entry into any building without the owner’s
consent.
811.10 Alternative Compliance and Variances
811.10.1 Alternative Compliance
Any owner or developer who wishes to approach the issues addressed in this section in a different
manner from that prescribed herein may submit his solution to the West Columbia Board of Zoning
Appeals for consideration in the following manner:
Step 1. Present the Landscape Administrator proposed solutions in writing by the required
deadline for the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of zoning appeals.
Step 2. Explain in detail the problems for which an alternative solution is offered, the
requirements of the section addressing that problem, and the proposed alternative.
Step 3. Submit a written statement, graphic representation, or both, prepared by a registered
landscape architect or landscape engineer, explaining how the alternative meets the spirit
and intent of this section.
811.10.2 Variance Request
The board of zoning appeals shall consider all requests for variance from the landscape regulations
when a claim is presented that, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement would result in an
unnecessary hardship. All variance procedures shall be governed by Article 11 of the zoning ordinance.
811.11 Enforcement
Whenever the Landscape Administrator or his/her authorized representative finds a violation of this
section, he/she shall direct compliance by issuing verbal or written orders. Additional enforcement actions may
include the following:
A. The revocation of any site plan approvals issued;
A. The withholding of any related permits, plats, inspections, or other permissions, approvals, or
privileges authorized by any city ordinances;
B. The issuance of a “stop work” order, pending compliance with the landscape regulations; and
C. Redress through legal action, including injunctive relief, described in Section 1009.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
135 | P a g e
Section 812 Location standards for assisted housing
To ensure the proper development of housing facilities to meet the needs of low income residents, the following
standards have been developed for location of assisted housing developments.
812.1 Definitions
Low income - Individuals or families whose annual income is 80% or less of the median income for
Lexington County
Assisted housing - Housing for low-income individuals or families that receive Department of Housing
and Urban Development (HUD) funding or any federal or state tax credits.
812.2 Concentrations
To prevent undue concentrations of assisted housing units in a given area, no new assisted housing project
shall be located within a one (1) mile radius of any existing housing project that has at least ten (10)
assisted housing units.
812.3 Density
No housing project shall contain more than fifty (50) low-income assisted units per site.
812.4 Access to public transportation
For the benefit of the residents who depend upon public transportation, any proposed site for low income
assisted housing must be directly located on an existing public transportation route.
812.5 Sidewalks
Any proposed site for a low income assisted housing project must be directly connected by sidewalks to
commercial developments that provide basic necessities such as food.
812.6 Exemptions
The following assisted housing projects are exempted from these location standards:
(1) Assisted housing projects for the elderly and/or handicapped. To qualify as elderly housing,
100% of all units must have at least one tenant who is 62 years old or older and qualify under
low-to-moderate income criteria established by the State Housing, Finance and Development
Authority.
(2) Assisted housing projects developed for home ownership.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
136 | P a g e
Section 813 Regulation of the Display of Merchandise Outdoors
813.1 Purpose and applicability of article: The provisions of this article shall apply to the establishment, operation, and
maintenance of outdoor displays visible from any and all public thoroughfares within the City limits, as well as to
yard sales which occur within the City Limits. The purpose of the article is to promote safety and the general
economic development and atmosphere of the City for the benefit of all businesses and citizens located there, and no
rights of individuals or individual businesses are created in this article. Further, it is to promote city-wide property
values and to preserve the aesthetic qualities and attractiveness of the City. The Zoning Administrator shall have
ability to grant, modify, or revoke permits issued pursuant to this article in the interest of improving the public
health, safety, and welfare.
813.2 Definitions: The following words, terms, and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
(1) Administrator: The Zoning Administrator, or a person designated by the Zoning Administrator to
administer and enforce the provisions of this article.
(2) Building: Any structure having completely enclosing walls and a roof.
(3) Encroachment: Stands, tables, umbrellas, chairs, displays, signs, objects related to the business, or other
items for sale on the public right-of-way, sidewalk or common area on property visible from a public
thoroughfare.
(4) Outdoor Displays: Displays of merchandise for sale on the exterior of a building or home which is visible
from a public thoroughfare.
(5) Permittee: The recipient of a yard sale permit under the terms and provisions of this ordinance.
(6) Property Owner: The owner of the property as listed on the Real Property Tax Rolls for the County of
Lexington, State of South Carolina.
(7) Yard Sales: Public or private sales in which merchandise is displayed for sale on sidewalks, parking lots,
yards, carports, open garages or other property which is visible from a public thoroughfare.
813.3 Prohibited Acts:
(A) No merchant, vendor, business, tenant, citizen or property owner shall:
(1) Place any item for sale, storage or display within 50 feet of the edge of a street. With the
exception that if a property owner and/or permittee has applied with the Zoning Department in
accordance with the terms of this ordinance for a Yard Sale permit, or such item is permitted
pursuant to this ordinance;
(2) Block or restrict the passageway to less than six feet in width, or block ingress or egress to or from
any building with items of merchandise for sale. Also, no items of merchandise for sale shall be
placed so as to block any driveway, crosswalk, bus stop, or counter service window;
(3) Store, park or leave any stand or items of merchandise for sale overnight on any parking lots,
sidewalks, and/or property which is visible from a public thoroughfare;
813.4 Outdoor Displays Exempted from Ordinance: Those merchants, vendors or businesses selling automobiles,
motorcycles, trailers, all terrain vehicles; water crafts and/or any other titled vehicles; motor oils at service stations;
outdoor furniture; lawn and landscaping equipment; live nursery products; lawn, garden and landscape items to
include top soil, fertilizer, mulch, stone, gravel (excluding toxic chemical concentrates); prepackaged firewood;
newspaper and magazine racks; Christmas trees from November 1 - January 2 of the following year; and vending
machines are exempt from the terms of this article and, therefore, are permitted to display the above listed
merchandise outside of their place of business. Further, those property owners, tenants, or citizens displaying a
swing set, sandbox and/or other playground equipment, above ground pool, trampoline, motorcycle, or tool shed are
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
137 | P a g e
exempt from the terms of this article.
813.5 Permit required for Yard Sale(s): It shall be unlawful for any person to create, establish, operate, maintain or
otherwise be engaged in the business of placing items of merchandise for sale upon the sidewalks, parking lots, or
upon property visible from any a public thoroughfare within the city limits unless he shall hold a valid permit issued
under the terms of this article or unless he is exempt from the terms of this article. Such permit shall be positioned
in a conspicuous place during the term of such yard sale.
813.6 Application for permit; fee:
(A) Application for the permit required by this article shall be made at the Zoning Department in a form
deemed appropriate by the Zoning Administrator. Such application shall include but not be limited to the
following information:
(1) Name, home address and telephone number of the applicant;
(2) Name, home address, and telephone number of the property owner if different from the applicant;
(3) Name, home address, and telephone number of a responsible person whom the City may notify or
contact at any time concerning the application if different from the applicant;
(4) Date, time and address of such yard sale; and
(5) Five ($5.00) Dollar non-refundable application fee; however, there shall be no fee for any entity
with a valid business license.
(B) The applicant shall be notified by the Zoning Department of the decision of the issuance or denial of the
permit.
(C) No application for a yard sale will be accepted that provides for the sale to occur over longer than a three
(3) day period.
(D) No more than three (3) yard sales per year will be granted to any applicant.
813.7 Removal of unauthorized displays of merchandise by city:
(A) The Administrator or his designee may remove the merchandise at the property owner’s and/or
permittee’s expense if:
(1) The property owner and/or permittee has failed to correct violations of this article or conditions of
his permit upon receipt of the Administrator’s notice of the violation delivered in writing to the
property owner and/or permittee;
(2) The property owner and/or permittee has failed to take positive actions to prohibit violations from
reoccurring;
(3) The property owner and/or permittee has failed to make modifications upon receipt of the
Administrator’s notice to make such modifications delivered in writing to the property owner
and/or permittee.
(B) Tables, chairs, merchandise, and other vestiges of the business may be removed by the Zoning
Administrator or his/her designee, and a reasonable fee charged for labor, transportation, and storage,
should the property owner and/or permittee fail to remove the items within thirty-six (36) hours of receipt
of the Zoning Administrator’s final notice to do so for any reason provided for under this Article. If the
action is based on subsection (A)(2) or (3) of this section, the action shall become effective upon the receipt
of such notice and the owner shall have four (4) hours to remove the items.
813.8 Appeals: The property owner and/or permittee shall have the right to appeal the decision of the City official to the
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
138 | P a g e
City Administrator within ten (10) days from the receipt of notice. The appeal must be in writing and filed with the
City Administrator. If an appeal is timely requested in writing and properly filed, a hearing shall be held within
thirty (30) days of the receipt of the request by the City Administrator. The owner or permittee may be represented
by an attorney and may present witnesses, affidavits, and any relevant documentary evidence. Formal rules of
evidence shall not apply. The City Administrator or his designee shall notify the owner or permittee of his/her
determination in writing.
813.9 Penalty: Any person violating, by act or omission, any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, shall be punishable by fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) or thirty (30) days in jail,
or both, at the discretion of the court. Where such an act or omission is continued in violation of the provisions of
these regulations after notice of such violation by the Zoning Administrator, each and every day during which such
act or omission continues shall be deemed a separate violation.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
139 | P a g e
814 Regulation of Shipping Containers, Cargo Containers, Tractor Trailers, and Portable Storage Containers.
814.1 Regulation of shipping containers, cargo containers, tractor trailers, portable storage containers, or other like items
in C-1, C-2, C-3, LM, and HM districts for nonresidential principal or accessory use:
814.1.1 The use of shipping containers, cargo containers, tractor trailers, portable storage containers, or other like
items in C-1, C-2, C-3, LM, and HM districts is permitted as an accessory structure when the item provides
necessary storage:
(1) For an active permitted construction project;
(2) To compensate for an act of God;
(3) Accessory to a use listed as a permitted nonresidential use within the underlying zoning district.
814.1.2 Requirements
(1) Where the use is permitted by Section 814.1.1(1) or Section 814.1.1(2), shipping containers, cargo
containers, tractor trailers, portable storage containers, or other like items:
(A) Shall not be used as a principal use or structure;
(B) Shall not be stacked;
(C) Shall not be located within any required yard areas;
(D) Shall be free from rust and damage and properly maintained at all times;
(E) Shall be located upon the same lot as the residential building or residential use to which it
provides storage;
(F) Shall not be located on an otherwise vacant lot;
(2) Where the use is permitted by Section 814.1.1(3), shipping containers, cargo containers, tractor trailers,
portable storage containers, or other like items:
(A) Shall not be used as a principal use or structure;
(B) Shall not be located in the front of any principal building or structure;
(C) Shall be permanently screened from public view and adjacent properties;
(D) Shall not be stacked;
(E) Shall not be located within any required yard areas;
(F) Shall not, along with permitted and permissible buildings and their accessory buildings, exceed
a total of thirty percent (30%) lot coverage;
(G) Shall be free from rust and damage and properly maintained at all times;
(H) Shall be located upon the same lot as the building or use to which it provides storage;
(I) Shall not be located on an otherwise vacant lot.
814.1.3 Where the principal use is a listed special exception within the underlying zoning district, shipping
containers, cargo containers, tractor trailers, portable storage containers, or other like items may be permitted as an
accessory structure pursuant to Section 814.1.1(3) only by review and approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals in
accordance with the procedures for review and approval of a special exception and must meet the requirements of
Section 814.1.2(2).
814.1.4 Time Limits
(1) Where permitted within Section 814.1.1 (1) and Section 814.1.1 (2), shipping containers, cargo
containers, tractor trailers, portable storage containers, or other like items shall be removed upon the
completion of permitted repairs and/or construction project or the expiration or revocation of any zoning or
building permit.
(2) Where permitted within Section 814.1.1 (3), shipping containers, cargo containers, tractor trailers,
portable storage containers, or other like items shall be removed within six months. The zoning
administrator or his or her designee may approve extensions to this time limit, provided that the total time
(including the original 6 months) does not exceed 18 months. The Zoning Board of Appeals may approve
extensions beyond 18 months as they would a request for a special exception.
814.1.5 Shipping containers, cargo containers, tractor trailers, portable storage containers, or other like items shall
not be permitted in the Gateway Overlay District except as an accessory structure when the item provides necessary
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
140 | P a g e
storage:
(1) For an active permitted construction project;
(2) To compensate for an act of God;
Provided that any such item must meet the requirements of Section 814.1.2(1).
814.1.6 Time Limits: Where permitted within Section 814.1.5, shipping containers, cargo containers, tractor
trailers, portable storage containers, or other like items shall be removed upon the completion of permitted repairs
and/or construction project or the expiration or revocation of any zoning or building permit.
814.2 Regulation of shipping containers, cargo containers, tractor trailers, portable storage containers, or other like items in
all zoning districts for residential principal or accessory use:
814.2.1 The use of shipping containers, cargo containers, tractor trailers, portable storage containers, or other like
items in all zoning districts for permitted residential principal or accessory use is permitted as an accessory structure
when the item provides necessary storage:
(1) For an active permitted construction project;
(2) To compensate for an act of God;
(3) For moving household contents.
814.2.2 Requirements: Where the use is permitted by Section 814.2.1, shipping containers, cargo containers, tractor
trailers, portable storage containers, or other like items:
(1) Shall not be used as a principal use or structure;
(2) Shall not be stacked;
(3) Shall not be located within any required yard areas;
(4) Shall be free from rust and damage and properly maintained at all times;
(5) Shall be located upon the same lot as the residential building or residential use to which it provides
storage;
(6) Shall not be located on an otherwise vacant lot;
814.2.3 Time Limits
(1) Where permitted within Section 814.2.1 (1) and Section 814.2.1 (2), shipping containers, cargo
containers, tractor trailers, portable storage containers, or other like items shall be removed upon the
completion of permitted repairs and/or construction project or the expiration or revocation of any zoning or
building permit.
(2) Where permitted within Section 814.2.1 (3), shipping containers, cargo containers, tractor trailers,
portable storage containers, or other like items shall be removed within 30 days. The zoning administrator
or his or her designee may approve extensions to this time limit, provided that the total time (including the
original 30 days) does not exceed 6 months. The Zoning Board of Appeals may approve extensions
beyond 6 months as they would a request for a special exception. At no time shall the Zoning Board of
Appeals approve an extension to allow such containers to remain on a property for more than 12 months
(including the original 6 months).
814.3 Permit Required: The owner or occupant of the property or the company providing the shipping container, cargo
container, tractor trailer, portable storage container, or other like item must obtain a zoning permit prior to the placement of a
shipping container, cargo container, tractor trailer, portable storage container, or other like items on any lot.
814.4 Nonconforming shipping containers, cargo containers, tractor trailers, portable storage containers, or other like items:
All shipping containers, cargo containers, tractor trailers, portable storage containers, or other like items shall conform to the
provisions of this section not later than 180 days from the date of passage of this section.
814.5 Use of shipping containers, cargo containers, tractor trailers, portable storage containers, or other like items as building
materials: Shipping containers, cargo containers, tractor trailers, portable storage containers, or other like items shall not be
used as a principal use or structure in any zoning district; however, this section is not meant to prohibit the use of such items
as a building material component when constructing a principal structure for uses permitted in the underlying zoning district.
Where used as a building material component, shipping containers, cargo containers, tractor trailers, portable storage
containers, or other like items:
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
141 | P a g e
(1) Shall be modified from its original form so that no likeness of a shipping container, cargo container, tractor
trailer, portable storage container, or other like item is visible from the exterior of the building;
(2) The applicant must submit with the zoning permit application a report from an engineer registered in South
Carolina showing that the shipping container, cargo container, tractor trailer, portable storage container, or other like
item in their modified form meets all aspects of the building code adopted by ordinance, including but not limited to
live loads, dead loads, deflection, wind resistance, snow loads, and any other element required by the building
official or his or her designee;
(3) The applicant must submit with the zoning permit application site plans of the proposed project, along with
sketch plans of the front, side, and rear elevations, dimensions, exterior materials, color chart, and such other
information as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this ordinance are being upheld.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
142 | P a g e
815 Regulation of Vehicle Sales, Vehicle Services, Tire Sales, and Tire Services.
815.1 The following requirements apply to all Vehicle Sales and/or Services and Tire Sales and/or Services:
(1) All structures must be accessible by an unobstructed lane sufficient to accommodate fire apparatus.
The minimum unobstructed lane width is twenty (20) feet.
(2) A parcel used for Vehicle Sales and/or Services and Tire Sales and/or Services must have two (2)
driveways, one for ingress and one for egress, or one (1) driveway adequate to permit simultaneous ingress
and egress. If one (1) driveway is provided, then the driveway must consist of at least two (2) lanes. The
minimum unobstructed lane width is twenty (20) feet.
(3) Service of vehicles requiring draining or replacing fluids or exceeding more than thirty (30) minutes
must occur inside a structure or under a canopy designed for servicing vehicles and meets requirements of
the International Fire Code as adopted by the City of West Columbia.
(4) Vehicles under repair or displayed for sale may only be stored in areas meeting the minimum parking
area improvement requirements per section 611.4.
(5) Vehicles not in readily apparent working order must be stored in an area screened from public view.
(6) No portion of any vehicle under repair or awaiting service or displayed for sale may project into any
right-of-way or onto any public or private sidewalk.
(7) No vehicle under repair or displayed for sale may occupy a parking spaces used to meet the minimum
requirements established in section 611(Off-street automobile parking and storage) or 612 (Off-street
loading requirements).
(8) Landscape and screening requirements established in section 811 (Landscape Regulations) must be met
prior to a zoning permit being issued for establishing a use as vehicle sales and/or services or tire sales
and/or services.
(9) Temporary structures may not be permitted for occupancy.
(10) Tire storage. Tires must be screened from public view and may not be visible from public or private
roadways or from any adjacent property. No tires may be stacked or stored within 50 feet from any
property line. Tires must be stored in a manner that prevents water from accumulating in or around tires.
(11) Business signs must be permanent and must comply with Article 9 (Sign Regulations).
(12) Consistent with section 611.4.2 of this Ordinance, no vehicle may be parked at any time in such a
manner that the vehicle is required to back onto a public street or way when leaving the premises.
(13) A business or sales office is required to be established on the same lot used for Vehicle Sales and/or
Services and Tire Sales and/or Services. The minimum interior floor area for a business or sales office is
700 square feet.
(14) Vehicles must be spaced a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches from other vehicles and structures.
This provision does not apply to vehicles properly parked between the markings of a space designed to
meet the requirements of section 611(Off-street automobile parking and storage).
(15) Vehicles must be parked or stored within twenty (20) feet of an access lane designed to meet the
requirements of 815.1.1.
(16) Vehicle sales establishments that do not store or display vehicles for sale outdoors are
exempt from the requirements of items (2), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (14) and (15) above.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
143 | P a g e
815.2 Continuation of Non-conformities
A. All parcels which are subject to Section 815 but do not comply with those provisions on the date of
their adoption are allowed to continue as non-conformities until the earliest of the following occurrences:
(1) A permit for alteration to the parcel, parking lot, or any existing or proposed structure is
issued.
(2) The passage of 365 days (1 year) from the date of adoption of this section or the adoption of
any subsequent amendments thereto.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
144 | P a g e
816 Regulation of Food Trucks
816.1 Definitions
A. Food Truck: A food truck or a mobile food unit is defined as a fully enclosed mobile kitchen that may prepare, cook
or serve time/temperature control for safety foods as an extension of a retail food establishment. A food truck must
be permitted by the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control (“SCDHEC”) in order to
operate from a retail food establishment.
B. Commissary: A commissary is a permitted retail food establishment that is authorized by SCDHEC to provide
support of operations, storage, and service area for mobile food units, and is constructed and operated in compliance
with the Retail Food Establishment Regulation 61-25. A food truck reports to each day of operation and shall be
stored onsite at the commissary.
816.2 Conditions: A person may operate a food truck on private property under the following conditions:
A. Food truck vendor shall prominently display the SCDHEC letter grade;
B. Food truck vendor must comply with all requirements and regulations as established by SCDHEC in the Retail Food
Establishments Regulation 61-25, including but not limited to:
a. The food truck shall have a potable water system under pressure. The system shall furnish hot and cold
water for all food preparation, utensil cleaning, and handwashing. The water inlet shall be located so that it
will not be contaminated by waste discharge, road dust, oil, or grease, and it shall be kept capped unless
being filled;
b. Grease must be contained and disposed of in an approved grease receptacle located at the associated
commissary;
c. Grey water must be contained and disposed of in a sanitary sewer at the associated commissary;
C. Maintains within the food truck proof of written permission from the private property owner or authorized lease
holder of the private property of each vending location if operating on private property;
D. Receives annually a zoning compliance permit to operate a food truck, a copy of which shall remain in the food
truck during operation;
E. When not in operation, the food truck must be removed from the parcel and the operator must remove from the
parcel all materials associated with the business. No food truck shall operate between the hours of 10:00 PM and
6:00 AM if the parcel upon which the food truck is located is within 400 feet of a parcel zoned residentially;
F. The use of any sound amplification is prohibited regardless of the intended purpose;
G. The sale or service of alcoholic beverages is prohibited;
H. Signs affixed to the food truck advertising the name of truck and a menu of items sold are permitted. All other signs,
balloons, banners, streamers or other similar devices to attract customers are prohibited;
I. The food truck vendor shall not operate the food truck as a drive-in window;
J. The noise level from the food truck motor and generator must comply with the City’s Noise Ordinance;
K. A garbage receptacle shall be provided for customers in a convenient location that does not impede pedestrian or
vehicular traffic. All litter or debris generated within a minimum of a 25-foot radius of the food truck shall be
collected and removed by the food truck operator;
L. Any extemporaneous service items, tables, etc. that a food truck operator may place outside of the vehicle shall not
extend further than a 15-foot radius of the food truck.
M. No temporary lighting shall be provided on site where the food truck is operating, except that localized lighting may
be used on or in the mobile food truck for the purpose of inside food preparation and menu illumination;
N. Mobile food truck operators must provide hand sanitation for customers;
O. Food trucks shall operate in conjunction with a permitted retail food establishment authorized to operate as a
commissary and shall report at least daily to the designated commissary for supplies, cleaning, and servicing.
816.3 Application. In order to operate a food truck within the City, a food truck operator must apply to the City for a zoning
compliance permit and a business license by submitting to the Zoning Administrator the following:
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
145 | P a g e
A. An application for a Zoning Compliance Permit;
B. An application for a business license;
C. Proof of general liability insurance for operation of the vehicle as a motor vehicle, and conduct of the business if the
business is to be conducted on public property, in amounts reasonably determined by the City in consultation with its
risk manager; And
D. Documentation of approval from SCDHEC to operate.
816.4 Operation.
A. Public Spaces. Food truck vendors may operate on City-owned property and public property, provided as follows:
a. Locates only within a zoning district that would otherwise permit the business;
b. Locates at least 100 feet from the customer entrance of a lawfully established restaurant during the hours of its
operation unless the owner of the restaurant provides a letter of consent, a copy of which shall be kept within the
food truck;
c. The food truck shall not occupy any handicap accessible parking space;
d. The food truck shall not occupy a parking space or spaces required to meet the minimum parking standards for the
principle use and the vending location shall not otherwise interfere in a significant way with the movement of motor
vehicles;
e. The food truck shall be positioned in a parking space and shall not block drive aisles, other access to loading/service
areas, or emergency access and fire lanes;
f. The food truck must be positioned at least 15 feet away from fire hydrants, any fire department connection,
driveway entrances, alleys, handicapped parking spaces, sidewalks, tree trunks and vegetation;
B. Private Spaces. Food truck vendors may operate on privately-owned spaces so long as they receive written permission
from the private property owner or authorized lease holder of the private property of each vending location, provided as
follows:
a. Locates only within a zoning district that would otherwise permit the business;
b. Locates at least 100 feet from the customer entrance of a lawfully established restaurant during the hours of its
operation unless the owner of the restaurant provides a letter of consent, a copy of which shall be kept within the
food truck;
c. The food truck shall not occupy any handicap accessible parking space;
d. The food truck shall not occupy a parking space or spaces required to meet the minimum parking standards for the
principle use and the vending location shall not otherwise interfere in a significant way with the movement of motor
vehicles;
e. The food truck shall be positioned in a parking space and shall not block drive aisles, other access to loading/service
areas, or emergency access and fire lanes;
f. The food truck must be positioned at least 15 feet away from fire hydrants, any fire department connection,
driveway entrances, alleys, handicapped parking spaces, sidewalks, tree trunks and vegetation;
C. Special Events. Nothing in this section should be read to prohibit the City from conducting special events that feature food
trucks. Food truck vendors may operate as part of special events if approved by the City to operate within that capacity.
816.5 Suspension and Revocation of Permit
A. The permit issued for the food truck business may be revoked if the vendor violates any of the provisions contained
in Section 816.2 above or if the food truck vendor’s SCDHEC permit to operate as a Mobile Food Unit is suspended
or revoked.
B. The Zoning Administrator may revoke a permit if he or she determines that the food truck vendor’s operations are
causing parking, traffic congestion or litter problems either on or off the property where the use is located or that
such use is otherwise creating a danger to the public health or safety.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
146 | P a g e
817 Food Truck Courts
817.1 Definitions.
A. Commissary: A commissary is a permitted retail food establishment that is authorized by SCDHEC to provide
support of operations, storage, and service area for mobile food units, and is constructed and operated in compliance
with the Retail Food Establishment Regulation 61-25. A food truck reports to a commissary at least once a day for
all food and supplies and for all cleaning and sanitizing of units and equipment each day of operation and shall be
stored onsite at the commissary.
B. Food Truck: A food truck is defined as a readily movable trailer or motorized wheeled vehicle, currently registered
with the S.C. Department of Motor Vehicles, designed and equipped to serve food and must be permitted by
SCDHEC as a mobile food unit.
C. Food Truck Court: A Food Truck Court or Food Truck Park is a business located on one or more platted lots, in
which the primary land use is a permanent food truck parking area, containing two or more food trucks to offer food
or beverages for sale to the public, and may provide tables, play areas, and other outdoor entertainment open to the
customers of all vendors.
D. Lumen: is a measurement of the amount of light within a certain area.
817.2 Location
A. Food Truck Courts may only operate in the C-1, C-2, LM and HM districts
B. Food Truck Courts must be located at least 100 feet from the customer entrance of a lawfully established restaurant
during the hours of its operation unless permitted as a Special Exception pursuant to Section 817.5.
817.3 General Operation
A. The Food Truck Court shall not operate between the hours of 10:00 PM and 6:00 AM;
B. The food trucks may not arrive before 5:30 AM must be removed each night by 10:30 PM.
C. Each food truck that operates on a Food Truck Court must apply to the City for zoning compliance permit and
business license pursuant to the Food Truck Regulation Section 816.
D. On-site Manager: There must be a designated manager of the site that is responsible for the orderly organization of
the food trucks, the cleanliness of the site and the site’s compliance with all rules and regulations during working
hours.
E. Restrooms: Within one (1) year of receiving a business license to operate, permanent restrooms must be provided
within the boundaries of the Food Truck Court. The number of water closets and lavatories required shall be based
on the occupant load for the fixed seating of the Court and the City of West Columbia Plumbing Code. At a
minimum at least one restroom for each sex shall be provided within five hundred feet from each Food Truck.
Portable toilets (Port-O-Lets, Porta Pottys, etc) are prohibited.
F. Each individual food truck is not allowed to operate a generator at the site unless emergency circumstances
necessitate the need for the use of a generator.
G. Food trucks shall not be parked on unimproved surfaces. Food trucks shall be placed on, at a minimum, a compacted
gravel base;
H. Signs: One on premises sign is permitted at the entrance identifying the Food Truck Court. Each food truck may
have attached signage. One temporary sandwich board sign is permitted per food truck to be displayed within ten
(10) feet of the food truck and within the boundary of the food truck court.
I. The Food Truck Court must be located at least 400 feet from an R-2, R-3 or R-4 zoning district. Food Truck Courts
located within 400 feet of an R-2, R-3 or R-4 district, as measured at the property line of the Food Truck Court to
the zoning district boundary, are permitted only by Special Exception pursuant to Section 817.5.
J. Minimum parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 611.3.16
817.4 Application Process
A site plan shall be provided for review showing:
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
147 | P a g e
A. The land area included within the site, the zoning classification of the adjacent sites, and all public and private
rights-of-way and easements bounding and intersecting the site;
B. A legal description of the platted lots of the proposed site and the boundaries thereof;
C. The location of each proposed permanent structure on the site and pads for food trucks, and the identification of any
proposed outdoor entertainment locations;
D. The location, width and surface material, including all curb cuts of driving lanes and food truck pads,
E. A twenty (20) foot fire lane where required by the fire department, including paving, turf or gravel to be used;
F. The location of fire hydrants;
G. The dimensions and capacities of parking areas and loading areas;
H. Landscaping in accordance with Section 811;
I. All pedestrian walks, patios and open areas for use by tenants or the public;
J. The location and height of all walls, and fences;
K. The location, size, height, lumen level and orientation of all lighting;
L. Location and screening of refuse containers, air conditioners and outside storage or display;
M. Location and number of provided seating and eating areas, including number of fixed seats and tables;
N. A schedule of phasing of all improvements shown in the plan;
O. Location, height and separation of buildings, including location of restrooms and open space.
817.5 Special Exceptions
The Board of Appeals may grant a Special Exception for a period up to 5 years. The Board shall consider the following:
A. The impact to adjacent properties;
B. The number of parking spaces on the lot and other public parking areas within a ¼ mile walking distance;
C. Whether the operation of a Food Truck Court would be compatible with the surrounding uses and zoning of adjacent
properties;
D. All other conditions of this section are met, and
E. Any other issues the Zoning Board of Appeals considers to be relevant.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
148 | P a g e
818 Small Wireless Facilities
818.1. Definitions.
“Antenna” means communication equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used
in the provision of Wireless Services.
“Applicable Codes” means uniform building, energy, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, gas, and fire codes in Title 6,
Chapter 9 of the South Carolina Code of Laws, local amendments to those codes authorized by state law, and local
codes or ordinances which impose requirements defined in Section 818.5 of this Ordinance including objective
design and concealment standards to regulate location, context, material, color, stealth and concealment standards on
a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis.
“Applicant” means any person who submits an Application to a City and is a Wireless Services Provider or a
Wireless Infrastructure Provider.
“Application” means a request submitted by an Applicant for a permit to (i) Collocate Small Wireless Facilities; or,
(ii) construct, install, maintain, operate, replace or modify a Utility Pole or Wireless Support Structure.
“Cable, Communications, Fiber or Electric Easement” means an easement, granted to a cable or video service
provider, a communications service provider (including without limitation a telephone utility), a fiber optics cable
services provider, or an electric services provider created or authorized by state law to provide such services, that
runs parallel to and abuts or within a Rights-of-Way and is occupied by existing Utility Poles or Wireless Support
Structures carrying electric distribution lines, wires, cable, conduit, fiber optic cable for telecommunications, cable or
electric service or supporting municipal street lights, or security lights. The term Cable, Communications, Fiber or
Electric Easement excludes easements for service drops or lines connecting the customer’s premises to the cable,
communications, fiber or electrical provider.
“City-Owned Pole” means (i) a Utility Pole owned or operated by the City in Covered Areas, including a Utility
Pole that provides lighting or traffic control functions, or other law enforcement functions, including light poles,
traffic signals, and structures for signage, and (ii) a pole or similar structure owned or operated by the City in a
Covered Area that supports only Wireless Facilities. The term does not include a Utility Pole owned or operated by
and accounted for as an asset of a municipal electric utility.
“Collocate” means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace one or more Wireless Facilities on, under,
within, or adjacent to an existing Wireless Support Structure or Utility Pole located in Covered Areas within the
jurisdiction of the City. “Collocation” has a corresponding meaning.
“Covered Areas” means the surface of, and the space above and below, any public “Rights-of-Way,” “ROW,” “City
Rights-of-Way,” “Public Rights-of-Way,” and/or “Cable, Communications, Fiber or Electric Easement” as those
terms are defined herein.
“Day” means calendar day unless the last day for the City or an Applicant to take action under this Ordinance ends
on a weekend, holiday, or time when all but City emergency services are closed due to weather or some unforeseen
situation.
“Decorative Pole” means a Utility Pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no
appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signage or a temporary
holiday or special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to nondiscriminatory
municipal practices.
“Design District” means an area that is zoned, or otherwise designated by municipal ordinance, and for which the
City maintains and enforces unique design and aesthetic standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis.
“Fee” means a one-time charge.
“Historic District" means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a Historic District under municipal, state
or federal law and for which the City maintains and enforces unique design and aesthetic standards on a uniform and
nondiscriminatory basis.
“Micro Wireless Facility” means a Small Wireless Facility that meets the following qualifications: (i) is not larger
in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height; and, (ii) any exterior antenna is no
longer than 11 inches.
“Person” means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity
or organization, including the City.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
149 | P a g e
“Rate” means a recurring charge.
“Rights-of-Way” or “ROW” or “City Rights-of-Way” or “Public Rights-of-Way” means that area on, below, or
above a public roadway, highway, street, sidewalk, alley dedicated to, managed or controlled by the City, County or
the State of South Carolina, but not including a federal interstate highway, in the City.
“Small Wireless Facility” means a Wireless Facility that meets both of the following qualifications: (i) each antenna
is located inside an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume, or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an imaginary enclosure of not more
than six (6) cubic feet; and (ii) all other wireless equipment associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than
twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box,
ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the
connection of power and other services.
“Transmission Pole” means a pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part to carry electric transmission
(as opposed to distribution) lines.
“Underground District” means an area that is designated by ordinances, zoning regulations, state law, private deed
restrictions, and other public or private restrictions, that prohibit installing above ground structures in a Covered Area
and for which the City maintains and enforces standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis.
“Utility Pole” means a pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part for the purpose of carrying electric
distribution lines or cables or wires for telecommunications, cable or electric service, or for lighting, traffic control
devices, traffic control or directional signage, or a similar function regardless of ownership, including City-Owned
Poles. Such term shall not include structures supporting only Wireless Facilities, nor shall it include Wireless Support
Structures.
“Wireless Facility” means equipment at a fixed location that enables Wireless Services between user equipment and
a communications network, including: (i) equipment associated with wireless communications; (ii) radio transceivers,
Antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration. The term includes Small Wireless Facilities. The term does not include the structure or
improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is Collocated, wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between Wireless Support Structures or Utility Poles or coaxial or fiber optic cable that is
otherwise not immediately adjacent to, or directly associated with, an Antenna.
“Wireless Infrastructure Provider” means any Person including a Person authorized to provide telecommunications
service in the State, that builds, installs or maintains Utility Poles, wireless communication transmission equipment,
Wireless Facilities or Wireless Support Structures.
“Wireless Services” means any services provided using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi,
whether at a fixed location or mobile, delivered to the public using Wireless Facilities.
“Wireless Services Provider” means a Person who provides Wireless Services.
“Wireless Support Structure” means a freestanding structure, such as a monopole or, other existing or proposed
structure designed to support or capable of supporting Wireless Facilities. Such term shall not include a Utility Pole.
818.2. Purpose and Scope.
A The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide policies and procedures for the placement of Small Wireless
Facilities in Covered Areas within the jurisdiction of the City.
B It is the intent of this Ordinance to establish uniform standards including, but not limited to:
a. Prevention of interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways, traffic light poles or
other light poles, and other public ways and places;
b. Prevention of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular
and pedestrian traffic;
c. Prevention of interference with other facilities and operations of facilities lawfully located in
Covered Areas or public property;
d. Preservation of the character of neighborhoods where facilities are installed;
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
150 | P a g e
e. Preservation of the character of historic structures, or historic neighborhoods, including but not
limited to such structures or neighborhoods listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
locally designated Historic Districts; and,
f. Facilitation of the rapid deployment of Small Wireless Facilities to provide the citizens with the
benefits of advanced Wireless Services.
818.3. Permitted Use; Application Process and Fees.
A. Permitted Use and Consent. Collocation of a Small Wireless Facility on an existing Utility Pole or
Wireless Support Structure, or a new or modified Utility Pole or Wireless Support Structure installed in a
Covered Area shall be a permitted use, except in supplemental review districts where such facilities are a
conditional use, subject to administrative review, conditions and other requirements in Section 818.5. In
accord with Article VIII, Section 15 of the State Constitution and related municipal code and ordinance
provisions, the City consents to the use of Public Rights-of-Way by permit holders acting in compliance
with this Ordinance.
B. Permit Required. No person shall place a Small Wireless Facility in a Covered Area without first filing a
Small Wireless Facility Application and obtaining a permit, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
C. Permit Applications. All Small Wireless Facility Applications filed pursuant to this Ordinance shall be on a
form, paper or electronic, as required by the City. The Applicant may designate portions of its Application
materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as “proprietary” or
“confidential” by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly, and the City shall endeavor to
protect materials so designated from public disclosure to the fullest extent permitted by state law.
D. Application Requirements. The Small Wireless Facility permit Application shall be made by the Applicant,
or its duly authorized representative as noted in a notarized statement from a Person with the Applicant
with authority to make such an authorization, and shall contain the following:
a. The Applicant’s name, address, telephone number and e-mail address;
b. Facility owner’s name, address, telephone number and email address, if different from Applicant;
c. Intended facility use: owner operated or owner leased capacity;
d. The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and e-mail addresses of all consultants, if any, acting
on behalf of the Applicant with respect to the filing of the Application;
e. A general description of the proposed scope of work for the Collocation of the Small Wireless
Facility. The scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character
of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters, including but not limited to
sub-surface utilities, likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
f. Identification of any consultant that is acting on behalf of the Applicant and that is authorized to
speak with the City, or a designee of the City, on the area of consultation for the Applicant even if
the Applicant cannot be available;
g. Verification from an appropriate representative of the Applicant that the Small Wireless Facility
shall comply with all Applicable Codes;
h. Verification of payment of the annual municipal consent or administrative fee for
telecommunications companies to use Public Rights-of-Ways pursuant to Section 58-9-2230;
i. Verification of local business license, if applicable;
j. Evidence the Applicant is duly authorized to do business in South Carolina;
k. Evidence the Applicant has received any necessary certificate of public convenience and necessity
or other required authority from the South Carolina Public Service Commission or the Federal
Communications Commission or evidence that it is not required;
l. A copy of an approved South Carolina Department of Transportation encroachment permit and all
documents required by SCDOT as part of the encroachment permit application, if the proposed
location is within a SCDOT Right-of-Way; and,
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
151 | P a g e
m. If the proposed location is outside of a SCDOT Right-of-Way, a statement that the Applicant has a
lease, attachment agreement or other authorization from the owner of the Utility Pole or structure
proposed for Collocation.
E Routine Maintenance and Replacement. An Application shall not be required for:
a. Routine maintenance;
b. The replacement of a Small Wireless Facility with another Small Wireless Facility that is
substantially similar or smaller in size, weight, and height; or
c. The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of Micro Wireless Facilities
that are strung on cables between existing Utility Poles and/or Wireless Support Structures in
compliance with the National Electrical Safety Code by a Wireless Services Provider or a
Wireless Infrastructure Provider that is authorized to occupy the Public Rights-of-Way and that is
remitting a consent, franchise, or administrative Fee pursuant to S.C. Code Ann. § 58-9-2230.
F. Information Updates. Any amendment to information contained in a permit Application shall be submitted
in writing to the City within ten (10) business days after the change necessitating the amendment.
G. Consolidated Application. An Applicant seeking to Collocate multiple Small Wireless Facilities may, at
the Applicant’s discretion, file a consolidated Application and receive a single permit for up to twenty (20)
Small Wireless Facilities. Provided, however, the City’s denial of any site or sites within a single
Application shall not affect other sites submitted in the same Application. The City shall grant a permit for
any and all sites in a single Application that it does not deny subject to the requirements of this Section.
H. Application Fees. Unless otherwise provided by law, and except as to telecommunication companies
exempted pursuant to S.C. Code § 58-9-2230, all Applications for permits pursuant to this Ordinance shall
be accompanied by a Fee of $100.00 for each Small Wireless Facility, except that the Fee for Small
Wireless Facilities addressed in a consolidated Application shall be $100.00 each for the first five Small
Wireless Facilities and $50.00 for each additional Small Wireless Facility up to a maximum of twenty (20)
Small Wireless Facilities. For clarity, any Applicant that pays either a franchise, consent Fee, or
administrative Fee pursuant to the requirements of S.C. Code § 58-9-2230 shall not be required to pay any
building permit Fee, zoning permit Fee, encroachment Fee, degradation Fee, or any other Fee assessed on a
telecommunications provider for its occupation of or work within the ROW.
I. Interference with Public Safety Equipment. A Small Wireless Facility shall be operated and maintained
in a manner that does not interfere with public safety (police, traffic control, fire and emergency services)
equipment.
818.4. Action on Permit Application.
A Review of Small Wireless Facility Applications. The City shall review the Application for a Small
Wireless Facility permit for conformity with applicable requirements of this Ordinance, and shall issue a
permit on nondiscriminatory terms and conditions subject to the following requirements:
a. Within ten (10) days of receiving an Application, the City must determine and notify the
Applicant whether the Application is complete; or if an Application is incomplete, the City must
specifically identify the missing information.
b. Make its final decision to approve or deny the Application within sixty (60) days of submission of
a completed Application .
c. Notify the Applicant in writing of its final decision, and if the Application is denied, specify the
basis for a denial, including citations to federal, state or local code provisions and/or statutes on
which the denial was based.
d. Notwithstanding an initial denial, the Applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the City
and resubmit the Application within thirty (30) days of the denial, and the City shall approve or
deny the revised Application within thirty (30) days of receipt of it. The subsequent review by the
City shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the original denial.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
152 | P a g e
B Review Deadline. If the City fails to act on an Application within the sixty (60) day review period (or
within the thirty (30) day review period for an amended Application), the Applicant may provide notice
that the time period for acting has lapsed and the Application is then deemed approved.
C Review of Eligible Facilities Requests. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, the City
shall approve and may not deny Applications that constitute eligible facilities requests for modification of
an eligible support structure that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such structure as
provided in 47 CFR 1.40001, within sixty (60) days according to the procedures established under 47 CFR
1.40001(c).
D Compensation. Subject to the limitations set forth in Section 818.3(h) herein, every permit shall include as
a condition the Applicant’s agreement to pay such lawful franchise Fees, business license taxes,
administrative Fees and consent Fees as are permitted under applicable South Carolina and federal law. The
Applicant shall also pay all applicable ad valorem taxes, service Fees, sales taxes, or other taxes and Fees
as may now or hereafter be lawfully imposed on other businesses within the City.
818.5. Requirements for Small Wireless Facilities in Covered Areas.
A Administrative Review. The City shall perform an administrative review of permit Applications including
the location or installation of new, modified, or replacement Utility Poles and/or Wireless Support
Structures and the attachment of Wireless Facilities and equipment on Utility Poles or Wireless Support
Structures. Review factors, in addition to location, shall include the size, shape, color, texture, and
materials of the structures and attachments.
a. The City may require a proposed Wireless Facility be designed to not be significantly more readily
apparent or plainly visible (to a reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities) from Covered Areas
than existing utility structures, poles and equipment located within five hundred (500) linear feet
on the same Covered Area as the subject Utility Pole or Wireless Support Structure.
b. Where Small Wireless Facilities are determined to be appropriate, the use of reasonable stealth
and concealment treatments, low profile equipment and control boxes, and screening may be
required to avoid significant negative impacts on the character and visual aesthetics of the area.
However, such requirements may be waived by the City upon a showing that the particular
location of a Small Wireless Facility does not warrant stealth or concealment treatments or
imposes an excessive expense. The waiver shall be granted or denied within forty-five (45) days
after the date of the request.
c. Supplemental review districts identified in Section 818.5(c) and listed in Appendix A may be
subject to a higher level of review.
B Maximum Size of Permitted Use.
(i) The height of an Antenna of a Collocated Small Wireless Facility shall be limited to the greater of
ten (10) feet above (a) the height of an existing or modified Utility Pole or Wireless Support
Structure; or (b) the height of a new Utility Pole or Wireless Support Structure as provided in (ii)
below.
(ii) The height of a new or modified Utility Pole, or Wireless Support Structure is limited to the
greater of (a) the tallest Utility Pole, excluding Transmission Poles, or Wireless Support Structure
located in the same Covered Area, measured from grade, in place within five hundred (500) linear
feet on the same Covered Area as the subject Utility Pole or Wireless Support Structure as of the
effective date of this Ordinance; or (b) in the absence of any such Utility Pole or Wireless Support
Structure, either (i) forty (40) feet in any area zoned exclusively for single family residential use,
unless a waiver is granted for good cause shown, or (ii) fifty (50) feet in any other area.
(iii) Collocation is not allowed on a Decorative Pole less than twenty (20) feet in height.
C Supplemental Review Districts. Collocated Small Wireless Facilitates and new or modified Utility Poles or
Wireless Support Structures located in supplemental review districts shall be a conditional use and subject
to the design and aesthetic requirements and review processes for structures specified in this Ordinance
establishing the supplemental review district(s) in addition to the requirement of this Ordinance, provided
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
153 | P a g e
that the City will work in good faith with the Applicant to accommodate the installation of Collocated
Small Wireless Facilities and new or modified Utility Poles or Wireless Support Structures in supplemental
review districts to the fullest extent practicable. The City reserves its right to maintain and implement the
following types of supplemental review districts.
a. Underground Districts. A Wireless Services Provider or a Wireless Infrastructure Provider shall
comply with nondiscriminatory requirements that prohibit electric utilities, telecommunications or
cable providers from installing above-ground structures in the Covered Area in these districts.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use or replacement of existing Utility Poles or Wireless
Support Structures in Underground Districts for the Collocation of Small Wireless Facilities
subject to administrative review by the zoning administrator, appropriate design and concealment
and a finding that such use does not increase the height by more than three (3) feet.
b. Historic and Design Districts. As a condition for approval of new Small Wireless Facilities or
new Wireless Support Structure in a Historic District or a Design District, the City may require
that a Wireless Services Provider or a Wireless Infrastructure Provider comply with the design and
aesthetic standards of the Historic District or Design District to minimize the impact to the
aesthetics in a Historic District or on a Design District's Decorative Poles. If design and
concealment treatments are determined on review by the City to be insufficient to mitigate harm to
the Historic District or Design District, the Application may be denied.
This section may not be construed to limit a municipality's authority to enforce historic preservation zoning
regulations consistent with the preservation of local zoning authority under 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7),
the requirements for facility modifications under 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a), or the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966 (54 U.S.C. Section 300101 et seq.), and the regulations adopted to implement
those laws.
D Appeals, Special Exceptions and Variance Requirements. Appeals of administrative decisions and
requests for special exceptions and variances from the provisions of this Ordinance, when strict application
would result in an unnecessary hardship or in the inability to deploy needed Small Wireless Facilities, shall
be heard and decided by the Board of Zoning Appeals. An applicant seeking a Special Exception to
construct a new Decorative Pole, Utility Pole or other Wireless Support Structure to Collocate a Small
Wireless Facility in an Underground District shall demonstrate, including certification through an engineer,
that it has diligently attempted to locate the proposed Decorative Pole, Utility Pole, Wireless Support
Structure, or Small Wireless Facility outside of the Underground District and that placement of the
Decorative Pole, Utility Pole, Wireless Support Structure, or Small Wireless Facility within the
Underground District is necessary to provide the needed wireless coverage or capacity, and one or more of
the following conditions exist supporting a Special Exception:
a. No existing Utility Pole or Wireless Support Structure is located within the location search radius
or to the extent a Utility Pole or Wireless Support Structure is located within the search radius,
such Utility Pole or Wireless Support Structure:
i. Is not available for Collocation under commercially reasonable rates, terms, and
conditions;
ii. Cannot accommodate the Collocation of the Small Wireless Facility and meet the
technical requirements necessary to deliver adequate wireless service coverage or
capacity; or
iii. Would require modifications exceeding the three (3) feet height limitation imposed in
Section 818.5(c)(i).
b. The only available option to deliver adequate wireless service coverage or capacity in the search
radius requires modifications to an existing Utility Pole or Wireless Support Structure exceeding
the three (3) feet height limitation imposed in section 818.5(c)(i) or the installation of a new
Utility Pole or Wireless Support Structure for Collocation of a Small Wireless Facility, or
c. The applicant has demonstrated other circumstances that, in the reasonable discretion of the
Zoning Board of Appeals warrant a special exception or variance.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
154 | P a g e
d. The Applicant shall abide by the design, stealth and concealment treatments imposed as conditions
of the special exception.
E Existing Supplemental Review Districts. Supplemental review districts approved by the City as of the
effective date of this Ordinance are listed in Appendix A. The Code provisions authorizing the district,
applicable design guidelines or manual, review authority and appeal jurisdiction are specified in Appendix
A. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit or otherwise limit the City from establishing additional
supplemental review districts, provided however, that facilities and structures for which a permit was
approved or deemed approved pursuant to this Ordinance prior to the establishment of the additional
supplemental review district remain subject to the provisions of this Ordinance, including routine
maintenance and replacement of those facilities and structures as set out in Section 818.3(e)(i) and (ii) of
this Ordinance, and not to any provisions otherwise applicable to the additional supplemental review
district. If a Wireless Services Provider or a Wireless Infrastructure Provider voluntarily replaces such
facilities in a manner that does not comply with Section 818.3(e)(ii) of this Ordinance, or if a Wireless
Services Provider or a Wireless Infrastructure Provider voluntarily relocates such facilities, such
replacement or relocation is subject to the then-existing provisions and requirements of the additional
supplemental review district.
F Repair of Damage. A Wireless Services Provider or a Wireless Infrastructure Provider shall repair all
damage to a City Right-of-Way directly caused by the activities of the Wireless Services Provider or the
Wireless Infrastructure Provider, while occupying, installing, repairing, or maintaining Wireless Facilities,
Wireless Support Structures, City Utility Poles, or Utility Poles and to return the Right-of-Way to its
functional equivalence before the damage. If the Wireless Services Provider or the Wireless Infrastructure
Provider fails to make the repairs required by the City within forty-five (45) days after written notice,
unless the City and the Wireless Services Provider or the Wireless Infrastructure Provider agree in writing
to a longer time period, the City may undertake those repairs and charge the applicable party the reasonable
and documented cost of the repairs. The City may maintain an action to recover the costs of the repairs.
818.6. Effect of Permit.
A Authority Granted: No Property Right or Other Interest Created. A permit from the City authorizes an
Applicant to undertake only certain activities in accordance with the Ordinance, and does not create a
property right or grant any authority whatsoever to the Applicant to impinge upon the rights of others who
may already have an interest in the Covered Area.
B Duration. Unless construction has actually begun and is diligently pursued to completion at that point, no
permit for construction issued under this Ordinance shall be valid for a period longer than twelve (12)
months unless both City and Applicant agree to a reasonable extension and all required Fees are paid for
the term regardless of construction. The inability of the Applicant to obtain electrical power or backhaul
transport services to serve the Wireless Facility such that it is operational within the twelve (12) months
due to the action or inaction of third-party utility providers shall not result in the invalidity of the permit.
818.7. Removal, Relocation or Modification of a Small Wireless Facility in the ROW.
A Notice. Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the City, a Wireless Services Provider or a
Wireless Infrastructure Provider shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any Wireless Facilities or Wireless Support
Structures within the Rights-of-Way whenever the City, in its reasonable discretion, has determined that
such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair,
maintenance, or installation of any City improvement in or upon, or the operations of the City in or upon,
the Rights-of-Way.
B Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities. The City retains the right to cut or move any Wireless
Facility or Wireless Support Structure located within its Rights-of-Way as the City, in its reasonable
discretion, may determine to be necessary, appropriate, or useful in response to any public health or safety
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
155 | P a g e
emergency. If circumstances permit, the City shall notify the Wireless Services Provider or the Wireless
Infrastructure Provider and provide opportunity to move its own Wireless Facilities or Wireless Support
Structure prior to the City cutting or removing a Wireless Facility or Wireless Support Structure and the
City shall notify the Wireless Services Provider or the Wireless Infrastructure Provider after cutting or
removing a Wireless Facility.
C Abandonment of Facilities. Upon abandonment of a Wireless Facility or Wireless Support Structure within
the City Rights-of-Way, the Wireless Services Provider or the Wireless Infrastructure Provider shall notify
the City within ninety (90) days of such abandonment. Following receipt of such notice the City may direct
the Wireless Services Provider or the Wireless Infrastructure Provider to remove all or any portion of the
Wireless Facility or Wireless Support Structure if the City, in its sole discretion, determines that such
removal will be in the best interests of the public health, safety, and welfare.
D Abandonment by Inaction. At any point when a Wireless Services Provider or a Wireless Infrastructure
Provider fails to pay any required Fee, or annual payment to the City, and fails to respond within sixty (60)
days to a written inquiry from the City as to whether the Wireless Services Provider or the Wireless
Infrastructure Provider intends to continue to operate a Wireless Facility or Wireless Support Structure, for
whatever reason, the Wireless Facility shall be deemed abandoned and the City may, at its sole option,
remove all or any portion of the Wireless Facility or Wireless Support Structure, or take other action as
authorized by law, including recovery of actual costs incurred in removing the Wireless Facility or
Wireless Support Structure.
818.8. Attachment to City-Owned Utility Poles in the Covered Areas.
A Annual Rate. The rate to place a Small Wireless Facility on a City-Owned Pole in Covered Areas shall be
fifty ($50.00) dollars per year per wooden pole or two hundred ($200.00) dollars per year for all other City-
Owned Poles. This rate is in addition to reimbursement to the City for any expenses for make-ready work.
The City reserves the right to require a pole attachment agreement to further define the terms and
conditions of attachments to City-Owned Poles. The rates specified in this section shall not apply to poles
owned, or operated and accounted for as an asset of, a municipal electric utility.
B Cease Payment. A Wireless Services Provider or a Wireless Infrastructure Provider is authorized to remove
its facilities at any time from a City-Owned Pole in Covered Areas and cease paying the annual rate to the
City as of the next due date for payment following the removal.
C Make-Ready. For City-owned Utility Poles in Covered Areas, the Applicant shall reimburse the City for
expenses for any reasonable make-ready work. The City shall provide a good faith estimate for any makeready
work necessary to enable the pole to support the requested Small Wireless Facility, including pole
replacement if necessary, within sixty (60) days after receipt of a completed request. Make-ready work
including any pole replacement shall be completed within sixty (60) days of written acceptance of the good
faith estimate by the Wireless Services Provider or the Wireless Infrastructure Provider.
D Municipal Utilities Excluded. Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authority of a
municipal electric utility to deny, limit, restrict, or determine the rates, Fees, terms, and conditions for the
use of or attachment to a Utility Pole owned, or operated and accounted for as an asset of, a municipal
electric utility.
818.9. Severability.
In the event any title, subtitle, section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, subparagraph, item, sentence, clause,
phrase, or work of this Ordinance is declared or adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such declaration or
adjudication shall not affect the remaining portions of the Ordinance which shall remain in full force and effect as if
the portion so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional was not originally a part of this Ordinance.
818.10. Effective Date.
This Ordinance shall take effect immediately after adoption.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
156 | P a g e
APPENDIX A
EXISTING SUPPLEMENTAL REVIEW DISTRICS
1. GATEWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT
2. NEW BROOKLAND HISTORIC DISTRICT
3. SALUDA FACTORY HISTORIC DISTRICT
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
157 | P a g e
ARTICLE 9
SIGN REGULATIONS
900 Purpose
The purpose of this section of the City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance is to provide fair and comprehensive
regulations that will:
900.1 Provide a pleasing overall environmental setting and good community appearance which is deemed vital
to economic development and trade, tourism, and to the continued attractiveness and aesthetics of the City;
900.2 Allow signs appropriate to the planned character of each zoning district while meeting the goals of local
comprehensive planning and zoning;
900.3 Promote highway safety, pedestrian safety, the welfare and comfort of the citizens of West Columbia and
visitors to the City, the convenience of the public, and the enjoyment of public travel;
900.4 Restrict private signs which overload the public’s capacity to receive information and increase the
probability of accidents by distracting attention or obstructing vision;
900.5 Protect property values within the City of West Columbia;
900.6 Preserve historic districts, scenic districts, environmental areas and green spaces of the City of West
Columbia; and
900.7 Reduce conflict between private and public information systems included in signs banners and illumination
erected and maintained by individuals, businesses and other entities which may be in discord with or detract from
the functionality and goals of municipal, state and federal information and traffic systems.
901 Scope
The provisions set forth in this article shall apply and govern in all districts and zoned areas, and shall regulate the
construction, erection, alteration, use, maintenance, location, size and height of all signs, regardless of their cost of construction or
duration of existence. The provisions of this article, however, shall not apply to the following:
901.1 Signs not visible beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel upon which they are situated or from any public
thoroughfare, right-of-way, or water-way;
901.2 Traffic signs, railroad crossing signs, danger signs and all other signs, erected or maintained by a municipal or
governmental body or agency, including danger signs and signs of businesses on governmental property. Nothing
contained herein, however, shall be construed to exempt signs of a commercial nature from this article.
901.3 Temporary signs which are customarily associated with any festival or occasions distinguished by a
resolution or ordinance of City Council or approved by the South Carolina Department of Transportation, but only
during the duration of these festivals or occasions.
901.4 Signs not exceeding one (1) square foot in area and bearing only property numbers, post office box
numbers, names of occupants of any premises, or other identification of a premises not having a commercial connotation;
901.5 Flags and insignia of any governing body except when displayed in connection with commercial or political
promotion;
901.6 Legal notices, identification, informational or directional signs erected by or required by governmental
bodies;
901.7 Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings except letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving
lights;
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
158 | P a g e
901.8 Signs specifically and exclusively preempted from regulation by Section 57-25-110 et seq. of the Code of
Laws of South Carolina, known as the Highway Advertising Control Act. Nothing contained herein, however, shall
abridge or limit regulation of the signs allowed by local municipalities pursuant to the Highway Advertising Control Act.
902 Definitions
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this article shall have their customary dictionary definitions. For
the purposes of this article, certain words or terms used are herein defined as follows:
Animation. The movement, or optical illusion of movement, of any part of the sign. Also included in this
definition are signs having “chasing action,” which is the action of a row of lights, mirrors or reflectors commonly used
to create the appearance of motion. Automatic changeable copy boards are permitted provided that there is no running
action to copy and provided that the copy does not change more than once every six (6) seconds.
Banner. A sign or outside advertising display having the letters, illusions or visual representation applied to cloth, paper,
vinyl, fabric or similar material with or without frame. The term banner shall include flags, pennants, rafts, T-shirts
displayed in a manner as to serve the purpose of a commercial advertising device, floats, balloons, spinners, streamers
and kites.
Changeable copy sign. A sign on which message copy is changed through the utilization of attachable letters,
numbers, symbols, graphics or automated means.
Display Surface Area. Except for double-faced signs, the area of all copy surfaces shall be included in determining
the area of a sign. In calculating double-faced signs, the calculation shall be based upon the area of one copy
surface, if the two copy surfaces are the same size. If unequal in size, the area of the larger copy surface of a doublefaced
sign shall be used in calculating the size. In calculating the area of a copy surface, that area of a sign including the
entire area within a regular geometric shape or combination of regular geometric shapes enclosing all surface areas and
all of the elements of informational or representational matter displayed, including blank masking or any surface shape
intended to convey ideas, information, meaning or art. Frames or structural members not bearing informational or
representational matter shall not be included in calculating the display surface area.
Double-faced sign. A sign with two (2) separate copy surfaces which are parallel and whose copy surfaces are not
separated by more than five (5) feet at any point;
Freestanding sign. A sign supported by an attached sign structure placed in the ground and which is wholly
independent of any building, fence, vehicle, trailer, or object (other than the sign structure) for support. A free-standing
sign may contain a sign or signs on one (1) side only, or it may be a double-faced sign or v-shaped, subject to the height,
size and other limitations indicated in this article.
Frontage, Lot. The length of the property line of any one (1) premise serving as a public street right-of-way. For
lots with multiple frontages, the principal street frontage shall be the same as that to which the building is oriented.
Should the owner wish to direct the sign solely to a frontage other than the principal frontage, the linear length of
this frontage will be used to calculate the allowable area of the sign. Should the owner wish to direct the sign to
both frontages, the frontage having the highest vehicular traffic volume shall be used to calculate the allowable area.
Height of sign. The vertical distance measured from the ground to the top of the sign face or sign structure,
whichever is greater.
Nonconforming sign: A sign which is lawfully constructed, modified, repaired or maintained, but which does not
comply with the provisions of this Article or these regulations, as amended, or which fails to comply with these
regulations because of changed conditions at the site of the sign or change in zoning or reclassification of the use of
property, etc.
Portable sign. Any sign which is intended to be readily relocated or which does not have an independent sign
structure firmly and permanently attached to the ground. These include, but are not specifically limited to, mobile
signs, signs on wheels, trailers or portable structures or vehicles which are parked in such a manner as to serve the
purpose of an advertising device, tent signs, A-frame signs and similar devices and signs not permanently and
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
159 | P a g e
securely affixed to the ground or other permanent structure.
Public agency. An agency of the local, state or federal government.
Sign. Any letters, pictorial or graphic representation, symbol, insignia, emblem, flag, banner, illuminated or
animated device, displayed in any manner whatsoever, which directs attention of persons to such device, and which
is located within the view of the general public from a public way. Customary graphics found on vending
machines, newspaper dispensers and similar machines shall not be considered as signs.
Sign, Advertising. Any sign which relates in subject matter to products, accommodations, services or activities
sold or offered elsewhere than on the premises on which the sign is located. Advertising signs include, but are not
limited to those signs commonly referred to as outdoor advertising signs, billboards or poster boards.
Signs, Business. Any sign which relates in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located, or to its
products, accommodations, services, or activities being offered, sold or engaged in on the premises. Billboards
or advertising signs as defined in Section 920.130 are not business signs.
Sign copy. All words, letters, numbers, figures, characters, art works, graphics, symbols, photographic material
or insignia that are used on a display surface area.
Sign, Neon. A sign which uses exposed incandescent tubing in various bright colors and which is illuminated by
an electrical current which activates a gas or liquid contained in such tubing.
Sign, Permanent. Signs which are affixed to a permanent, secured sign structure, wall or building.
Sign, Projecting. Any sign which projects from and is supported by a building, including marquees and canopies.
Sign structure. A supporting structure erected or intended for identifying/advertising purposes, with or without
a sign thereon, permanently and securely situated upon or attached to real property, upon which any sign is
fastened, affixed displayed, applied or a part of, provided however, said definition shall not include a building,
fence, flagpole, illumination standards, masts, stakes or chains.
Sign, Temporary. Signs which are not affixed to a sign structure, wall, or building.
Sign, Wall. Any sign attached flat to the exterior surface wall or any other vertical surface of a building. Such sign
may also be painted or applied directly onto a vertical surface. This designation does not include window signs.
Sign, Window. Any sign painted, attached, applied or affixed to or on the glazing of a window or glass, or to an
opaque or transparent door, of a structure. All window signs shall be deemed temporary.
V-shaped sign. Any structure whose copy surfaces are not parallel and equidistance from each other and whose
copy surfaces are greater than five (5) feet apart at any given point.
903 General Provisions
It shall be illegal for a sign to be placed within the City of West Columbia except as provided in this article.
903.1 Permit Required: Except as indicated herein, zoning and building permits shall be required for the
erection, alteration or reconstruction of any sign within the City limits and such permits shall be issued in accordance
with this Zoning Ordinance and the International Building Code. The following signs are specifically exempt from these
permitting requirements:
(1) Signs exempt from the scope of this article;
(2) Temporary signs which are specifically allowed under this article;
(3) Public Signs: Signs of public bodies, agencies, traffic signs and regulatory devices, directional signs,
emergency warning, bus stop, taxi stand and legal notices;
(4) Interior signs;
(5) Decorations: Decorative lighting and banners which are permitted under this article;
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
160 | P a g e
(6) Signs on a business vehicle identifying the business, address and telephone. This exemption does not include
separate sign structures attached to a vehicle;
903.2 Automobile/Air Traffic/Pedestrian Hazards and Sign Illuminations:
(1) No flood lights shall be utilized as a part of a sign illumination system which are not hooded or shielded
so that the light source is not visible from any public right-of-way or adjacent property nor shall any sign
otherwise reflect or emit a glaring light so as to impair driver vision.
(2) No sign illumination system shall contain or utilize any beacon, spot, search or stroboscopic light or reflector
which is visible from any public right-of-way or adjacent property, nor shall such lights be operated outside
except by authorized public agencies;
(3) No sign shall have animation, except as defined in Section 902.2 relating to automatic changeable copy boards;
(4) No sign shall obstruct the view of motor vehicle operators entering a public roadway from a driveway, street or
alley;
(5) No sign shall be permitted which may be confused with an official traffic sign, signal, device or any other
official sign or which uses the words, “stop,” “warning,” “danger,” “caution,” or similar words implying the
existence of danger or need for stopping or maneuvering. No sign shall display any intermittent light resembling
the color, size, shape or order of lights customarily used in traffic signals or on emergency vehicles or on law
enforcement vehicles, except as part of a permitted traffic control sign.
(6) No sign shall be located, erected, repaired, altered or maintained upon or across any public road, street, highway
or right-of-way. No sign shall be posted to or affixed to any lamp post, public utility pole, street signs or shade
tree or upon any public structure or building, except as may be authorized by state or federal law.
904 Design Standards
904.1 All signs shall be constructed of durable materials and designed to meet all applicable requirements of the
International Building Code. Further, all signs shall be of such professional quality and structure so as not to detract
from good community appearance and attractiveness.
904.2 A sign, whether temporary or permanent, shall not be erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct
any fire escape, exit or any window or door or opening used or potentially used as a means of any fire escape or any
window or door or opening used as a means of egress.
904.3 All permanent signs shall be securely attached to a building or structure by fixed, metal support, such as
bolts, anchors, supports, guy wires or steel rods. Staples, nails, tethers or chains should not be used to secure any
permanent sign to any building, structure or ground.
904.4 All permanent signs shall be constructed to withstand the wind pressure as designated by the International
Building Code.
904.5 Except as otherwise provided, all signs and portions of signs shall be securely anchored or affixed and
constructed as required in the International Building Code.
904.6 Signs in disrepair and unsafe signs:
(1) All signs, together with all their support, braces, guy wires and anchors shall be kept in good repair and
permanently maintained in a safe condition, free from deterioration, defective or missing parts, or peeling or
faded paint or material and able to withstand the required wind pressure. Any sign not in compliance with this
provision is hereby declared to be nonconforming.
(2) The administrator may order the repair or removal of such signs that are not maintained in a safe condition,
in good repair or in accordance with the provisions of this article.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
161 | P a g e
(A) Permanent Signs
(1) If the administrator shall find that any permanent sign is in violation of this subsection or article,
then he/she shall give notice to the property owner specifying the location of the hazard or
deteriorated sign, what needs to be done to render the sign in safe and in good repair or to bring such
sign in compliance with this article, and that in the event the same is not done by the owner that the
City will remove the sign at the expense of the owner of the property upon which it is located. Service
of such notice may be made personally by any city official or by registered or certified mail, return
receipt requested. Service shall be deemed complete upon delivery. In the event the address of the
person to be notified is unknown or the notice which has been mailed is returned, such notice may be
served by posting the same on a conspicuous place on the premises on which the nuisance is located
and by advertising said notice in the local newspaper, in which event service shall be deemed
completed after the preceding is accomplished.
(2) The person(s) so notified shall remove or initiate alteration of such permanent sign within fifteen
(15) days of such notice and such sign condition shall be completely rectified within sixty (60) days.
In the case where rectification of the sign condition is impossible or impracticable within this
sixty(60) days, the administrator may grant an additional thirty (30) days, upon the owner’s showing
the impossibility or impracticability of repair within sixty (60) days. If the person(s) so notified fails
or refuses to remove or alter such sign so that it is in conformity with this section within the time
periods specified herein, then the building inspector may cause such sign to be removed at the expense
of the owner or lessee thereof.
(B) Temporary Signs
If the administrator shall find that any temporary sign is in violation of this subsection, then he/she
shall cause such sign to be removed and store such sign for a period not to exceed fourteen (14) days
so that the owner may claim such property. If an individual does not claim the property within
fourteen (14) days, the administrator may dispose of the sign. The administrator shall have no duty to
notify or contact the owner of the signs regarding removal of a sign in violation of this subsection.
(3) The administrator may, without notice, cause any unsafe or insecure sign to be immediately removed if the
sign presents an immediate peril to life, limb or property.
(4) In the event that any sign is damaged exceeding fifty (50%) percent of the replacement value according to
appraisal thereof by competent appraisers, such sign may be restored, reconstructed, altered or repaired only
to conform with all of the provisions of this Article.
(5) No sign shall be permitted to be erected, repaired, altered or maintained which in any manner may obscure
visibility required for safe travel and passage or confuse, distract, or unduly divert the attention of drivers of
vehicles or pedestrians.
904.7 Neon signs and illumination: Neon signs, when illuminated, shall have such lighting shielded so as not to
directly shine on abutting properties or in the line of vision of the public using the streets or sidewalks. Neon signs
must not confuse, distract, or unduly divert the attention of drivers of vehicles or pedestrians. Neon signs may not
blink, flash, or have any appearance of animation. Neon signs must be maintained in good repair with all tubes
illuminated as originally intended. Any sign that uses exposed neon tubing must be turned off in the event that any
portion of the sign becomes damaged or inoperable. Neon tubing may be used as a window sign or highlighting
feature visible from the exterior of the building with the following conditions:
(1) Neon window signs may not cover more than twenty-five (25%) of the glass window space;
(2) Neon window signs may not be greater than three (3) square feet in size;
(3) Any neon window sign greater than three (3) square feet must will be deducted from the permitted
business sign display surface area as established in section 907;
(4) Each business or establishment may have one (1) neon sign in a window of its business so long as it
meets the aforementioned standards. Any additional neon sign must be deducted from the permitted
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
162 | P a g e
display surface area as established in section 907;
(5) Highlighting neon features may not cover more than 10% of the combined outline of doors, windows,
awnings, entrance ways, and other minor architectural features located on the primary building front;
(6) Highlighting neon features may not be used on rooflines and sidewalk areas.
905 Prohibited Signs
905.1 Signs within or near the public right-of-way or utility easement:
(1) No temporary or permanent sign, signal or other informational device shall be erected or placed within or
protrude into any public right-of-way or utility easement, except as otherwise permitted herein.
(A) An exception to this section shall be allowed when less than five (5) feet exists between the right-ofway
and the premises contained on any parcel of land, subject to the following regulations:
(1) Such signs shall not extend more than four (4) feet over the public right-of-way or more than twothirds
(2/3) of the distance from the lot line to the curb line or the nearest edge of street surface,
whichever is lesser.
(2) No portion of any such sign shall be less than twelve (12) feet above the surface of the street right-ofway
(3) If the frontage provided is increased by any means to exceed five (5) feet, any such sign projecting
over any public right-of-way shall be removed at the time the frontage is increased.
(B) No sign, signal, banner or other informational device, including its supporting structures, shall be
erected or placed nearer than four (4) feet to the edge of the curb or any paved roadway, or to the edge of the
traveled portion of any unpaved roadway, so that a clear zone is provided for pedestrian movement and clear
vision from intersections and drive-ways.
905.2 Temporary and Portable Signs: Except as indicated in this section, no temporary or portable sign shall be
erected, constructed, installed or maintained within the City limits:
(1) Temporary Subdivision Signs: Temporary subdivision signs announcing a land subdivision development
may be erected in residential areas on the premises of the land subdivision, provided that the display surface
area of such signs do not exceed fifty (50) square feet in area, are set back at least twenty (20) feet from any
property line, are spaced at least five hundred (500) feet apart, and are removed not more than thirty (30) days
from such time as seventy-five (75%) percent of the lots are conveyed.
(2) Craftsman’s Signs: Signs of craftsmen, artisans, house painters, contractors, or subcontractors may be
erected and maintained during the period that such persons are performing repair, remodeling, repainting or
improvement work on the premises which such signs are erected and the location of such work is not the
craftsmen’s fixed or normal place of business. The display surface area of these signs shall not be in excess of
twelve (12) square feet and such signs shall be removed immediately upon completion of work.
(3) Contractor’s Signs or Building Under Construction Signs: One sign displaying the names of the building,
contractor, architects, engineers and similar identifying information is permitted upon the premises of any work
under construction or any work of major repair or improvement, provided that the display surface area does not
exceed sixty (60) square feet in area and the sign is removed within seven (7) days after completion of the
work.
(4) Real Estate and Garage Sale Signs: Signs offering real estate for sale, rent or lease, provided that combined
display surface area of all such signs does not exceed four (4) square feet for every 100 feet of street frontage
and that the total display surface area shall not exceed six (6) square feet on any individual lot. These same
provisions apply to on-site garage sale signs in West Columbia.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
163 | P a g e
(5) Political Signs: Signs announcing candidates seeking public office or relating to any election, vote by a
governing body or public referendum shall be allowed on private property only. Further, such signs shall be
removed within seven (7) days after the election or referendum for which they were prepared has been decided.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to limit or prohibit the purchase of advertising space on permitted
advertising signs in addition to the signs permitted by this section.
905.3 Signs within Historically Significant/Scenic/Development Areas:
Except as preempted or prohibited by federal and state law or regulation, no advertising sign or banner shall be
erected, constructed or maintained in the following locations:
(1) Within one thousand (1000) feet of any historic marker, structure, building, location or area. For
the purposes of this section, historic marker, structure, building, location or area shall include, but
not be limited to any place which has been recognized by any government agency as having
historic significance, such as the National Registry of Historic Places or any location deemed a
“Historic Site” by any state or federal agency.
(2) Within one thousand (1000) feet of any public park or recreational area, designated green way or
riverbank;
(3) Within any area currently or subsequently designated as a redevelopment area by the City of West
Columbia in its Redevelopment Plan. Should any additional area subsequently become
designated as a Redevelopment Area, any advertising sign located within the area shall be deemed
nonconforming, pursuant to the provisions of this article.
905.4 Banners, flags and pennants: Except those specifically exempted from this article, each frontage shall be
limited to three (3) banners, flags or pennants not exceeding a total of forty-five (45) square feet in display
surface area.
905.5 Hiring Signs
Hiring signs are permitted on the lot where the business is located. Hiring signs must be less than six (6)
square feet in display area unless a banner permit is obtained by the business per section 905.4. Only one
hiring sign may be placed per frontage. Hiring signs may not be displayed for more than thirty (30) days.
Hiring signs may not be located off-site. Hiring signs may not display any commercial messages or
advertisements. Hiring signs may not be placed in any right-of-way.
905.6 Gas Filled Figures
Gas filled figures used to draw attention to a business or event are prohibited. Exceptions:
(1) Gas filled figures used as a display for similar items for sale by the establishment or for seasonal
decorations. The figure must be located near the establishment’s storefront, cannot interfere with traffic
or pedestrian safety, and cannot be used as a sign. Gas figures must be properly secured to prevent
movement. Gas figures may not be placed on rooftops or within fifty (50) feet of any road right-of-way.
(2) Gas filled figures which are associated with any festival or occasions distinguished by a resolution
or ordinance of City Council, but only during the duration of the festival or occasion. Such gas filled
figures cannot interfere with traffic or pedestrian safety.
905.7 Civic Club, Religious, and Eleemosynary Signs
Temporary civic club, religious, and eleemosynary signs, whether on or off the premises, informing the
public of a specific festival or event are permitted. Such signs must be less than six (6) square feet in display
area. Only one such sign may be placed per frontage. Such off-site signs must be placed on private
property with the consent of the property owner. Such signs may not be placed in any right-of-way. Such
signs shall be placed at least ten (10) feet from rights-of-way in residential areas. Such signs may be
displayed seven (7) days prior to the beginning of the festival or event and must be removed within seven
(7) days after the end of the festival or event. Such signs may not be displayed for more than thirty (30)
days.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
164 | P a g e
906 Signs Permitted in Residential Districts
Except as specifically provided herein, all signs are prohibited in residential areas:
906.1 Signs Excluded from Regulation by Definition: Those signs excluded from the scope of this article by
Section 901 are permitted.
906.2 Temporary Signs: Those temporary signs enumerated in Section 905.2 are allowed in residential areas.
All other temporary and portable signs are prohibited.
906.3 Home Occupation Signs: One (1) non-illuminated sign shall be permitted for each home occupation on singledwelling
residential areas, provided that the display surface area of such sign does not exceed one (1) square foot
in area and that such sign is a wall sign attached to the location’s principal structure.
906.4 Permanent Subdivision Sign: Permanent signs displaying no information other than the name of the residential
land subdivision in which they are located shall be permitted provided that such signs do not exceed twenty (20)
square feet in area, do not inhibit vision affecting the safety and well-being of vehicular traffic and pedestrians
and are maintained pursuant to Section 904 of this Article. All vision clearances established in Section 606 of the
Zoning Ordinance must also be observed.
906.5 Group Residential Uses and Nonresidential Uses: Signs relating to permitted group housing developments,
mobile home parks, residential high rise structures and permitted nonresidential uses of a recreational, civic,
charitable, fraternal, cultural, religious, educational, institutional, governmental, and service nature and not
elsewhere regulated, prohibited or specified, may be erected, subject to the following provisions:
(1) Size: Total display surface area for these signs shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet per street frontage.
(2) Location: Each location shall not have in excess of one (1) sign per street frontage. If such sign is building
mounted, it shall be a flat wall sign.
(3) Height: If building mounted, such sign shall not project above the roof line. If freestanding, such sign shall
not exceed four (4) feet above ground level when located in required frontage, or six (6) feet above ground
level when located elsewhere. All vision clearances established in Section 606 of the Zoning Ordinance must
also be observed.
(4) Additional Bulletin or Notice Board Allowed: In addition to those signs allowed under this, one and only one
bulletin or notice board displaying information relating to activities or services conducted or offered on the
premises may be erected and maintained per lot frontage, providing that the display surface area of such
board does not exceed twenty (20) square feet.
906.6 Setbacks for Residential Signs: All components of signs permitted by this Section 960 shall be set back at least
ten (10) feet from any street right-of-way and from any property line.
907 Signs permitted in Commercial and Manufacturing Districts
Except as specifically provided herein, all signs are prohibited in Commercial and Manufacturing zoned areas:
907.1 Signs Permitted in Residential Areas: All signs permitted in residential areas are permitted in commercial
and manufacturing districts.
907.2
907.3 Business Signs: Business signs shall be permitted in commercial and manufacturing districts, subject to the
following provisions:
(1) Dimensional and Set-back Requirements:
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
165 | P a g e
District Sign Type Maximum
Height
Minimum Set-back From
Right-of-way
C-1 Freestanding 20 feet 0
Projecting Not to exceed
Roof line
0
Wall Not to exceed
Roof line
--
C-2;
LM; HM
Freestanding 20 feet 5
Projecting Not to exceed
Roof line
5
Wall Not to exceed
Roof line
--
C-3 Freestanding 10 feet 5
Projecting Not to exceed
Roof line
5
Wall Not to exceed
Roof line
--
(2) All signs shall also meet the requirements of Section 606 relating to vision clearances.
(3) Maximum Display Surface Area:
District Maximum Display Area
C-1;
C-2;
C-3
The lesser of 150 square feet or three square feet
for each one foot of lot frontage.
LM; HM 200 square feet
(4) Number of Signs:
1. For signs attached to buildings and/or painted on buildings, there can be any number of signs
on a particular wall facing a public street, or parking lot, but the area must not exceed the
requirements of Section 970.20(1)(C). Notwithstanding this, there shall be no more than a
total of three (3) window signs per structure.
2. Where more than one business with valid business licenses are located on a single lot, the
each additional business shall be permitted an additional fifty (50) square feet of display
surface area for wall signs and/or projecting signs, but no additional free standing sign shall
be allowed. Such additional surface area shall be designated and used for the purpose of
identifying the second or subsequently licensed business. Such additional display area shall
not be transferable or assignable between licensed business on such lot. A common signage
plan shall be prerequisite to the issuance of any sign permit when more than one business is
located on a single lot. The owner of the property or the property manager may submit a
common signage plan in the form designated by the Zoning Administrator. Common
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
166 | P a g e
signage plans must include the business name, sign dimensions, display area square footage,
sign type, and display area allotment for each business on the lot. The Zoning Administrator
or his designee must approve common signage plans. Once approved by the Zoning
Administrator, the common signage plan shall become binding on all businesses and uses
occupying the affected lots, but may be amended by filing a new or revised plan in
conformance with the requirements of this ordinance.
3. Where a single lot has more than one road frontage and the secondary or subsequent road
frontage is greater than 100 feet, one additional freestanding sign may be permitted on the
lot. The additional freestanding sign may not be greater than fifty (50) square feet of display
area. Such additional display area shall not be transferable or assignable to any other signage
on the lot.
(5) Business signs must identify a validly licensed business or be removed within thirty (30) days from
the lapse, loss or surrender of such business license in order to limit confusion relating to locations
and operations of businesses. If the sign is not removed within thirty (30) days from the lapse, loss or
surrender of the license, the zoning administrator may proceed with its removal at the property
owner’s expense, subject to the provisions of Section 940.60(B).
(6) Business signs must accurately identify the subject matter to the premises which it is located, or to its
products, proprietors, accommodations, services or activities sold, offered or engaged in on the
premises. If there is a change in the business which makes the business sign inaccurate or misleading,
or if the business is discontinued, the business sign shall be brought into conformity within thirty (30)
days after written notice to the owner by the zoning administrator. If the sign is not brought into
conformity within the thirty (30) days after written notice, the zoning administrator may proceed with
its removal at the property owner’s expense, subject to the provisions of Section 940.60(B).
(7) Exceptions for Dimensional Requirements for On-Site Business Signs Located Near an Interstate
Interchange
Business located within seven-hundred and fifty (750) feet on an interstate interchange may increase
the height of one freestanding sign to fifty (50) feet. In addition to the display surface area established
in section 907.2(3), fifty (50) square feet of display area may be allotted for a permitted freestanding
sign over thirty-five (35) in height. Such additional display area shall not be transferable or assignable
to any other signage on the lot.
908 Advertising Signs
908.1 Location: Advertising signs shall only be allowed in areas zoned as Light Manufacturing (LM), Heavy
Manufacturing (HM) and General Commercial (C-2). Advertising signs are prohibited on public right-of-way. Where
churches or other places of worship and special exceptions as defined by this ordinance apply in the above-referenced
commercial and industrial zones, no advertising structure will be allowed within 1000 feet as measured along the
roadway. In the areas in which the City grants variances, no variance for an advertising sign shall be granted that is any
less stringent than what is required by state law, SC Department of Transportation regulations or the Outdoor
Advertising Act.
908.2 Dimensional Requirements:
Maximum Height: 40 feet
Minimum Setback from right-of-way
and utility easements: 10 feet
Maximum Display Surface Area: 288 square feet
Minimum Spacing: 1,000 feet between advertising signs on the same
side of a street and 500 feet between signs
on opposite sides of the street
908.2.1 Exceptions for Dimensional Requirements of Advertising Signs Visible From and Marketed to Interstate
Highway 26 Vehicular Traffic:
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
167 | P a g e
Restrictions and regulation of all advertising signs shall subject to the provisions of this article. Notwithstanding, the
City desires to maintain conformity with State law, industry standards, commercial practice and appearance of
advertising signs for Interstate Highway 26 traffic. Therefore, only those advertising signs visible and primarily
marketed to interstate traffic on Interstate Highway 26 shall have the height, display area and spacing limitations
imposed by Title 57, Chapter 25 of the South Carolina Code of Laws and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
908.2.2 Exception for Dimensional Requirements for Advertising Signs Located on Parcels in Areas Zoned Light
Manufacturing (LM), Heavy Manufacturing (HM), and General Commercial (C-2) that have Street Frontage on Jarvis
Klapman Boulevard, Augusta Road, Sunset Boulevard, Charleston Highway, and Airport Boulevard:
The maximum display surface area for advertising signs located on parcels in areas zoned Light Manufacturing (LM),
Heavy Manufacturing (HM), and General Commercial (C-2) that have street frontage on Jarvis Klapman Boulevard,
Augusta Road, Sunset Boulevard, Charleston Highway, and Airport Boulevard shall not exceed 378 square feet for all
sign faces plus extensions. The same height, setback, and spacing requirements imposed by section 908.2 shall apply to
all advertising signs. This exception does not apply to any area of Jarvis Klapman Boulevard, Augusta Road, Sunset
Boulevard, Charleston Highway, and Airport Boulevard located within the Gateway Overlay District shown on the
official zoning map of West Columbia or in the area commonly known as “Triangle City,” defined by Augusta Road on
the north, E Avenue on the south, 13th Street on the west, and 11th Street on the east, including but not limited to, the
confluence of Charleston Highway and Augusta Road.
909 Sign Regulation in PUD-R and PUD-C Districts
Specific regulations are imposed upon sign locations in PUD-R and PUD-C districts. However, it is the intent of
this ordinance that signs within PUD-R and PUD-C districts be appropriate for the locations in which they are established, and
that regulations governing the display surface area, number, location and height of signs should be generally followed as for the
least restrictive zone related to site size of the development, as set forth in Section 709.3 of the Zoning Ordinance.
910 Nonconforming Signs
910.1 A nonconforming sign shall not be rebuilt, altered or repaired except in conformity with this article after
sustaining damage exceeding fifty (50%) percent of the replacement cost of the sign at the time of damage, provided that
any permitted reconstruction shall be completed within six (6) months after issuance of a building permit.
910.2 On any permanent sign which is nonconforming at the time of passage of this ordinance, or at any time after
such sign becomes nonconforming because of changes in zoning or circumstances, work may be done on ordinary
repairs, or on repair or replacement of any sign structure provided that the dimensions, display surface area, or height is
not increased, setbacks are not decreased or construction material is not replaced with non-conforming material.
910.3 Temporary Nonconforming Use: Notwithstanding any provision allowing repair and replacement of nonconforming
signs, the following provisions shall be applicable to all signs in order to uniformly implement this article:
(1) Permanent Signs: A permanent sign shall be required to come into conformity with this article within
seventy-two (72) months from the date of passage of this article. Exception for certain on-site business
signs existing prior to June 19, 2000: The lawful use of an on-site freestanding, projecting, and/or wall
business sign as regulated in Section 907.2 that is nonconforming only because it does not conform with the
minimum setback from right-of-way requirements, maximum height requirements, and/or maximumdisplay
area requirements may be continued; however, any such nonconforming sign shall be immediately removed
or brought into compliance with the requirements of this article whenever any of the following occur:
(a) The sign is a prohibited sign according to the provisions of Section 905;
(b) The sign is not maintained in accordance with the provisions of Section 904;
(c) Any portion of the sign or sign structure is located within or protruding into any public right-ofway
or utility easement in violation of Section 905.1;
(d) Any portion of a projecting sign or wall sign regulated in Section 907.2 exceeds the roof line of
the building on which it is mounted;
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
168 | P a g e
(e) The sign has been destroyed or damaged to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of the
replacement cost of the sign at the time of the damage.
No portion of this section shall be interpreted to allow any nonconforming sign dimensions, display surface
area, or height to be increased, setbacks to be decreased, or construction material to be replaced with
nonconforming material.
(2) Temporary Signs/ Portable Signs/Banners/Flags/Window Signs: Those temporary signs, portable
signs, banners, flags and window signs which are duly licensed and permitted at the time of passage of this
ordinance, if required to be licensed and/or permitted under current law, and are subject to this article shall
be required to comply with all provisions of this article or be removed within twelve (12) months from the
date of passage of this article.
(3) Notwithstanding any provision for temporary usage of signs that become nonconforming, signs which
are nonconforming under the current ordinance for any reason, and signs which are not duly licensed or
permitted prior to the passage of this ordinance shall be immediately removed or be considered in
immediate violation.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
169 | P a g e
ARTICLE 10
ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
1000 Zoning administrator or his/her designee
This ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the zoning administrator or his/her designee (or other City of
West Columbia staff as designated by the city administrator), who shall have all the powers and duties authorized by statute
or ordinance. The duties of the zoning administrator or his/her designee with regard to this ordinance shall be:
1) Interpretation of the terms and provisions of this ordinance;
2) Administration of this ordinance by the issuance of permits and certificates, including the collection of authorized
fees;
3) Processing applications for appeals to the board of zoning appeals for special exceptions, variances and
administrative reviews.
4) Preparation of the record for appeal to circuit court from the decisions of the board of zoning appeals;
5) Maintenance of a current zoning map, amendments to the zoning ordinance, and all public records related to
zoning and planning;
6) Enforcement of the zoning ordinance and investigation and resolution of zoning complaints;
7) Administrative assistance to the planning commission and board of zoning appeals when authorized;
8) Such other duties as may be authorized in the administration of this ordinance.
1001 Zoning permit required
1001.1 Permits Required. No building, sign, or structure shall be erected, moved, enlarged, altered or demolished
and no use of land may be changed without a zoning permit as issued by the zoning administrator or his/her
designee. No zoning permit shall be issued by the zoning administrator or his/her designee except for use which is
in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
1001.2 Fees for Permits. A fee established by regulation by the city council shall be paid for each zoning permit or
certificate of zoning compliance issued by the zoning administrator or his/her designee.
1001.3 Application for zoning permits. Application for zoning permits shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate
drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be used, the sizes and locations of existing
structures on the lot, and the location and dimensions of a proposed structure or alteration as well as the shape, size,
height, use and location of the buildings already on the lot, the setback lines of buildings on adjoining lots,
offstreeet parking space, and such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for
determining whether the provisions of this ordinance are being observed. The application may contain such other
information as may be required by the zoning administrator or his/her designee to determine compliance with this
ordinance, including existing or proposed buildings or alterations, existing or proposed uses of buildings and land,
number of families, housekeeping units, rental units, and existing conditions of the adjacent property. One copy of
the plans shall be returned to the applicant with the signed approval or disapproval of the zoning administrator or
his/her designee noted on the copy within fifteen (15) days of receipt.
1001.4 Expiration of permits. If the work described on the zoning permit has not begun within six (6) months from
the date of the permits, the permit shall expire and be void upon written notice of the zoning administrator or his/her
designee.
1002 Certificates of zoning compliance
1002.1 Certificates Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, occupy, or permit the use or occupancy of
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
170 | P a g e
any building or property hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, altered, or enlarged in whole or in part, until
a certificate of zoning compliance has been issued by the zoning administrator or his/her designee stating that the
proposed use conforms with the requirements of this ordinance.
1002.2 Nonconforming Uses or Structures. Uses or structures made nonconforming by this ordinance may not
continue without a certificate of zoning compliance issued by the zoning administrator or his/her designee, which
shall state that the use or structure was in existence at the time of adoption or amendment of this ordinance. The
certificate of zoning compliance shall specify the features which are nonconforming, and may be used to establish a
vested interest in continuation of the nonconformity.
1002.3 Temporary Uses. Certificates of zoning compliance may be issued and renewed by the zoning administrator
or his/her designee for permitted temporary uses for the times permitted by the zoning district regulations.
1003 Violations
1003.1 Misdemeanor penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person to use property, or for any person to construct,
alter, enlarge, or demolish any structure without a permit or permits required by this ordinance. Conviction for
violation of this ordinance is punishable as a misdemeanor under the general penalty provisions of the city code.
1003.2 Withholding permits. The zoning administrator or his/her designee shall deny a zoning permit for any use
or work which fails to comply with this ordinance. The zoning administrator or his/her designee, building official,
or other appropriate official shall withhold all other city permits for work which violates this ordinance.
1003.3 Complaints. A written complaint specifying facts showing a violation of this ordinance filed by any person
shall be investigated by the zoning administrator or his/her designee. Upon determination that a violation has
occurred, the zoning administrator or his/her designee shall take appropriate enforcement action authorized by this
ordinance.
1003.4 Stop work orders. The zoning administrator or his/her designee is authorized to issue a stop work order
pursuant to S. C. Code 6-29-950(a) requiring work to cease until specified code violations are corrected. Failure to
comply with a stop work order of the zoning administrator or his/her designee is a misdemeanor punishable under
the general penalty provisions of the city code. Issuance of a stop work order may be appealed to the board of
zoning appeals.
1003.5 Arrest warrant. The zoning administrator or his/her designee, with concurrence of the city attorney, is
authorized to request the issuance of an arrest warrant for violations of this ordinance.
1003.6 Injunction. The zoning administrator or his/her designee shall submit a request to the city attorney for
institution of a civil action seeking an injunction prohibiting violation of this ordinance when appropriate.
1004 Records of applications and certificates
Records of applications for rezoning permits, records of plats and plans in connection with said permits, and records
of all occupancy certificates and denials shall be kept on file in the office of the zoning administrator or his/her designee and
copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved.
1005 Penalties for violation
Any person violating, by act or omission, any provision of this ordinance, shall be guilty of city code and shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500) or thirty (30) days in jail or both, at the discretion of the court.
Where such an act or omission is continued in violation of the provisions of these regulations after notice of such violation by
the zoning administrator or his/her designee, each and every day during which such act or omission continues shall be
deemed a separate violation.
The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, surveyor, builder,
engineer, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such violation may each be
found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
171 | P a g e
1006 Expiration of zoning permit
Any zoning permit shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within six (6)
months of the date of issue of the permit, or the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of one (1) year.
1007 Legal remedies
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or
any building, structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the zoning administrator or his/her designee or any other
appropriate authority or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be damaged by such violations, in addition
to other remedies, may institute injunction or other appropriate action in proceeding to prevent the violation.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
172 | P a g e
ARTICLE 11
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
1100 Establishment, membership, and proceedings of the board
A board of zoning appeals is hereby established which shall consist of five (5) members, a majority of which
constitutes a quorum. Members shall serve overlapping terms of three (3) years. The initial board established under this
ordinance shall be appointed as follows: two members to serve for one (1) year; two members to serve for two (2) years, and
one member to serve for three (3) years or after that time until their successors are named. Each member of the zoning board
of appeals must reside within the city of West Columbia and be a registered voter. A vacancy shall be filled for an unexpired
term in the same manner as the initial appointment. West Columbia City Council may remove any member of the board for
cause or in the event that a member ceases to possess the qualifications set forth in this section or those required by law1.
None of the members shall hold any other public office or position in the City of West Columbia.
1100.1 Officers. The board shall elect one of its members as chairman, who shall serve for one year unless reelected
or until a successor is elected and qualified. The board shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer of
the City of West Columbia or of the zoning board.
1100.2 Proceedings. The board shall adopt rules of procedure to govern the operations of the board.
1100.3 Meetings. Meetings of the board are held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board
may determine.
1100.4 Public notice. Public notice of all meetings of the board of zoning appeals shall be provided by publication
in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of West Columbia. In cases involving variances or special
exceptions conspicuous notice shall be posted on or adjacent to the property affected, with at lease one such notice
being visible from each public thoroughfare that abuts the property.
1100.5 Oaths and Subpoenas. The chairman, or in his or her absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths
and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena.
1100.6 Minutes. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each
question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other
official actions, all of which must be immediately filed in the office of the board or the office of the zoning
administrator or his/her designee, and must be a public record.
1101 Powers and duties of the board of zoning appeals
The board of zoning appeals shall have the following powers and duties:
1101.1 Administrative Review. To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of the zoning
ordinance.
1101.2 Variance. To hear and decide appeals for variance from the requirements of the zoning ordinance when
strict application of the provisions of the ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance may be
granted in an individual case of unnecessary hardship if the board makes and explains the following findings:
(a) there are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property;
(b) these conditions do not generally apply to other property in the vicinity;
(c) because of these conditions, the application of the ordinance to the particular piece of property would
1 State Law Reference: Section 6-29-780 of the S.C. Code of Laws 1976, as amended.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
173 | P a g e
effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property;
(d) The authorization of a variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property or to the public
good, and the character of the district will not be harmed by the granting of the variance.
(i) The board may not grant a variance the effect of which would be to allow the establishment of
a use not otherwise permitted in a zoning district, to extend physically a nonconforming use of
land, or to change the zoning district boundaries shown on the official zoning map. The fact that
property may be utilized more profitably, should a variance be granted, may not be considered
grounds for a variance.
(ii) In granting a variance, the board may attach to it such conditions regarding the location,
character, or other features of the proposed building, structure or use as the board may consider
advisable to protect established property values in the surrounding area, or to promote the public
health, safety or general welfare.
1101.3 Special Exception. To permit uses by special exception subject to the uses set forth in the zoning
ordinance, the board is specifically authorized to determine whether special exceptions should be granted. To this
end, the board will grant special exceptions with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this
ordinance, or to deny special exceptions when not in harmony with the intent and purpose of this ordinance.
1101.4 Violation of Conditions and Safeguards. Violation of conditions or safeguards, when made a part of the
terms upon which a variance or special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance and
punishable under Section 1005.
1102 Appeals to the board of zoning appeals
Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the
City of West Columbia. The appeal must be taken within thirty (30) days from the date the appealing party received actual
notice of the action from which the appeal is taken. The appeal is initiated by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is
taken and the board of zoning appeals notice of appeal specifying the grounds of it. Appeals must be filed in writing on
forms available from the zoning administrator or his/her designee specifying the type of appeal and stating the grounds under
which the appeal is requested.
An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from which the
appeal is taken certified to the board, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In that case, proceedings may not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board or by a court of record on application, on notice to
the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown.
The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal or other matter referred to it, and give at least
fifteen (15) days public notice of it in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of West Columbia, as well as due notice
to the parties in interest and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing any party may appear in person or by
agent or by attorney.
In exercising the power above, the board of zoning appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter,
reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirements decision or determination, and to that end shall
have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a zoning permit. The
board, in execution of its duties specified in this chapter, may subpoena witnesses and in case of contempt may certify this
fact to the circuit court having jurisdiction.
All final decisions and orders of the board must be in writing and permanently filed in the office of the board as a
public record. All findings of fact and conclusions of law must be separately stated in final decisions or orders of the board,
which must be delivered to the parties of interest by certified mail.
In case of contempt by a party, witness, or other person before the board of zoning appeals, the board may certify
this fact to the circuit court of Lexington County and the judge of the court, in open court or in chambers, after hearing, may
impose a penalty as authorized by law.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
174 | P a g e
1103 Appeals from the board of zoning appeals
Any person or person(s) who may have a substantial interest in any decision of the board of zoning appeals or an
officer or agent of the City of West Columbia may appeal from a decision of the board to the circuit court in Lexington
County by filing with the clerk of the court a petition in writing setting forth plainly, fully, and distinctly why the decision is
contrary to law. The appeal must be filed within thirty (30) days after the decision of the board is mailed.
Upon the filing of the appeal, the clerk of the circuit court shall give immediate notice of it to the secretary of the
board and within thirty (30) days from the time of the notice the board shall file with the clerk a certified copy of the
proceedings held before the board of zoning appeals, including a transcript of evidence heard before it, if any, and the
decision of the board including its findings of fact and conclusions.
The filing of an appeal in the circuit court from a decision of the board shall not ipso facto act as supersedeas, but
the judge of the circuit court may in his discretion grant a supersedeas upon such terms and conditions as may seem
reasonable and proper.
At the next term of circuit court or in chambers, upon ten (10) days notice to the parties, the presiding judge of the
circuit court of Lexington County shall proceed to hear and pass upon the appeal on the certified record of the board’s
proceeding. The findings of fact by the board of zoning appeals shall be treated in the same manner as a finding of fact by a
jury, and the court may not take additional evidence. In the event the judge determines that the certified record is insufficient
for review, the matter may be remanded to the board of zoning appeals for rehearing. In determining the questions presented
by the appeal, the court shall determine only whether the decision of the board is correct as a matter of law. In the event that
the decision of the board is reversed by the circuit court, the board is charged with the costs, and the costs must be paid by the
City of West Columbia which established the board of zoning appeals.
A party in interest who is aggrieved by the judgment rendered by the circuit court upon the appeal may appeal in the
same manner as provided by law for appeals from other judgments of the circuit court.
1104 Functions of zoning administrator, board of zoning appeal, city council and courts on interpretation,
administration and appeal
It is the intent of this ordinance that all questions of administration and enforcement shall first be presented to the
zoning administrator or his/her designee, and that such questions shall be presented to the board of zoning appeals only upon
appeal from the zoning administrator or his/her designee, and that recourse from the decisions of the board of zoning appeals
shall be the courts as previously provided.
1105 Appropriations to finance work of the board.
The City of West Columbia may appropriate such monies, otherwise unappropriated, as it considers fit to finance the
work of the board of zoning appeals and to generally provide for the enforcement of any zoning regulations and restrictions
authorized under this chapter.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
175 | P a g e
ARTICLE 12
AMENDMENTS
1200 Amendments
The regulations, restrictions, and zoning districts set forth in this ordinance may from time to time be amended,
supplemented, changed, or repealed by the city council after consultation with the planning commission and in accordance
with the following procedures.
1201 Initiation of proposals for amendments
1201.1 An amendment to the zoning ordinance text or zoning map may be initiated by the city council, the planning
commission, the zoning administrator or his/her designee, or a property owner or an agent authorized by the owner
in writing.
1201.2 Amendment requests shall be initiated using a form provided by the zoning administrator or his/her designee
accompanied by the required documents and information, a plat of the property showing the names of surrounding
property owners, and a filing fee established by council.
1201.3 Amendment requests should be received at least thirty (30) days prior to a regular meeting of the planning
commission in order to ensure that they will be heard at that meeting.
1202 Minimum area requirements for creation of new districts
No separate zoning district of less than two (2) acres shall be created by any amendment to this ordinance provided
that an addition of the C-3 district of less than two acres can be made to any existing commercial or manufacturing district
upon approval.
1203 Public hearing on proposed amendment
Before enacting an amendment to this ordinance, the city council of the City of West Columbia shall have a public
hearing thereon as required by Section 6-7-730 of the Code of Laws of South Carolina, 1976, following the procedures
established by the above mentioned section. City council, under this ordinance, empowers the planning commission to hold
the necessary hearing, unless the planning commission deems it necessary to require a public hearing held by city council as
may occur from time to time.
1204 Notice required
Following the initiation of an amendment request, the following steps are required to provide sufficient notice of the
public hearing for the adoption of a text or map amendment:
1) For text or map amendments, newspaper notice of the public hearing shall be published at least fifteen (15) days
prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the community.
2) For amendments which request a change to the zoning map, notices of the public hearing shall be conspicuously
located on or adjacent to the property affected, one (1) hearing notice for every street frontage. Such notice
shall indicate the nature of the change proposed, identification of the property affected, and time, date, and
place of the hearing.
3) For amendments which request a change to the zoning map, notices of public hearing shall be mailed to all
adjacent property owners and to groups which have filed a written request for notices.
1205 Planning commission review and recommendation
The planning commission shall review the text or map amendment request at an open meeting at which the person
initiating the request may be allowed to make written or oral presentations. If oral or written comments are taken from the
applicant, the planning commission shall give other interested members of the public an opportunity to make comments. The
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
176 | P a g e
planning commission shall follow its own by-laws for the conduct of the public hearing. The review of the amendment
request by the planning commission shall include a determination of whether the proposed amendment is in conformity with
the City of West Columbia Comprehensive Plan. The planning commission shall make a recommendation for action by the
city council within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the amendment application. If the planning commission does not submit
a recommendation within the prescribed time, the city council may proceed to act on the proposed amendment.
1206 Action by city council
The city council may adopt a text or map amendment on second reading by ordinance at least six (6) days after the
first reading. Rejection of the planning commission’s recommendation is accomplished in a single reading. Map
amendments may be adopted or rejected for all or any portion of the properties being requested. A zoning district
designation that was not included in the public notices shall not be adopted. An amendment request may be withdrawn in
writing by the initiator at any time prior to final action by the city council.
1207 Recording amendments
All text amendments shall be noted and placed in the official copy of the zoning ordinance maintained by the zoning
administrator or his/her designee and/or the municipal clerk. Map amendments shall be reflected on the official zoning map
as soon as practicable after their approval.
1208 Reconsideration of proposed amendments
Action shall not be initiated for a zoning amendment affecting the same parcel(s) of property more often than once
every twelve (12) months from the date the amendment was submitted by the applicant.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
177 | P a g e
ARTICLE 13
FEES AND CHARGES
1300 Schedule of fees and charges
The city council may establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses and a collection procedure for zoning
permits, certificates of zoning compliance, appeals, amendments, and other matters pertaining to these regulations. This
schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the zoning administrator or his/her designee and may be altered or amended
only by city council.
1301 No action until fees paid
No permit, certificate, special exception or variance shall be issued or granted unless and until such costs, charges,
fees or expenses have been paid in full, nor shall any action be taken on proposed amendments or on proceedings before the
board of appeals unless and until applicable charges and fees have been paid in full.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
City of West Columbia Zoning Ordinance
178 | P a g e
ARTICLE 14
LEGAL STATUS
1400 Separability
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such
declaration shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid.
1401 Repeal of previous zoning ordinance
The zoning ordinance of the City of West Columbia, South Carolina previously adopted, together with all
subsequent amendments thereto, is hereby repealed as of the effective date of this ordinance.
1402 Effective date
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon second reading approval by city council.
___________________________ ____________________________________________
Date - First Reading Mayor
___________________________
Date - Second Reading
Attested:
___________________________
City Clerk
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
Zoning Ordinance for the City of West Columbia, SC
Amendment Page
Section 705, C-2 (general commercial)
Passenger terminals, truck terminals, and mini warehouses moved from Section 705.1, Permitted
Principal Uses and Structures to Section 705.3 Permitted Special Exceptions. Pawn shops, title loan
businesses and check cashing operations moved from Section 705.1, Permitted Principal Uses and
Structures to Section 705.3 Permitted Special Exceptions with the following location requirements:
1,000 feet spacing between such businesses and 1,000 feet distance from schools and churches. Text
amendments approved by City Council on March 8, 2005.
Scriveners Error: Section 908.1 Location
Included the following language from the original text, which was omitted from the 2004 text,
“Advertising signs are prohibited on public right-of-way. Where churches or other places of worship
and special exceptions as defined by this ordinance apply in the above-referenced commercial and
industrial zones, no advertising structure will be allowed within 1000 feet as measured along the
roadway. In the areas in which the City grants variances, no variance for an advertising sign shall be
granted that is any less stringent than what is required by state law, SC Department of Transportation
regulations or the Outdoor Advertising Act.”
Section 812.6 Exemptions
Established a qualification for assisted housing projects for the elderly in which 100% of all units must
have at least one tenant who is 62 years old or older and qualify under low-to-moderate income criteria.
Text amendments approved by City Council on June 6, 2006.
Section 301 List of Definitions
Established definitions for check cashing operations, commercial kennels, noncommercial kennels,
payday loan businesses, and title loan businesses. Amended the definition for financial institutions to
exclude payday loan businesses. Repealed the definition for kennel. Text amendments approved by City
Council on June 6, 2006.
Section 705, C-2 (general commercial)
Established payday loan businesses as a permitted special exception under Section 705.3.13. Removed
kennels as a permitted special exception and established commercial kennels and noncommercial
kennels as a permitted special exception under Section 705.3.8. Text amendments approved by City
Council on June 6, 2006.
Section 707, LM (light manufacturing)
Removed kennels as a permitted principal use and structure and established commercial kennels and
noncommercial kennels as a permitted principal use and structure under Section 707.1.17. Text
amendments approved by City Council on June 6, 2006.
Section 708, HM (heavy manufacturing)
Removed kennels as a permitted principal use and structure and established commercial kennels and
noncommercial kennels as a permitted principal use and structure under Section 708.1.18. Text
amendments approved by City Council on June 6, 2006.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
Section 615, Regulation of highlighting colors on the exterior of commercial buildings
Established ordinance regulating the use of highlighting colors on the exterior of commercial buildings.
Text amendment adopted by City Council on May 3, 2005 (numbering duplicates current ordinance).
Section 615, Regulation of highlighting colors on the exterior of commercial buildings
Ordinance renumber to Section 617. Text amendments approved by City Council on June 6, 2006.
Section 809, Regulation of the display of merchandise outdoors
Established ordinance regulating the display of merchandise outdoors. Text amendment adopted by City
Council on January 3, 2006 (numbering duplicates current ordinance).
Section 809, Regulation of the display of merchandise outdoors
Ordinance renumber to Section 813. Text amendments approved by City Council on June 6, 2006.
Section 705.1.26, Permitted Principal Uses and Structures, Storage for Permitted Uses
Established a 7,500 square feet gross floor area limit on structures for storage of wares for permitted
uses. Text amendment approved by City Council on August 1, 2006.
Section 710, Gateway Overlay District
Established the Gateway Overlay District text. Text amendment approved by City Council on August 1,
2006.
Section 903.1 (6), General Provisions
Amended provision for signs on business vehicles to exclude separate sign structures attached to a
vehicle. Text amendment approved by City Council on December 5, 2006.
Section 905.5, Prohibited Signs, Neon Signs
Ordinance renumber to section 904.7 (Design Standards) and amended to allow certain neon signs in
accordance to established conditions. Text amendment approved by City Council on December 5, 2006.
Section 905.5, Prohibited Signs, Hiring Signs
Established ordinance regulation the display of hiring signs. Text amendment approved by City Council
on December 5, 2006.
Section 905.6, Prohibited Signs, Gas Filled Figures
Established ordinance regulating the display of gas filled figures. Text amendment approved by City
Council on December 5, 2006.
Section 905.7, Prohibited Signs, Civic Club, Religious, and Eleemosynary Signs
Established ordinance regulating the display of civic club, religious, and eleemosynary signs. Text
amendment approved by City Council on December 5, 2006.
Section 907.2(4) Signs Permitted in Commercial and Manufacturing Districts, Business Signs,
Number of Signs
Amended ordinance to require a common signage plane when more than one building is located on a
singe lot. Amendment also established provision for an additional freestanding sign on certain lots in
accordance with established conditions. Text amendment approved by City Council on December 5,
2006.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
Section 907.2(7) Signs Permitted in Commercial and Manufacturing Districts, Business Signs,
Exceptions for Dimensional Requirements for On-Site Business Signs Located Near an Interstate
Interchange
Established ordinance providing additional display surface area and increase in height for certain
freestanding signs within 750 feet of an interstate interchange. Text amendment approved by City
Council on December 5, 2006.
Section 910.3(1) Nonconforming Signs, Temporary Nonconforming Use, Permanent Signs
Amended ordinance to provide an exception in accordance with established conditions for certain onsite
business signs existing prior to June 19, 2000. Text amendment approved by City Council on
December 5, 2006.
Section 908.2 Advertising Signs
Remuneration of a portion of the section pertaining to exceptions for dimensional requirements of
advertising signs visible from and marketed to Interstate
Highway 26 vehicular traffic from 908.2 to 908.2.1. Amended ordinance to include exception for
dimensional requirements for advertising signs located on parcels in certain areas zoned Light
Manufacturing (LM), Heavy Manufacturing (HM), and General Commercial (C-2) that have street
frontage on Jarvis Klapman Boulevard, Augusta Road, Sunset Boulevard, Charleston Highway, and
Airport Boulevard. Text amendment approved by City Council on April 1, 2008.
Section 814 Regulation of Shipping Containers, Cargo Containers, Tractor-Trailers, and Portable
Storage Containers
Established ordinance regulating the use of shipping containers, cargo containers, tractor-trailers, and
portable storage containers. Text amendment approved by City Council on April 21, 2008.
Section 902 Definitions, Animation
Amended to restrict copy from changing more than once every six (6) seconds from more than once
every five (5) seconds. Text amendment approved by City Council on November 10, 2008.
Scriveners Error: Section 612.2 Off-street loading requirements
The 2004 zoning ordinance revision omitted “Wholesale and industrial uses” for Section 612.2 and
duplicated “Retail and service businesses” for Section 612.1 and 612.2. Corrected the error on February
23, 2009 to reflect off-street loading requirements for “Wholesale and industrial uses” in Section 612.2.
Section 611 Off-street automobile parking and storage
Amended section 611.4.1 to add requirements for improvement of off-street parking areas. Amended
sections 611.5 and section 611.7 to include additional requirements for parking travel or camping
vehicles and boats. Text amendment approved by City Council on November 1, 2011
Scriveners Error: Section 709.1.2 PUD-C Planned Unit Development--Commercial
The 2004 zoning ordinance revision duplicated the definition for PUD-R, stating “The PUD-C district is
intended to accommodate primarily residential uses with nonresidential uses integrated into the design
of such districts as secondary uses.” Corrected the error on January 11, 2013 to state, “The PUD-C
district is intended to accommodate primarily nonresidential uses with residential uses integrated into
the design of such districts as secondary uses.” The correction reflects the correct definition as
promulgated in the zoning ordinance of 1990 and reflects the intent of the code.
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
Section 601 Continuance of nonconforming uses, structures or characteristics of use
Amended section 601.3 to clarify that a nonconforming structure cannot be willfully demolished and
rebuilt as a nonconforming structure and a nonconforming use cannot be re-established in any structure
that is demolished and rebuilt. Amended section 601.5 to establish a provision that exempts certain
existing accessory apartments from the abandonment provision of Section 601.5. Amended section
601.6 to clarify that a nonconforming use cannot be re-established in a structure that has sustained
damage exceeding 50% of the replacement cost of the structure. Text amendments approved by City
Council on August 6, 2013.
Section 815 Regulation of Vehicle Sales, Vehicle Services, Tire Sales, and Tire Services.
Adopted conditions for the operation of vehicle sales, vehicle service, tire sales, and tire service
businesses. Text amendments approved by City Council on December 2, 2014.
Section 703.8 Maximum Height of Structures
Amended section 703.8 to permit maximum structure height of 50 feet under certain conditions in R3
and R4 districts. Text amendments approved by City Council on December 2, 2014.
Section 816 Regulation of Food Trucks
Adopted conditions for the operation of food trucks. Text amendments approved by City Council on
December 1, 2015
Section 611.3.16 Parking
Amended section 611.3 to insert “Minimum per food truck 2 spaces”. Text amendment approved by
City Council on December 1, 2015.
Sections 704.1.30, 705.1.34, 707.1.27 and 708.1.27
Amended the Permitted Use Sections for the C-1, C-2, LM and HM Districts to include “Food Truck
Courts as a Condition Per Section 817”. Text amendment approved by City Council on December 1,
2015.
Sections 704.3.5, 705.3.14, 707.3.6, and 708.3.6
Amended the Special Exception Sections of the C-1, C2, LM and HM Districts to include “Food Truck
Courts within 400 feet of an R-2, R-3 or R-4 subject to the provision of Section 817. Text amendment
approved by City Council on December 1, 2015.
Section 710.5 Permitted Uses
Amended Section 710.5 to insert “Food Truck Court as a Special Exception per Section 817.” Text
amendment approved by City Council on December 1, 2015.
Section 817 Food Truck Courts
Adopted conditions for the operation of Food Truck Courts. Text amendments approved by Council on
December 1, 2015.
Section 709.9 Minimum Off-street Parking and Loading
Amended ordinance to allow for the reduction in parking and a shared parking plan for PUD’s. Text
amendment adopted by City Council on December 1, 2015
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
Section 709.10 Signs
Amended the ordinance to allow for a common signage plan to be submitted with the PUD descriptive
statement. Text amendment was approved by City Council on December 1, 2015.
Scriveners Error: Section 704.3.6
Corrected the error that incorrectly numbered the food truck court as 704.3.5.
Scriveners Error: Section 707.3.6
Corrected the error that incorrectly numbered the food truck court as 707.3.6.
Section 701.2, 702.2, 703.2, 704.2, 705.2, 706.2, 707.2, and 708.2 Permitted Accessory Uses and
Structures
Amended ordinance to allow for beekeeping as a permitted accessory use in all zoning districts. Text
amendment adopted by City Council on April 5, 2016.
Section 301 Definitions
Amended ordinance to add definitions for Brewpub, Manufacturing Artisan, Microbrewery and Microdistillery.
Text amendment adopted by City Council on April 5, 2016.
Section 611.2.6 Parking
Amended ordinance to add Artisan Manufacturing. Text amendment adopted by City Council on April
5, 2016.
Section 704.1, 705.1 and 706.1 Permitted Principal Uses and Structures
Amended ordinance to add Artisan Manufacturing as a Conditional Use. Text amendment adopted by
City Council on April 5, 2016.
Scriveners Error Section 704.1.31
Corrected the error that incorrectly numbered Artisan Manufacturing as 701.1.31
Section 710.5(1) Permitted Uses
Amended ordinance to add Artisan Manufacturing as a Special Exception. Text amendment adopted by
City Council on April 5, 2016.
Section 818 Small Wireless Facilities
Established ordinance regulation the small wireless facilities. Text amendment approved by City
Council on August 20, 2018.
Sections 815.1.16, 704.1.32, 705.1.36, 707.1.29 and 708.1.28
Amended ordinance to add certain provisions relating to vehicle sales approved by City Council on
November 19, 2018
Article 3, Sections 704.4.8, 705.4.3, 706.3.7, 707.4.5, 708.4.6, 710.4, 710.5(2)(d) and 710.5(2)(e) –
deleted with subsequent headings to remove gap
Amended ordinance to address body art services approved by City Council on November 19, 2018
Sections 709, 709.2, 709.3
Amended ordinance to permit PUD’s less than 4 acres approved by City Council on April 22, 2019
NOT OFFICIAL COPY
Section 711
Amended ordinance to add the Redevelopment Floating Zone District approved by City Council on
April 22, 2019
Sections 301, 704.1.33, 705.1.37, 707.1.30, 708.1.29, 710.5
Amended ordinance to regulate beer gardens approved by City Council on July 15, 2019
Section 301, 704.1.34, 705.1.37, 707.1.30, 708.1.30, 710.5
Amended ordinance to regulate taprooms approved by City Council on July 15, 2019
Section 1100
Amended ordinance to add eligibility criteria for ZBA membership approved by City Council on
December 3, 2019.