
Winnsboro, SC Code of Ordinances


TOWN OF WINNSBORO, SOUTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2019 S-5 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 101618C, passed 11-6-2018



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



TOWN OFFICIALS



 



Mayor
 
Roger Gaddy, MD


Mayor Pro Tem
 
Clyde Sanders, District #3


Council Members
 
Danny Miller, District #1


 
 
Janice Bartell-Prather, District #2


 
 
John McMeekin, District #4


Town Manager
 
Don L. Wood


Finance Director
 
Kathy Belton


Clerk
 
Lorraine Abell


Town Attorney
 
Creighton Coleman




 



CHARTER



Section



   New Charter, March 3, 1903



Editor’s note:



   A prior Charter went into effect December 19, 1886 and continued in
force until the Charter of March 7, 1903 was adopted. That Charter placed
Winnsboro under the general law for the government of municipalities. A
petition to accomplish this was submitted to the qualified electors of the
town on February 5, 1902.



NEW CHARTER, MARCH 3, 1903



The State of South Carolina)



     Executive Department)



   By Secretary of State



   Whereas, the Town of Winnsboro in the State of South Carolina,
heretofore incorporated, is desirous of surrendering its Charter and
accepting incorporation under the provisions of Article 2, Chapter 49 of
Volume I of the Code of Laws of 1902. And whereas, the Town Council of the
Town has submitted the question to vote of the qualified electors and has
certified the result, accompanied by the sworn returns of the managers of the
said election, by which it appears that the vote was in favor of surrendering
the Charter and accepting incorporation under that Article.



   Now, I, J.T. Gantt, Secretary of State, by virtue of the authority in
me vested by Article 2, Chapter 49 of Volume I of the Code of Laws of 1902,
do hereby certify that the Town of Winnsboro is duly incorporated with
privileges, powers and immunities, and subject to the limitations prescribed
by that Article 2, Chapter 40 of Volume I.



   Given under my Hand and Seal of the State of South Carolina this the
third day of March, 1903, and 127th year of the Independence of the United
States of America.




J.T. Gantt,





Secretary of State




   Seal of the State of South Carolina



   Recorded in the office of R.M.C., for Fairfield County this 7th day of
March, 1903, in Book of Charters, Page 76.



   JNO. W. LYLES, R.M.C.



(1995 Code, Supplementary Facts, New Charter)



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



      11.   TOWN STANDARDS



CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Designation and citation



   10.02   Continuation of existing ordinances



   10.03   Definitions



   10.04   Rules of construction



   10.05   Catchlines of sections



   10.06   Effect of repeal of ordinances



   10.07   Severability of parts of code



   10.08   Amendments



   10.09   Altering code



   10.10   Liability for violations



   10.11   Prosecution for different penalties



 



   10.99   General penalty; continuing violations



§ 10.01  DESIGNATION AND CITATION.



   The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated “The Code of Ordinances of the Town of
Winnsboro, South Carolina” or the “town code” and may be so cited.



(1995 Code, § 1-3041)



§ 10.02  CONTINUATION OF EXISTING ORDINANCES.



   The provisions appearing in this code, as far as they are the same as
those ordinances existing at the time of the adoption hereof, shall be
considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments.



§ 10.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AND or OR.  The word AND may be read as OR, and OR as AND where the
sense requires it.



   BOND.  When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be
sufficient.



   CLERK.  Whenever the word is used, the term shall be construed to mean
Clerk to Council.



   CORPORATE LIMITS, CORPORATION LIMITS or TOWN LIMITS.  The legal
boundary of the Town of Winnsboro.



   COUNCIL.  The Mayor and Council of this town in council assembled.



   COUNTY.  The County of Fairfield in the State of South Carolina.



   JOINT AUTHORITY.  All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving the authority to a majority
of the persons or officers.



   KEEPER and PROPRIETOR.  Include persons, firms, associations,
corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through
a servant, agent or employee.



   MANAGER. The Town Manager of this town.



   MAYOR.  The Mayor of this town.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.



   MUNICIPALITY.  The Town of Winnsboro.



   NAME OF OFFICER.  Whenever the name of an officer is given, it shall
be construed as though the words “of the Town of Winnsboro” were added.



   OATH. The word OATH shall be construed to include an affirmation in all
cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an OATH, and in
those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM
and AFFIRMED.



   OFFICERS, AGENTS, THINGS AND PLACES OF THE TOWN.  Unless a contrary
intention appears, the officer, agents, employees and other persons, things
and places situated in the town or employed by or appertaining to the town or
subject to the jurisdiction thereof.



   OWNER.  Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant
by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of the building or land.



   PERSON.  Extends and applies to associations, clubs, societies, firms,
partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.



   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes every species of property except real
property as herein described.



   PRECEDING, FOLLOWING.  Next before and next after, respectively.



   PREMISES.  Place or places.



   PROPERTY.  Includes real and personal property.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent
thereto.



   REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.



   RESIDENCE.  The place adopted by a person as his or her place of
habitation, and to which, whenever he or she is absent, he or she has the
intention of returning.  When a person eats at one place and sleeps at
another, the place where the person sleeps shall be deemed his or her
RESIDENCE.



   ROADWAY.  The portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular traffic.



   SEAL.  The town or corporate seal.



   SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.



   SIGNATURES or SUBSCRIPTIONS.  Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



   STATE.  The State of South Carolina.



   STREET.  Avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys, lanes,
viaducts, bridges and approaches thereto and all other public thoroughfares
in the town, and shall mean the entire width thereof between opposed abutting
property lines.  It shall be construed to include a sidewalk or foot path,
unless the contrary is expressed or unless the construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Town Council.



   TENANT, OCCUPANT.  Applied to a building or land, shall include any
person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of
the building or land, either alone or with others.



   TOWN, CITY, CORPORATION.  Whenever the words are used, they shall be
construed as if the words “of Winnsboro, South Carolina” followed them.



   WEEK.  Shall be construed to mean seven days.



   WRITTEN, IN WRITING. Include any representation of words, letters or
figures, whether by printing or otherwise.



   YEAR. A calendar year.



(1995 Code, § 1-3042)



§ 10.04  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   As used in this code and all ordinances, in all cases in which the
spirit and intent may require it, the following shall apply.



   (A)   Computation of time.  The time within which an act is to be
done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, and
if the last day be a Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded.



   (B)   Delegation of authority.  Whenever a provision appears
requiring the head of a department to do some act or make certain
inspections, it is to be construed to authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the
provision or section designate otherwise.



   (C)   Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall
extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations
as well as males.



   (D)   Interpretation.  In the interpretation and application of any
provision of this code, it is held to be the minimum requirements adopted for
the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general
welfare. Where any provision of this code imposes greater restrictions upon
the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this code, the
provision imposing the greater restriction of regulation shall be deemed to
be controlling.



   (E)   Nontechnical and technical words.  Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but
technical words and phrases and others as may have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to
that meaning.



   (F)   Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend
and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and
thing, and the plural shall include the singular number.



   (G)   Time.  Words used in the past or present tense include the
future as well as the past and present.



(1995 Code, § 1-3042)



§ 10.05  CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS.



   The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in boldface
type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section
and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of the sections, nor as any
part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of the sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
re-enacted.



(1995 Code, § 1-3043)



§ 10.06  EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in
force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.



   (B)   The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or
penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or
proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or
cause of action arising under the ordinance.



(1995 Code, § 1-3044)



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE.



   The sections, divisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of
this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph,
division or section of this code shall be declared unconstitutional by the
valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, the
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses,
sentences, paragraphs, divisions and sections of this code.



(1995 Code, § 1-3045)



§ 10.08  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code of ordinances,
which amend, repeal or in any way affect this code of ordinances, may be
numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this code and printed for
inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and divisions
or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, the repealed portions may be
excluded from the code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby and
the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted, in the case of
repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of the subsequent ordinances until the
time that this code of ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or
omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances.



   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this code may be made
by amending the provisions by specific reference to the section: “That
Section               of the Code of Ordinances, Town of Winnsboro,
South Carolina, is hereby amended to read as follows: [. . .].” The new
provisions shall then be set out in full as enacted.



   (C)   In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the code
is to be added, the following language may be used: “That the Code of
Ordinances, Town of Winnsboro, South Carolina, is hereby amended by adding a
section to be numbered                 , which section reads as
follows: [. . .].” The new section shall then be set out in full as enacted.



   (D)   In lieu of the foregoing paragraph, when the governing
authority desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature
embracing a subject not previously existing in the code, but which the
governing authority desires to incorporate into the code, a provision in
substantially the following language may be made a part of the ordinance:
“It is the intention of the Council, and it is hereby ordained, that the
provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made part of the Code of
Ordinances of the Town of Winnsboro, South Carolina, and the sections of this
ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish that intention.”



   (E)   All sections, subchapters, chapters or provisions desired to
be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, subchapter or chapter
number, as the case may be.



(1995 Code, § 1-3046)



§ 10.09  ALTERING CODE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or
deletions any part or portion of this code, or to insert or tamper with the
code in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the town to be
misrepresented thereby. Any person, firm or corporation violating this
section shall be punished as provided in § 10.99.



(1995 Code, § 1-3047)



§ 10.10  LIABILITY FOR VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Any violation of this code by any officer, agent or other
person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated
association or organization while acting within the scope of his or her
office or employment, shall, in every case, also be deemed to be a violation
by the corporation, association or organization.



   (B)   Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by
any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be
subject and liable to punishment as well as the corporation or unincorporated
association or organization for the violation by it of any provision of this
code, where the violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act,
omission or order of any person.



§ 10.11  PROSECUTION FOR DIFFERENT PENALTIES.



   In all cases where the same offense may be created by different clauses
or sections of the ordinances of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against
the same person for the same offense.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY; CONTINUING VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance or resolution any
act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or
whenever in the code, ordinance or resolution the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any provision of this
code or any provision of this code or any ordinance or resolution shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $300 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30
days. Each day any violation of any provision of this code or of the
ordinance or resolution shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   In addition to the penalty hereinabove provided, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
code or any ordinance or resolution shall be deemed a public nuisance and may
be abated as provided by law, and each day that the condition continues shall
be regarded as a new and separate offense.



(1995 Code, § 1-3048)



CHAPTER 11:  TOWN STANDARDS



Section



   11.01   Corporate limits established



   11.02   History of town/incorporation



   11.03   Historical sketch



   11.04   Districts



Cross-reference:



   Town seal generally, see § 31.23



§ 11.01  CORPORATE LIMITS ESTABLISHED.



   The map of the town showing the territorial limits thereof is hereby
designated as the official map of the town, and the corporate limits as known
thereon are declared to be the true and correct corporate limits of the town,
including all annexations made through and including the date of adoption of
this code.







 



(1995 Code, § 1-3049)



§ 11.02  HISTORY OF TOWN/INCORPORATION.



   The Town of Winnsboro was initially incorporated on December 30, 1832.
The Charter of March 3, 1903 placed it under the general law for the
government of municipalities. On January 20, 1976, the town adopted the
Council-Manager form of government pursuant to the Home Rule Statute, Act.
No. 283 of 1975, being S.C. Code §§ 5-13-10 through 5-13-100. The
Certificate of Incorporation was issued by the Secretary of State on January
23, 1976.



(1995 Code, Preface)



§ 11.03  HISTORICAL SKETCH.



   The following is taken from the preface to the Ordinances printed in
1886.



   We find the first mention of Winnsboro in the Acts of General Assembly,
is on 8th March, 1785, in IV Stats., 652, in an “An Act for establishing
Fairs and Markets in the Town of Winnsborough.”



   This Act recites:



   “Whereas, John Winn, Richard Winn and John Vanderhorst, did, by their
humble petition to the honorable, the Senate and House of Representatives of
this State, set forth that, at the special instance and request of a number
of the inhabitants of the district situate between Board and Catawba rivers,
they had laid out a town by the name of Winnsborough in the said district, on
land their property, and had forever given and granted to the public of this
State the streets in the said town, and also several lots of land for a
church and market place, agreeable to a plan to the said petition annexed;
and in order to encourage the trade and commerce of that country, the said
John Winn, Richard Winn and John Vanderhorst, prayed that a market place
might be by law established in the said town, and public fairs kept and held
there at least twice every year, for exposing to sales horses, cattle, grain,
hemp, flax, tobacco, indigo and all sorts of produce and merchandise, and
that such market and fairs be invested with such liberties and privileges as
to the same commonly belong or appertain.”



   This Act then provides for:



      1.    Public markets to be kept in the town;



      2.    Two fairs to be kept annually, in May and October;



      3.    Inhabitants to appoint directors of the fairs and a
clerk of the market;



      4.    Directors to hold court of piepowder during the fairs;
and



      5.    No person can be arrested at these fairs, except for
treason.



   On March 27, 1787 (V Stats., 11), an Act was passed “for enlarging
the Town of Winnsborough.” The boundaries of the town by this plan were a
street not named three squares north of College Street, Walnut Street on
East, Moultrie Street on south, and Garden Street on west.



   By authority of an Act passed December 19, 1916 (VIII Stats., 280), the
boundaries of the town were reduced on October 30, 1825, to Fairfield Street
as the northern boundary, and the northeast portion of the town lying north
of College Street and east of Congress Street was excluded as being private
property. On December 20, 1832, the town as such was duly incorporated as
“Winnsborough.” (VI Stats., 458.)



   But Winnsboro was a village of note before the Revolution.



   In Tarleton’s Campaigns (London Ed., 1787,) we find the town
frequently mentioned as Wynnesborough. Also in a map by William Faden,
“Geographer to the King,” compiled in 1787 from maps of the British
Engineer officers, we find the same name given. Wynnes is the prefix of six
other towns in the United States, and all are pronounced Winns.



   The general opinion is that the place was named after some member of
the Winn family, of which Richard, John and Minor Winn were well known at the
time of the Revolution.



   Tarleton says that Lord Cornwallis after learning of the defeat of
Ferguson at King’s Mountain selected Wynnesborough as a place for his
encampment in October, 1780, it presenting the most advantages, especially
for abundant supplies from the surrounding country. He remained here until
January, 1781.



   When here Lord Cornwallis’ marquee was near the oak in front of Mount
Zion College. After inquiry, General Sherman in February, 1865, placed his
marquee upon the same spot.



   During the Revolution a large military hospital was situated upon the
premises now occupied by Mr. George H. McMaster and was used by both armies
in turn. The British dead were buried in his front yard, and the Americans in
rear extending to where the tombs of Captain James Mitchell and of Lt.
Col........and the Tumulus over his horse now are.



   Mills in his Statistics says that in 1826 Winnsborough is one of the
most pleasant and flourishing villages in the State; and that there are few
if any healthier places in the State.



   The present name of Winnsboro appears for the first time in an Act
(XIII Stats., 512), amending the Charter, December 19, 1866. This charter is
now in force, but expires on December 19 of this year, 1886.



   This town is traversed by the C.C. & A.R.R., two telegraph lines, has
Bank, Court House, Jail, Town Hall and Market. It also has a well organized
Fire Department (the best in the state in proportion to the population) and
the streets are well lighted. It has eight churches in its limits. Also the
Mount Zion Collegiate Institute, chartered in 1785 as a college with power to
confer degrees, under the patronage of the Mount Zion Society, incorporated
in 1777.



   The official Post name of the place is Winnsborough. There is a town in
Louisiana and another in Texas of the same name and both are named after
this, our town.



   The present population is about 1,900, and there is a large population
in the suburbs.



(1995 Code, Historical Sketch)



§ 11.04  DISTRICTS.



   (A)   In compliance with the United States Constitution, the
Constitution of this state, S.C. Code § 4-9-90, as amended, and the United
States Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 1973 et
seq., the Town Council has determined to realign the electoral districts for
the election of members of Council in accordance with the Federal Decennial
Census of 2010.



   (B)   There presently exist four single-member districts for the
election of Town Council members.



   (C)   This section is for the purpose of defining the boundaries of
these four single-member election districts.



   (D)   The redefining of the district boundaries is based upon the
2010 Census for redistricting purposes in order that the population of the
districts shall comply with the requirements set forth in the Voting Rights
Act of 1965, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 1973 et seq.



   (E)   The pertinent demographic data in reference to the proposed
districts is attached to Ordinance 071712 as Exhibit A and is incorporated
herein by reference as if fully set forth. The four single-member election
districts for the election of Town Council members are hereby redistricted to
be depicted on the map of the town attached to Ordinance 071712 as Exhibit B
and incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth.



   (F)   The Town Manager is authorized and directed to take
administrative action to promulgate and execute any procedures and policies
as may be necessary or desirable to carry into effect and implement the
redistricted single-member election districts provided for in this section,
including the elections required thereby, and in accord with any directions,
suggestions or objections of the Civil Rights Division, U.S. Department of
Justice, after submittal to it of this section.



   (G)   This section shall become effective upon adoption by the
Council of this town.



(Ord. 071712, passed 7-17-2012)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   GOVERNMENT



      31.   TOWN OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZATIONS



      32.   PUBLIC SAFETY



      33.   FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION



      34.   PURCHASING



      35.   MUNICIPAL COURT



      36.   TOWN POLICIES; PERSONNEL



CHAPTER 30:  GOVERNMENT



Section



Form of Government



   30.001   Form of government adopted



Governing Authority



   30.015   Council



   30.016   Mayor pro tem



   30.017   Compensation



   30.018   Oath of Mayor and Council members



Meetings of Council



   30.030   Date and time



   30.031   Conference sessions



   30.032   Quorum and rules of order



   30.033   Voting requirements



   30.034   Minutes of meetings



   30.035   Appearance of citizens



   30.036   Agenda



   30.037   Special committees




Ordinances




   30.050   Ordinances required



   30.051   Form of ordinances



   30.052   Introduction of ordinances



   30.053   Introduction of resolutions



   30.054   Enactment of ordinances



   30.055   Adoption of resolutions



   30.056   Notice of adoption




Elections




   30.070   Terms of office



   30.071   Election of Mayor and Council members



   30.072   Transfer of authority for conducting municipal elections to
county



   30.073   Nonpartisan elections



   30.074   Time of elections; notice



   30.075   Time of taking office; contested election



FORM OF GOVERNMENT



§ 30.001  FORM OF GOVERNMENT ADOPTED.



   It is ordained by the governing body of the town in council duly
assembled this January 6, 1976, that the Council-Manager form of municipal
government, with a Mayor and four Council members with nonpartisan election
by petition for four-year terms, as provided in S.C. Code §§ 5-15-10 et
seq., is hereby adopted for the town to be effective on May 1, 1976 or as
soon thereafter as prescribed by state law.



(1995 Code, § 1-1001)  (Ord. passed 1-20-1976)



GOVERNING AUTHORITY



§ 30.015  COUNCIL.



   All legislative and administrative powers of the town and the
determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the Town Council,
with each member, including the Mayor, having one vote.



(1995 Code, § 1-2001)



§ 30.016  MAYOR PRO TEM.



   (A)   The Council shall, at the first meeting of the newly
constituted Council after any general election for Town Council, elect one of
its members as Mayor Pro Tempore for a term of two years.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Mayor Pro Tempore to act as Mayor
during the absence or disability of the Mayor or in case of a vacancy in the
Office of Mayor.



(1995 Code, § 1-2002)



§ 30.017  COMPENSATION.



   (A)   The annual salary of the Mayor and Council members shall be as
determined by the Council.



   (B)   No ordinance changing these salaries shall become effective
until the date of commencement of the terms of the Mayor and Council members
elected at the next general election following any change. At that time the
salary becomes effective for all Council members.



   (C)   The Mayor and Council members may also receive payment for
actual expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties.



(1995 Code, § 1-2003)



§ 30.018  OATH OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   The Mayor and Council Members, before entering upon the duties of their
respective offices, shall take the following oath:



      “I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I am duly qualified,
according to the Constitution of the state, to exercise the duties of the
office to which I have been elected and that I will, to the best of my
ability, discharge the duties thereof, and preserve, protect and defend the
Constitution of this state and of the United States.



      “As Mayor (or Council Member) of the Town of Winnsboro, I will
equally, fairly, and impartially, to the best of my ability, and skill,
exercise the trust reposed in me, and will use my best endeavor to preserve
the peace and carry into effect according to law the purposes for which I
have been elected. So help me God.”



(1995 Code, § 1-2004)



Constitutional reference:



   Oath prescribed for officials, see Art. VI, Sec. 5



Statutory reference:



   Statutory oath, see S.C. Code § 5-15-150



   Structure, organization, duties, powers and functions of the Council,
see S.C. Code § 5-9-40



MEETINGS OF COUNCIL



§ 30.030  DATE AND TIME.



   (A)   Regular meetings of Council shall be held at 6:15 p.m. on the
first and third Tuesdays in each month unless changed by a majority of vote
of members present at any regular or special meeting.



   (B)   Special meetings of Council may be held on the call of the
Mayor or of a majority of the members. Notice of a special meeting shall be
given immediately to all available members and the news media by the Manager.



   (C)   All regular and special meetings of Council shall be open to
the public.



(1995 Code, § 1-3001)



§ 30.031  CONFERENCE SESSIONS.



   (A)   The Council may have conference meetings as permitted by the
State Freedom of Information Act and this code at the times and in the places
as may be deemed necessary and in the public interest by the Mayor or any
member of Council.



   (B)   No formal vote shall be taken upon any matter under discussion
at this conference, but an informal polling of Council may be made if desired
by any member of Council.



   (C)   The Manager may, if time permits, give notice to the news
media that a conference meeting will be held pursuant to law without stating
the specific matters to be discussed. When advance notice is not given, the
Manager may give notice of the meeting after it has been held.



   (D)   No vote of Council shall be necessary to call a conference
meeting.



(1995 Code, § 1-3002)



Statutory reference:



   Freedom of Information Act, see S.C. Code §§ 30-4-10 et seq.



Editor’s note:



   The previous codification contained the following Editorial Note: 
Conference sessions and executive sessions held in accordance with the
provisions of the Freedom of Information Act are authorized.



Op. Atty. Gen., unnumbered, July 29, 1976.



§ 30.032  QUORUM AND RULES OF ORDER.



   Three Council members serving shall constitute a quorum for the conduct
of business at any meeting. The Mayor is considered as a Council member for
this purpose. The Mayor or Mayor Pro Tempore shall preside, except that in
the absence of both, the members present shall elect a presiding member.
Except as otherwise required by state law or ordinance, all proceedings of
the Mayor and Council shall be governed by its rules and in accordance with
the agenda.



(1995 Code, § 1-3003)



§ 30.033  VOTING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All actions of Council shall be by majority vote of members
present at a public meeting.



   (B)   Every member of Council present shall vote on every question
except when required to refrain from voting by state law.



   (C)   The vote on every question shall be by voice vote unless a
roll call vote is requested by any member and the vote by name shall be
recorded in the Council minutes by the Clerk.



   (D)   No member of Council may leave the Council chamber while in
public session without permission of the presiding officer.



   (E)   Any member of the Council may, if he or she desires, have his
or her reasons for voting for or against any measure recorded in the minutes.



   (F)   No member of Council shall vote on any question of a private
nature in which he or she is personally or pecuniarily interested.



(1995 Code, § 1-3004)



§ 30.034  MINUTES OF MEETINGS.



   The Clerk shall keep the minutes of all public meetings of Council
which shall be a matter of permanent public record. At each Council meeting,
the minutes of the previous meeting shall be presented for approval. Minutes
shall not be considered the official record of a meeting until approved by
Council. Any member of Council desiring to express a position on a matter
voted upon by Council in the minutes may do so by presenting the position in
writing to Mayor and Council not later than the next regular meeting.



(1995 Code, § 1-3005)



§ 30.035  APPEARANCE OF CITIZENS.



   (A)   Public comments.  During a period of 30 minutes the Mayor or
presiding officer may recognize any citizen of the municipality or others who
have standing in the municipality at any regular meeting without being on the
agenda concerning any municipal matter, with the exception of personnel
matters.



   (B)   Public hearing. Any citizen of the municipality or others who
have standing regarding the topic of the public hearing shall be entitled to
an appearance before Council at a “called public hearing.”



   (C)   Presenters/petitioners.  Any citizen of the municipality or
others who have standing in the municipality shall be entitled to an
appearance before Council at any regular meeting concerning any municipal
matter with the exception of personnel matters. Persons desiring to speak
must notify the Town Manager prior to 12:00 noon on the Friday preceding the
Council meeting to be placed on the agenda. Presenters/petitioners must
provide their name, address and matter to be discussed.



   (D)   Sign-up for public comments and/or public hearing.  At least
ten minutes prior to the commencement of a Town Council meeting, a potential
speaker, who is not already a presenter/petitioner appearing on the agenda,
wishing to appear before Council must place his or her name, address and
matter to be discussed on the public comments or public hearing list. The
list shall be maintained by the Clerk to Council. Sign-ups for public
comments and public hearings will be on a first-come, first-served basis. No
names will be added to either list once the lists are given to the Mayor or
presiding officer.



   (E)   Appearing before Council.  When recognized by the Mayor or
presiding officer, the speaker shall approach the podium and give his or her
name and address in an audible tone of voice for the records, state the
subject he or she wishes to address, and state whom he or she is representing
(group, organization and the like), if applicable.



   (F)   Time limit.  Any speaker appearing before Council for public
comments or at a public hearing shall limit his or her remarks to three
minutes. The Clerk to Council will be the timekeeper and will notify the
Mayor or presiding officer when a speaker’s time has expired. All remarks
made by the speaker shall be addressed to Council as a whole and not to any
individual member of Council. No profanity or personal attacks will be
permitted; the speaker will forfeit time as a result of either.



   (G)   Other.  No person other than members of Council and the
speaker shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or
through a member of Council, without the permission of the Mayor or presiding
officer. Otherwise, such behavior by those in attendance may cause
cancellation of public comments or public hearing. The purpose of addressing
Council is to allow Council members to hear the opinions of citizens and is
not intended to afford the opportunity to engage in a debate or dialogue;
therefore, no reply or rebuttal by Council members is required.



(1995 Code, § 1-3006)  (Ord. 071806, passed 7-18-2006)



§ 30.036  AGENDA.



   (A)   Matters to be considered by Council at regular meeting shall
be placed on a written agenda prepared by the Manager. Any additional items
desired for inclusion on the agenda shall be presented to the Manager not
later than 12:00 noon on the Friday preceding the Council meeting.



   (B)   The order of the agenda shall be as follows:



      (1)   Call to order;



      (2)   Reading and approval of the minutes of the previous
meeting;



      (3)   Special reports/presentations;



      (4)   Adoption of ordinances and resolutions;



      (5)   Manager’s report;



      (6)   Old business;



      (7)   New business; and



      (8)   Adjournment.



(1995 Code, § 1-3007) 



§ 30.037  SPECIAL COMMITTEES.



   Council may appoint a special committee to assist in or hold a public
hearing for Council at any time upon any matter pending before it. Minutes or
reports of hearings held by special committees shall be filed with the
Manager as public records.



(1995 Code, § 1-3008)



ORDINANCES



§ 30.050  ORDINANCES REQUIRED.



   (A)   In addition to other acts required by law to be done by
ordinance, those acts of the Town Municipal Council shall be by ordinances
which:



      (1)   Adopt or amend the administrative code of ordinances, or
establish, alter or abolish any town department, office or agency;



      (2)   Provide for a fine or other penalty or establish a rule
or regulation in which a fine or other penalty is imposed for violations;



      (3)   Adopt budgets or levy taxes, except as otherwise
provided with respect to the property tax levied by adoption of a budget,
pursuant to public notice;



      (4)   Grant, renew or extend franchises;



      (5)   Authorize the borrowing of money;



      (6)   Sell or lease or contract to sell or lease any lands of
the municipality; and



      (7)   Amend or repeal any ordinance described in divisions
(A)(1) through (6) above.



   (B)   In matters other than those referred to in this section,
Council may act either by ordinance or resolution.



(1995 Code, § 1-3021)  (Ord. 011607H, passed 1-16-2007)



§ 30.051  FORM OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in
the form required for final adoption which shall include:



      (1)   A title briefly describing the content;



      (2)   Findings, reasons or basis for the ordinance, if desired
and appropriate;



      (3)   An enacting clause;



      (4)   Citation of any ordinance repealed;



      (5)   The provisions of the ordinance including section
numbers, if the ordinance is to be codified or amends an existing codified
ordinance;



      (6)   The effective date of the ordinance;



      (7)   The name of the person requesting introduction of the
ordinance;



      (8)   The approval of the Town Attorney as to form and the
assignment of an ordinance number; and



      (9)   Space for the signatures of the Mayor or presiding
member of Council and the Town Clerk attesting notice, if required, and
adoption.



   (B)   Written resolutions shall be in a similar form as deemed
appropriate by the Town Attorney.



(1995 Code, § 1-3022) 



§ 30.052  INTRODUCTION OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   An ordinance may be proposed by any member of Council. A
proposed ordinance shall be referred to the Town Attorney for approval as to
form.



   (B)   The Town Attorney shall render assistance in the preparation
of notices and ordinances. After an ordinance is in proper form and required
notices have been given, the Town Attorney shall send the ordinance to the
Manager to be held for public inspection.



   (C)   An ordinance shall be deemed to be introduced when its title
is read during a public meeting of Council.



(1995 Code, § 1-3023) 



§ 30.053  INTRODUCTION OF RESOLUTIONS.



   A voice motion of a member of Council shall be considered to be the
introduction of an oral resolution which shall require no written record
other than a notation of the secretary in the Council minutes. A resolution
proposed in writing shall be introduced in the same manner as an ordinance.



(1995 Code, § 1-3024) 



§ 30.054  ENACTMENT OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   An ordinance to levy a tax, adopt a budget, appropriate funds,
grant a franchise, license on right to use or occupy a public street or
public property for commercial purposes shall be complete in the form in
which it is finally passed, and in that form remain on file with the Manager
for public inspection at least one week before final adoption.



   (B)   No ordinance shall be adopted until it shall have been read at
two regular meetings held on two separate days with at least six days between
each reading.



   (C)   Emergency ordinances may be adopted on one reading without
notice or hearing by affirmative vote of two-thirds vote of members present.
An emergency ordinance may not levy taxes, relate to a franchise or a service
rate and shall expire automatically on the sixty-first day following
enactment.



   (D)   The introduction and reading of any ordinance, shall be by the
reading of the title only unless full reading is requested by a member of
Council.



   (E)   After the introduction of an ordinance, any member of Council
may request a public hearing which may be held at any time designated by the
Mayor and Council prior to final adoption.



   (F)   Upon final adoption by vote of Council, and unless otherwise
required, an ordinance shall be signed by the Mayor or presiding member and
attested by the Clerk, who shall affix the town seal and file the original in
the ordinance book.



(1995 Code, § 1-3025) 



§ 30.055  ADOPTION OF RESOLUTIONS.



   Written or oral resolutions may be adopted on one reading unless a
public hearing is set by a majority of the members of Council present.



(1995 Code, § 1-3026)



§ 30.056  NOTICE OF ADOPTION.



   After the adoption of any ordinance, notice of the adoption shall be
posted on the public bulletin at the Town Hall, and the ordinance shall be
available for public inspection in the Town Hall.



(1995 Code, § 1-3027) 



Statutory reference:



   Adoption of ordinances, see S.C. Code §§ 5-7-250 through 5-7-280



ELECTIONS



§ 30.070  TERMS OF OFFICE.



   The Mayor and members of Council shall be elected for terms of four
years. Commencing with the 1991 general municipal election, Council members
shall be elected from Districts 1 and 3, and commencing with the 1993 general
municipal election, Council members shall be elected from Districts 2 and 4.
The districts referred to in this section are those set forth and designated
upon the map and census data in § 30.071.



(1995 Code, § 1-8001)  (Ord. 01-17-89B, passed 2-7-1989)



§ 30.071  ELECTION OF MAYOR AND COUNCIL MEMBERS.



   (A)   The Mayor shall be elected from the town at large, and one
member of Council shall be elected from each of the four districts set forth
and designated upon the map and census and population data prepared by the
Research and Statistical Services Division of the State Budget and Control
Board, all of which is attached to Ordinance 071712 (§ 11.04) and
incorporated herein by reference.



   (B)   Candidates seeking election to Council from one of the four
districts must be residents of that district and if elected, must continue to
be a resident of the district for the entire term of office.



(1995 Code, § 1-8002)  (Ord. 01-17-89B, passed 2-7-1989)



§ 30.072  TRANSFER OF AUTHORITY FOR CONDUCTING MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS TO
COUNTY.



   (A)   The town desires to transfer all authority for conducting
municipal elections to the County Voter Registration and Election Commission
apart from the following: that the town will continue to accept candidate
filings, including but not limited to notices of candidacy, candidacy pledges
and nomination petitions.



   (B)   All authority for the conducting of municipal elections is
hereby transferred to the Voter Registration and Election Commission for the
county in the following particulars:



      (1)   The County Voter Registration and Election Commission
shall advertise municipal elections, prepare and distribute ballots and
election materials, appoint managers of election for each polling place, and
otherwise supervise and conduct all municipal elections within the town;



      (2)   Immediately upon the closing of the polls at any
municipal election in the town, the County Voter Registration and Elections
Commission shall begin to count and continuously count the votes cast and
make a statement of the whole number of votes cast in the election together
with the number of votes cast for each candidate for Mayor and Council
member, canvass the vote and publicly display the unofficial results;



      (3)   The Voter Registration and Election Commission shall
thereafter certify the results of the elections and transmit the certified
results to the Town Council or an appointed authority representing the city
government as soon as practical following the certification;



      (4)   Hear and decide protests and certify the results of
municipal elections; and



      (5)   Utilize an automated election system and computer
counting with the count publicly conducted.



   (C)   This section shall take effect upon the successful completion
of the following necessary actions prerequisite under federal and state law
to effect the changes called for hereunder:



      (1)   Adoption of an appropriate ordinance by the governing
body of the county accepting the authority being transferred hereunder; and



      (2)   Submission to the United States Justice Department and
subsequent receipt of preclearance and positive response to the transfer of
authority for conducting municipal elections which would be effected
hereunder.



(1995 Code, § 1-8003)  (Ord. 06-15-10-C, passed 6-15-2010)



§ 30.073  NONPARTISAN ELECTIONS.



   (A)   All regular and special elections for the Offices of Mayor and
Council shall be nonpartisan general elections pursuant to state law.



   (B)   The election results shall be determined according to the
nonpartisan plurality method prescribed in S.C. Code § 5-15-61.



   (C)   No political party affiliation shall be placed on any ballot
for any candidate.



(1995 Code, § 1-8004)



§ 30.074  TIME OF ELECTIONS; NOTICE.



   (A)   Elections for town officials shall be held in odd-numbered
years on the first Tuesday in April.



   (B)   The Council shall give public notice of the general town
election at least 90 days prior to the date of the election.



(1995 Code, § 1-8005)



§ 30.075  TIME OF TAKING OFFICE; CONTESTED ELECTION.



   (A)   Newly elected officers shall not be qualified pursuant to
state law until the third Tuesday in April next following the date of the
general election.



   (B)   Newly elected officials shall take office the first Tuesday in
July.



   (C)   If the results of the election are contested, the incumbent
who fills the contested office shall hold over until the contest is finally
determined.



(1995 Code, § 1-8006)



Statutory reference:



   Contested elections, see S.C. Code § 5-15-130



CHAPTER 31:  TOWN OFFICIALS AND ORGANIZATIONS



Section




Town Manager




   31.01   Creation of office



   31.02   Appointment of Town Manager



   31.03   Removal of Town Manager



   31.04   Powers and duties of Town Manager



   31.05   Council not to interfere with appointments or removals



   31.06   Emergencies



   31.07   Bond



   31.08   Compensation



   31.09   Vacancy




Treasurer/Finance Director




   31.20   Appointment; term



   31.21   Bond



   31.22   Duties



   31.23   Town seal




Town Attorney




   31.35   Election; term




Other Offices and Departments




   31.50   Creation of other departments



TOWN MANAGER



§ 31.01  CREATION OF OFFICE.



   The Office of Town Manager is hereby created.



(1995 Code, § 1-4001)  (Ord. passed 9-20-1955)



§ 31.02  APPOINTMENT OF TOWN MANAGER.



   The Town Manager shall be appointed by majority vote of the Town
Council for an indefinite term. The Manager shall be chosen by the Council
solely on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualification,
with special reference to his or her actual experience in municipal
government.  At the time of his or her appointment he or she need not be a
resident of the town or the state. No Council member or Mayor shall receive
the appointment during the term for which he or she shall have been elected
nor within one year after the expiration of his or her term.



(1995 Code, § 1-4002)  (Ord. passed 9-20-1955)



§ 31.03  REMOVAL OF TOWN MANAGER.



   The Town Manager may be suspended by the Council by a majority vote of
its members and at the time of the suspension shall be furnished with the
reasons for the suspension in writing. The Manager upon request to Council
shall be accorded a hearing by Council within ten days from date of
suspension notice and shall have the right to answer the charges against him
or her before Council. The request for the hearing shall be filed by the
Manager with Council within four days after receipt of the statement of
charges. Council shall take final action upon the charges at the hearing
demanded by the Manager or, if no hearing is demanded within the period
herein specified, the Council shall nevertheless meet within ten days from
date of notice of suspension and make final disposition of the matter.



(1995 Code, § 1-4003)  (Ord. passed 9-20-1955)



§ 31.04  POWERS AND DUTIES OF TOWN MANAGER.



   (A)   The Town Manager shall be the executive officer and head of
the administrative branch of the town, subject to approval by a majority vote
of Council.



   (B)   He or she shall be responsible to the Town Council for the
proper administration of all affairs of the town; and to that end, subject to
the personnel provisions of the Town Charter, he or she shall have power and
shall be required to:



      (1)   Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service,
suspend or remove all officers and employees of the town, except as otherwise
provided by law, and except as he or she may authorize the head of a
department or office to appoint, suspend or remove subordinates in the
department or office;



      (2)   Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the Council
and be responsible for its administration after adoption;



      (3)   Prepare and submit to the Council as of the end of the
fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities
of the town for the preceding year;



      (4)   Keep the Council advised of the financial condition and
future needs of the town and make recommendations as he or she may deem
desirable;



      (5)   Recommend to the governing body the salaries to be paid
each appointive officer and subordinate employee of the town;



      (6)   Recommend to the governing body, in writing, from time
to time, for adoption, any measures as he or she may deem necessary or
expedient;



      (7)   Consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments
or units under his or her jurisdiction, with the approval of the Town
Council. The Manager may be the head of one or more departments;



      (8)   Attend all meetings of the Council, unless excused
therefrom by the Council, except when his or her removal is under
consideration by the Council. The Manager shall have the privilege of taking
part in the discussion of all matters coming before the Council. The Manager
shall be entitled to notice of all meetings, regular and special, of the
Council;



      (9)   Purchase all materials, supplies or equipment, for which
funds are provided in the budget, but he or she may not purchase any item
which exceeds any budget appropriation until the Council has increased the
appropriation: provided, that for purchases of more than $5,000, except for
emergency replacement of essential equipment, the Manager shall be required
to receive sealed or competitive bids and shall present the bids to the
Council for approval or rejection. He or she may let contracts not in excess
of $5,000, necessary in the operation or maintenance of town services, when
sufficient funds for those purposes have been appropriated in the budget, but
the Council shall let all contracts for more than $5,000, all contracts for
new construction and all contracts which cannot be consummated with funds
provided in the current budget. The Manager shall advise the Council as to
whether or not any contract offered is desirable, or which of several
contracts offered is most desirable of the town. The Manager may issue rules
and regulations governing requisitions and the transaction of the business of
purchasing between himself or herself as purchasing agent and the heads of
the departments, officers and employees of the town as the governing body may
approve;



      (10)   See that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced;



      (11)   Make investigations into the affairs of the town, or
any department or division thereof. Investigate all complaints in relation to
all matters concerning the administration of the government of the town, and
in regard to service maintained by the public utilities in the town, and see
that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the town are
faithfully observed; and



      (12)   Perform any other duties as may be required of him or
her by the Council, not inconsistent with law or ordinances.



(1995 Code, § 1-4004)  (Ord. passed 9-20-1955)



§ 31.05  COUNCIL NOT TO INTERFERE WITH APPOINTMENTS OR REMOVALS.



   Individual members of the Council shall not direct or request the
appointment of any person to, or his or her removal from office by the
Manager, or by his or her subordinates, or in any manner attempt to dictate
the appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administrative
service of the town. Except for the purpose of inquiry, Council shall deal
with the administrative service solely through the Manager, and no Council
member or Mayor shall give orders to any subordinates of the Manager, either
publicly or privately.



(1995 Code, § 1-4005)  (Ord. passed 9-20-1955)



§ 31.06  EMERGENCIES.



   In case of accidents or other circumstances creating any emergency, the
Manager may, with the consent of the governing body, award contracts and make
purchases for the purpose of repairing damages caused by the accident or
meeting the emergency; but he or she shall file promptly with the Council a
certificate showing the emergency and the necessity for the action, together
with an itemized account of all expenditures.



(1995 Code, § 1-4006)  (Ord. passed 9-20-1955)



§ 31.07  BOND.



   The Manager shall furnish a surety bond in the sum of $10,000 to be
approved by the Council, the bond to be conditioned on the faithful
performance of his or her duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid by
the town.



(1995 Code, § 1-4007)  (Ord. passed 9-20-1955)



§ 31.08  COMPENSATION.



   The Manager shall receive compensation as the Council shall fix from
time to time by ordinance.



(1995 Code, § 1-4008)  (Ord. passed 9-20-1955)



§ 31.09  VACANCY.



   Any vacancy in the Office of Manager shall be filled within 60 days
after the effective date of the vacancy.



(1995 Code, § 1-4009)  (Ord. passed 9-20-1955)



Statutory reference:



   Powers and duties of Manager, see S.C. Code § 5-13-90



TREASURER/FINANCE DIRECTOR



§ 31.20  APPOINTMENT; TERM.



   The Town Manager shall appoint an officer to be known as the
Treasurer/Finance Director.



(1995 Code, § 1-4021)



§ 31.21  BOND.



   Before entering upon the duties of office, the Treasurer/Finance
Director shall give bond in a sum as may be required and with a surety
company approved by the Manager, for the faithful performance of the duties
of office.



(1995 Code, § 1-4022)



§ 31.22  DUTIES.



   The Treasurer/Finance Director shall collect all claims and accounts
that may be due and payable to the town; receive all moneys belonging to the
town; issue all licenses for which provisions may be made; pay all bills owed
by the town when approved by the proper authority; deposit funds in a bank
designated by the Manager; make statements of financial conditions of the
town as ordered by the Manager; keep account of all moneys and accounts and
report to the Manager; and perform other duties as may be required by the
Manager and Council.



(1995 Code, § 1-4023)



§ 31.23  TOWN SEAL.



   (A)   The town shall have a common seal, which shall be affixed to
all ordinances passed by Council, to all deeds of real estate executed on
behalf of the town, and to all notes, bonds and other evidences of
indebtedness executed in behalf of the town.



   (B)   The seal shall be and remain in the custody of the Clerk to
Council.



(1995 Code, § 1-4024)



Statutory reference:



   Duties of Municipal Clerk, see S.C. Code § 5-7-220



TOWN ATTORNEY



§ 31.35  ELECTION; TERM.



   The Council shall appoint as Town Attorney a person who is a member of
the South Carolina Bar Association and admitted to practice law in this state.



(1995 Code, § 1-4031)



OTHER OFFICES AND DEPARTMENTS



§ 31.50  CREATION OF OTHER DEPARTMENTS.



   (A)   There are hereby established and created other offices and
departments for the town as follows:



      (1)   Public Safety Department:



         (a)   Police protection; and



         (b)   Fire protection.



      (2)   Water/Sewer and Natural Gas Department;



      (3)   Electric Department;



      (4)   Streets and Sanitation Department;



      (5)   Finance Department;



      (6)   Building Inspection Office;



      (7)   Personnel Department;



      (8)   Purchasing and General Services Department;



      (9)   Maintenance Department; and



      (10)   Community Development and Grants Department.



   (B)   Persons appointed to these departments and offices shall be
responsible for the functions and duties as prescribed in this code and other
duties as the Manager may from time to time determine.



(1995 Code, § 1-4041)



Statutory reference:



   Departments and offices established by ordinance, see S.C. Code §
5-7-260



CHAPTER 32:  PUBLIC SAFETY



Section



Law Enforcement



   32.01   Police Department established



   32.02   Resisting arrest



   32.03   Responding to summons for assistance



   32.04   Resisting, interfering with officer



   32.05   Resisting, interfering with officer in execution of warrant,
other process



   32.06   Stop on command of officer



Emergency



   32.20   Definitions



   32.21   Emergency proclamation



   32.22   Emergency powers of the Mayor



   32.23   General curfew



   32.24   Emergency authority of members of the Public Safety
Department; duty of public to obey



Cross-reference:



   Fire Department, see Chapter 92



LAW ENFORCEMENT



§ 32.01  POLICE DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Town Police Department to be
headed by the Public Safety Director who shall be appointed by the Manager.



   (B)   The Manager may employ additional members of the Department as
deemed appropriate.



(1995 Code, § 2-1001)



§ 32.02  RESISTING ARREST.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to resist arrest, or if under
arrest, to refuse to accompany the arresting officer or to endeavor to force
the officer to drag, pull or carry him or her to the place of destination.



(1995 Code, § 2-1002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.03  RESPONDING TO SUMMONS FOR ASSISTANCE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person between the ages of 18 and 50 years
of age being called upon by any police officer, member of the Council or
anyone deputized by them for assistance to suppress an affray, breach of
peace or any outrage, to refuse that assistance.



(1995 Code, § 2-1003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.04  RESISTING, INTERFERING WITH OFFICER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to assault, resist, abuse or in any
manner, by word or act, interfere with a police officer or any other officer
or employee of the town in the discharge of his or her duty or to aid or abet
any assault, resistance, abuse or interference.



(1995 Code, § 2-1004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.05  RESISTING, INTERFERING WITH OFFICER IN EXECUTION OF WARRANT, OTHER
PROCESS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to assault, obstruct, hinder,
prevent or in any manner interfere with any officer or other person charged
with the execution of any lawful warrant or other process in arresting any
person for whose apprehension the warrant has been issued, or to rescue or
attempt to rescue any person from the custody of an officer or person
lawfully arresting him or her, or directly or indirectly to aid, abet or
assist any person so arrested to escape from custody, or to harbor or conceal
any person for whose arrest a warrant or other process shall have been
issued, so as to prevent the discovery of the person, after notice or
knowledge of the fact of the issuing of the warrant or other process.



(1995 Code, § 2-1005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.06  STOP ON COMMAND OF OFFICER.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and knowingly fail or
refuse to stop when signaled, hailed or commanded to stop by a police officer
or other officer of the town.



(1995 Code, § 2-1006)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Municipal police, see S.C. Code § 5-7-110



EMERGENCY



§ 32.20  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CIVIL EMERGENCY.



      (1)   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of
actual force or violence or any threat to use force, if accompanied by
immediate power to execute, by three or more persons acting together without
authority of law; or



      (2)   Any impending natural disaster or humanmade calamity,
including flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion
within or adjacent to the corporate limits of the town, resulting in the
threat of death or injury of person or the destruction of property to an
extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public
health, safety and welfare of the citizens and residents of the town.



   CURFEW. A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running,
loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public
property or vacant premises within the corporate limits, excepting persons
officially designated to duty with reference to a civil emergency.



(1995 Code, § 2-3001)  (Ord. passed 7-21-1970)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.21  EMERGENCY PROCLAMATION.



   When, in the judgment of the Mayor, or in his or her absence the Mayor
Pro Tem, a civil emergency is deemed to exist, he or she shall forthwith
proclaim, in writing, the existence of an emergency.



(1995 Code, § 2-3002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.22  EMERGENCY POWERS OF THE MAYOR.



   After proclamation of a civil emergency, the Mayor, or in his or her
absence the Mayor Pro Tem, may, in the interest of public safety and welfare,
make any or all of the following orders, in addition to the proclamation of
any curfew as herein provided:



   (A)   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores;



   (B)   Order the closing of all beer taverns or places at which beer
is sold or dispensed;



   (C)   Order the closing of all private clubs or portions thereof
wherein the consumption of intoxicating liquor, wine and/or beer is permitted;



   (D)   Order the discontinuance of the sale of beer or wine;



   (E)   Prohibit the giving away of beer, wine, liquor or any other
alcoholic beverage;



   (F)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving
away gasoline or liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;



   (G)   Order the closing of gasoline stations and other
establishments, the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution or
dispensing of liquid flammable or combustible products;



   (H)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing
or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever;



   (I)   Order the closing of any or all establishments or portions
thereof, the chief activity of which is the sale, distribution, dispensing or
giving away of firearms or ammunition; and



   (J)   Issue other orders as are immediately necessary for the
protection of life and property, including the ordering into effect and
operation of any civil disturbance plan prepared for and adopted by Council.



(1995 Code, § 2-3003)  (Ord. passed 7-21-1970)



§ 32.23  GENERAL CURFEW.



   After proclamation of a civil emergency by the Mayor, or in his or her
absence the Mayor Pro Tem, he or she may order a general curfew applicable to
the geographical areas of the town, or to the town as a whole, as is deemed
necessary or advisable, and not applicable during the hours of the day or
night as is deemed necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare.



(1995 Code, § 2-3004)  (Ord. passed 7-21-1970)



§ 32.24  EMERGENCY AUTHORITY OF MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY DEPARTMENT;
DUTY OF PUBLIC TO OBEY.



   (A)   All members of the public shall obey the lawful commands,
orders and directions of members of the Public Safety Department issued
during the period of the emergency and in connection with meeting the
emergency.



   (B)   Included within the powers hereby conferred is the power to
forbid all individuals or vehicles from entering premises or areas where the
emergency exists and where the presence of these individuals or vehicles
would handicap the officers in combating the emergency; and the officers are
likewise empowered to require removal of any vehicle or other movable object
from the areas.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or
impede the efforts of the officers at the times stated and, specifically, to
drive any vehicle over or impose any weight upon any fire hose being employed
or to be employed in connection with meeting the emergency.



   (D)   The emergency area shall be deemed to include not merely the
premises immediately involved but also any and all fire hydrants in proximity
to a burning structure or being used or to be used in connection with
combating the emergency and shall include also all public or private property
or across which lines or equipment of either of the departments may be laid,
strung or placed, as well as streets and avenues adjacent or in proximity to
the structure or property affected or likely to be affected by the emergency.
The powers hereby conferred upon the Public Safety Department extend to the
entire emergency area and are in addition to the powers as members of the
Department may already have by operation of law.



(1995 Code, § 2-3005)  (Ord. passed 1-26-1948)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Emergency ordinance adoption, see § 30.054(C)



CHAPTER 33:  FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION



Section




General Provisions




   33.01   Fiscal year designated



   33.02   Annual tax levy



   33.03   Annual tax for payment of interest on bonds, sinking fund



   33.04   When taxes due and payable; to whom paid



   33.05   Public notice



   33.06   Notification to taxpayer of taxes due



   33.07   Rate of tax



   33.08   Duty of County Tax Collector



   33.09   Manager to administer budget




Delinquent Tax Procedure




   33.25   Penalty for nonpayment of taxes



   33.26   Lien



   33.27   Execution for delinquent taxes



   33.28   Fees and charges for execution



   33.29   Levy of executions



   33.30   Suspension of sale upon claim of previous payment or unjust
assessment of taxes



   33.31   Presumption from failure to raise the claim of previous
payment or unjust assessment



   33.32   Advertisement of tax sale



   33.33   Conduct of sale



   33.34   Receipt and duplicate warrant given to purchaser



   33.35   Purchase of land at tax sale by town



   33.36   Disposition of proceeds of sale



   33.37   Redemption



   33.38   Waste during redemption period



   33.39   Title to purchaser upon failure to redeem



   33.40   Tax Collector’s deed as evidence of title



   33.41   Tax Collector’s bond to cover money collected by him or
her pursuant to executions



   33.42   Responsibility of Tax Collector for execution and collection



   33.43   Proceedings before Town Council for relief of taxpayer



   33.44   Recovery of collection costs



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 33.01  FISCAL YEAR DESIGNATED.



   (A)   From and after the passage of this section the fiscal year of
the town shall end on June 30 of each year.



   (B)   All records, accounts, statements, accounting periods and
financial matters of the town shall hereafter conform to this fiscal year
termination date.



(1995 Code, § 1-5001)  (Ord. passed 7-7-1970)



§ 33.02  ANNUAL TAX LEVY.



   The Council shall impose by ordinance an annual tax at a rate in its
discretion as will yield an amount necessary for the general purposes of the
town, not exceeding the limit permitted by law, exclusive of any tax levied
with respect to any outstanding bond issues. The tax shall be levied by the
Council on the property within the corporate limits of the town as assessed
for taxation for county and state purposes as heretofore provided in this
chapter.



(1995 Code, § 1-5002)



§ 33.03  ANNUAL TAX FOR PAYMENT OF INTEREST ON BONDS, SINKING FUND.



   In addition to the annual tax, the Council shall have the right to levy
any further annual tax as may be necessary to pay the interest on all
outstanding bonds issued by the town and to create the necessary sinking
funds for the redemption of the bonds at their respective maturities.



(1995 Code, § 1-5003)



§ 33.04  WHEN TAXES DUE AND PAYABLE; TO WHOM PAID.



   Any person owning or possessing taxable property with the town as of
January 1 of every calendar year shall be subject to taxation for the ensuing
year. All taxes and sums herein assessed and provided for shall be due and
payable between December 1 and February 15 of the following year. All these
taxes and sums remaining due and unpaid on February 15 of each year shall be
subject to a penalty of 15% and an additional 5% for all delinquent taxes
remaining due and unpaid on March 15 of the same year and shall be collected
by distress or otherwise, as is provided by law, together with all legal
costs and legal penalties.



(1995 Code, § 1-5004)  (Ord. passed 6-21-1983)



§ 33.05  PUBLIC NOTICE.



   It shall be the duty of the Clerk to publish in the local newspaper the
amount of the millage imposed by Council for purposes of taxation for the
ensuing year, this notice to appear 30 days prior to the date taxes are due
for collection.



(1995 Code, § 1-5005)



§ 33.06  NOTIFICATION TO TAXPAYER OF TAXES DUE.



   The County Treasurer’s Office through a mutual agreement notifies
each taxpayer by mail of the taxpayer’s total obligation, both county and
municipality.



(1995 Code, § 1-5006)



§ 33.07  RATE OF TAX.



   (A)   For the purpose of raising supplies and funds for general
purposes and to meet the general obligations of the town, an ad valorem tax
will be levied and assessed upon every dollar of the value of all real and
personal property within the corporate limits of the town on an annual basis.



   (B)   All taxes and sums assessed and payable under the provisions
of this subchapter shall be paid in legal currency and tender of the United
States of America.



(1995 Code, § 1-5007)  (Ord. passed 6-15-1976)



§ 33.08  DUTY OF COUNTY TAX COLLECTOR.



   The County Tax Collector shall collect municipal taxes at the time
county taxes are collected and shall be responsible for the collection of
delinquent taxes.



(1995 Code, § 1-5008)



§ 33.09  MANAGER TO ADMINISTER BUDGET.



   The Manager shall administer the budget and may authorize the transfer
of appropriated funds within and between departments as necessary to achieve
the goals of the budget.



(1995 Code, § 1-5009)



DELINQUENT TAX PROCEDURE



§ 33.25  PENALTY FOR NONPAYMENT OF TAXES.



   All taxes not paid by January 1 shall be delinquent and the penalties
as provided in § 33.04 will be added.



(1995 Code, § 1-5021)



§ 33.26  LIEN.



   Taxes so levied and the penalties for nonpayment shall constitute a
lien upon the property on which the tax is levied.



(1995 Code, § 1-5022)



§ 33.27  EXECUTION FOR DELINQUENT TAXES.



   If the taxes and penalties are not paid by May 1 of the following year,
the authorized official shall issue in the name of the town an execution, in
duplicate, signed by the duly authorized official, directed to the Tax
Collector of the town requiring and commanding him or her to levy the
execution by distress and sale of so much of the defaulting taxpayer’s
estate, real, personal or both, as may be sufficient to satisfy the town
taxes with the penalties thereon of the defaulters, and shall specify the
aggregate amount of the taxes and penalties.



(1995 Code, § 1-5023)



§ 33.28  FEES AND CHARGES FOR EXECUTION.



   The town shall be allowed the same fees and costs in the enforcement of
the executions and for sales thereunder as are allowed to the County Tax
Collector and Sheriff respectively. These fees and costs shall be enforceable
and collectible in the same manner as fees and costs under county and state
executions and on sales thereunder.



(1995 Code, § 1-5024)



§ 33.29  LEVY OF EXECUTIONS.



   Under the execution, the authorized official shall seize and take
exclusive possession of as much as the defaulting taxpayer’s estate, real
or personal or both, as may be necessary to raise the sum of money named
therein, and the charges thereon.



(1995 Code, § 1-5025)



§ 33.30  SUSPENSION OF SALE UPON CLAIM OF PREVIOUS PAYMENT OR UNJUST
ASSESSMENT OF TAXES.



   In case the defaulting taxpayer, after levy of execution, shall allege
that the taxes have been paid or are unjustly assessed against him or her, he
or she can and may have the sale suspended, provided that before the sale he
or she satisfies the Tax Collector that he or she has paid all taxes charged
against the property, together with the penalties and costs named in the
warrant, accompanied with his or her affidavit that the taxes have been paid,
or are unjustly assessed against him or her, and within 20 days thereafter
take the steps as are provided in this chapter for correction of unjust
assessment, or to prove payment and prosecute the matter to a successful
result within a reasonable time.



(1995 Code, § 1-5026)



§ 33.31  PRESUMPTION FROM FAILURE TO RAISE THE CLAIM OF PREVIOUS PAYMENT OR
UNJUST ASSESSMENT.



   In case the defaulting taxpayer, after the levy of the execution, makes
no payment and files no affidavit, as herein provided, he or she shall be
deemed in law to have waived all exception to possible omissions, errors or
irregularities in the assessment of the tax and in all preliminaries to the
sale as prescribed by law, and to have admitted that all preliminary steps to
the assessment and sale, and the assessment and sale, are in accordance with
requirements of the law.



(1995 Code, § 1-5027)



§ 33.32  ADVERTISEMENT OF TAX SALE.



   The authorized official shall give notice of and advertise all sales
made by him or her under the provisions of this chapter in the same manner as
tax sales by sheriffs are required by law to be noticed and advertised, and
according to the usage and custom in these cases.



(1995 Code, § 1-5028)



§ 33.33  CONDUCT OF SALE.



   After advertisement, the authorized official shall sell the property
levied upon at public outcry before the entrance to the courthouse at a time
which may be determined and stated in notice and advertisement of sale.



(1995 Code, § 1-5029)



§ 33.34  RECEIPT AND DUPLICATE WARRANT GIVEN TO PURCHASER.



   Upon compliance by the purchaser with the terms of the sale, the
authorized official shall give to the purchaser a receipt for the purchase
money and shall annex the receipt to the duplicate execution. The authorized
official shall endorse the duplicate execution with a statement of his or her
actions thereunder.



(1995 Code, § 1-5030)



§ 33.35  PURCHASE OF LAND AT TAX SALE BY TOWN.



   In case there is no bid equal or greater in amount to the taxes named
in the execution, in addition to any taxes due to the state and county on the
property, the Finance Director shall buy the land for the town as the actual
purchaser thereof, for the amount of the taxes and penalties, costs and
charges, and the Chief of Police shall issue his or her receipt, and if not
redeemed thereafter execute title, to the town as to any other purchaser, in
the manner above provided, and shall put it or its authorized agent in
possession of the premises. The land so sold and purchased and delivered to
the town shall be treated by it as assets of the town and sold at which time
and in a manner as by it shall be deemed most advantageous to it.



(1995 Code, § 1-5031)



§ 33.36  DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF SALE.



   After deducting from the proceeds of the sale, the costs and expenses
thereof, the Tax Collector shall pay over the remainder to the authorized
official who shall apply it to the payment of taxes due from the defaulting
taxpayer and retain the balance, if any, for disposition according to law.



(1995 Code, § 1-5032)



§ 33.37  REDEMPTION.



   The owner, his or her successor in title, or any mortgage creditor may
within one year from the day of the sale redeem the property by paying to the
authorized official the taxes, penalties, cost and expenses of the sale,
together with 7% of the whole amount of the purchase price of the land so
sold. Thereupon the town shall refund to the purchaser the amount paid on his
or her bid with interest as above stated. The bid by the purchaser shall be
then cancelled. The owner or his or her successor in title shall remain in
possession of this land. Should any mortgagee redeem land as above permitted,
then the amount so paid by him or her for taxes, charges, costs and
penalties, shall be added to the mortgage debt or other lien, with same
incidents as to priority and with same rate of interest and collectible in
the same way as the original mortgage debt.



(1995 Code, § 1-5033)



§ 33.38  WASTE DURING REDEMPTION PERIOD.



   In the event waste or damage to the premises is threatened by the owner
or any other party during the redemption period, the purchaser at a tax sale
may apply to the Court of Common Pleas or a judge thereof for an injunction
against the waste and for the appointment of a receiver to take charge of the
property.



(1995 Code, § 1-5034)



§ 33.39  TITLE TO PURCHASER UPON FAILURE TO REDEEM.



   The Tax Collector shall not make title to the purchaser until the
expiration of the redemption period. Upon failure of defaulting taxpayer or
other party interested to redeem the land so sold for taxes within one year
as stated, the Tax Collector shall make title to the purchaser and put the
purchaser in possession of the property sold and conveyed.



(1995 Code, § 1-5035)



§ 33.40  TAX COLLECTOR’S DEED AS EVIDENCE OF TITLE.



   In all cases of sale, the Tax Collector’s deed of conveyance shall be
held and taken as prima facie evidence of a good title in the holder, that
all proceedings have been regular and that there has been compliance with all
the requirements of the law.



(1995 Code, § 1-5036)



§ 33.41  TAX COLLECTOR’S BOND TO COVER MONEY COLLECTED BY HIM OR HER
PURSUANT TO EXECUTIONS.



   The town shall be protected by the official bond of the Tax Collector
for the proper collection and payment by him or her to the Finance Director
of all moneys received by him or her pursuant to executions delivered to him
or her.



(1995 Code, § 1-5037)



§ 33.42  RESPONSIBILITY OF TAX COLLECTOR FOR EXECUTION AND COLLECTION.



   The Tax Collector shall be responsible for all executions delivered to
him or her and for all funds realized thereunder. He or she shall keep a
proper account thereof.



(1995 Code, § 1-5038)



§ 33.43  PROCEEDINGS BEFORE TOWN COUNCIL FOR RELIEF OF TAXPAYER.



   The Town Council shall hear and determine, upon satisfactory proof, the
petition of any taxpayer praying relief for any cause, and especially on the
ground that all taxes due upon the property have been paid or that portions
of the taxes have been paid, and an offer to pay the balance, accompanied by
the sum admitted to be owing. The Council shall grant the relief of the
premises as may be just.



(1995 Code, § 1-5039)



§ 33.44  RECOVERY OF COLLECTION COSTS.



   (A)   The Town of Winnsboro may impose a collection cost of up to
$25 to defray its internal costs of collection for any delinquent debts that
are sought to be collected pursuant to the provisions of the Setoff Debt
Collection Act, S.C. Code Ann. §§ 12-56-10 et. seq. This cost is hereby
declared to be a collection cost that arises by operation of law and shall be
added to the delinquent debt and recovered from the debtor.



   (B)   The Town of Winnsboro hereby declares that the administrative
fee charged by the Municipal Association of South Carolina is also a
collection cost to the city/town, which shall also be added to the delinquent
debt and recovered from the debtor.



   (C)   This section shall be effective on the date of final reading,
provided however, that this section is declared to be consistent with prior
law and practice and shall not be construed to mean that any fees previously
charged to debtors as costs of collection under the act were not properly
authorized or properly charged to the debtor.



(Ord. 09-05-06, passed 9-5-2006; Am. Ord. 2018-101618B, passed 11-6-2018)



CHAPTER 34:  PURCHASING



Section



   34.01   Purchasing agent; specified duties



   34.02   Formal contract procedure



   34.03   Bidding; competitive; required exception



   34.04   Award to lowest bidder; advertising, when required



   34.05   Bid deposits



   34.06   Sealed bid procedures



   34.07   Materials testing



   34.08   Financial interest of town officials and employees prohibited



   34.09   Records of open market orders and bids



   34.10   Stock reports



   34.11   Surplus stock



   34.12   Supplies unsuitable for public use, sale or exchange



   34.13   Gifts and rebates



   34.14   Cooperative purchasing



§ 34.01  PURCHASING AGENT; SPECIFIED DUTIES.



   The Town Manager, or an officer of the town designated by the Town
Manager, shall be the purchasing agent for the town. He or she shall be
responsible to ensure that all procurement and contracts are administered
within compliance of the local procurement policy, which is consistent with
state procurement regulations.



(1995 Code, § 1-5051)



§ 34.02  FORMAL CONTRACT PROCEDURE.



   All supplies and contractual services, except as otherwise provided
herein, when the estimated cost thereof shall exceed $10,000, shall be
purchased by formal, written contract from the lowest responsible bidder,
after due notice inviting proposals. No contract or purchase shall be
subdivided to avoid the requirements of this section. All sales of personal
property which has become obsolete or unusable, when the estimated value
shall exceed $10,000, shall be sold by formal written contract or at a public
auction to the highest responsible bidder, after due notice inviting
proposals and bidders.



(1995 Code, § 1-5052)  (Ord. passed 6-7-1983)



§ 34.03  BIDDING; COMPETITIVE; REQUIRED EXCEPTION.



   Before any purchases or contracts for supplies, materials, equipment or
services exceeding $5,000 are made, the purchasing agent shall give ample
opportunity for competitive bidding. For purchases or contracts not exceeding
$5,000, oral bids may be accepted. All other bids shall be in writing.
Competitive bidding shall be encouraged for all contracts, purchases or
sales. However, in the event of an emergency affecting the public welfare,
health or safety, the provisions of this section shall not apply. A full
report of the circumstances of an emergency purchase shall be filed by the
purchasing agent with the Town Council and shall be entered in the minutes of
the Council.



(1995 Code, § 1-5053)  (Ord. passed 6-7-1983)



§ 34.04  AWARD TO LOWEST BIDDER; ADVERTISING, WHEN REQUIRED.



   All contracts for town improvements, materials, equipment or services
costing more than $5,000 shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder
after publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the town at least
five days before the last day set for receipt of proposals; provided,
however, that in case of professional services, this section shall not apply.
The newspaper notice required herein shall include a general description of
the articles or services to be purchased, shall state where bid blanks and
specifications may be secured and the time and place for opening bids.



(1995 Code, § 1-5054)  (Ord. passed 6-7-1983)



§ 34.05  BID DEPOSITS.



   When deemed necessary by the purchasing agent, bid deposits shall be
prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Upon entering into a
contract, bidders shall be entitled to return of bid deposit where the
purchasing agent has required it. A successful bidder shall forfeit any bid
deposit required by the purchasing agent upon failure on his or her part to
enter into a contract within ten days after the award; provided, however,
that the town, in its uncontrolled discretion, may waive this forfeiture.



(1995 Code, § 1-5055)  (Ord. passed 6-7-1983)



§ 34.06  SEALED BID PROCEDURES.



   Procedure for sealed bids shall be as follows.



   (A)   Sealing.  Bids shall be submitted to the purchasing agent
securely sealed in an envelope and shall be identified on the envelope in
accordance with bid instructions.



   (B)   Opening.  Bids shall be opened in public at the time and
place stated in the public inspection.



   (C)   Tabulation.  A tabulation of all bids received shall be
available for public notices.



   (D)   Rejection of bids.  The purchasing agent shall have the
authority to reject all bids, parts of all bids or all bids for any one or
more supplies or contractual services included in the proposed contract, when
the public interest will be served thereby.



   (E)   Bidders in default to town.  The purchasing agent shall not
accept the bid of a vendor or contractor who is delinquent in the payment of
taxes, license or other moneys due the town.



   (F)   Award of contract.



      (1)   Authority in agent.  The purchasing agent shall have
the authority to award contracts within the purview of this chapter;
provided, however, that contracts in excess of $5,000 shall not be awarded
without prior approval of Town Council.



      (2)   Lowest responsible bidder. Contracts shall be awarded to
the lowest responsible bidder. In determining lowest responsible bidder, in
addition to price, the purchasing agent shall consider:



         (a)   The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to
perform the contract or provide the service required;



         (b)   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or
provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or
interference;



         (c)   The character, integrity, reputation, judgement,
experience and efficiency of the bidder;



         (d)   The quality of performance of previous contracts
or services;



         (e)   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder
with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or services;



         (f)   The sufficiency of the financial resources and
ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service;



         (g)   The quality, availability and adaptability of the
supplies or contractual services to the particular use required;



         (h)   The ability of the bidder to provide future
maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract; and



         (i)   The number and scope of conditions attached to the
bid.



   (G)   Award to other than low bidder.  When the award is not given
to the lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons for
placing the order elsewhere shall be prepared by the purchasing agent and
filed with the papers relating to the transaction and held for a period of no
less than 12 months.



   (H)   Tie bids.



      (1)   Local vendors.  If all bids received are for the same
total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, the contract
shall be awarded to the local bidder. If two or more of these bids are
submitted by local bidders, the purchasing agent shall award the contract to
one of the local tie bidders by drawing lots in public. If local bidders are
not involved in the tie bids, the purchasing agent shall award the contract
to one of the outside tie bidders by drawing lots in public. The purchasing
agent, local bidders and vendors should bear in mind, however, that to award
a contract to a local vendor where he or she is not the lowest responsible
bidder, or where price, quality and service are not equal, is to give
preference to one minute segment of the citizenry against the best interests
of the community as a whole.



      (2)   Performance bonds.  The purchasing agent shall have the
authority to require a performance bond, before entering into a contract, in
a form and amount as he or she shall find reasonably necessary to protect the
best interests of the town.



      (3)   Payment bond, labor and material bond.  The purchasing
agent may require a payment bond and a labor and material bond, before
entering into a contract, in a form and amount as he or she shall deem
necessary to protect the best interest and the town.



(1995 Code, § 1-5056)  (Ord. passed 6-7-1983)



§ 34.07  MATERIALS TESTING.



   The purchasing agent shall have the authority to require chemical and
physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which
are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with the
specifications. In the performance of these tests, the purchasing agent shall
have the authority to make use of laboratory facilities of any agency of the
town government or any outside laboratory.



(1995 Code, § 1-5057)  (Ord. passed 6-7-1983)



§ 34.08  FINANCIAL INTEREST OF TOWN OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES PROHIBITED.



   No member of the Town Council or any officer or employee of the town
shall have a financial interest in any contract or in the sale to the town or
to a contractor supplying the town of any land or rights or interests in any
land, material, supplies or services, except when a majority of the Town
Council determines the exception in the best interest of the town; provided,
that no Council member whose interest is involved shall vote on the question.
Any willful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office,
and any officer or employee of the town found guilty thereof shall thereby
forfeit his or her office or position. Any violation of this section with the
knowledge express or implied of the person or corporation contracting with
the town shall render the contract voidable by the Town Manager or the Town
Council.



(1995 Code, § 1-5057)  (Ord. passed 6-7-1983)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 34.09  RECORDS OF OPEN MARKET ORDERS AND BIDS.



   The purchasing agent shall keep a record of all open market orders and
the bids submitted in competition thereon, and the records shall also be open
to public inspection.



(1995 Code, § 1-5059)  (Ord. passed 6-7-1983)



§ 34.10  STOCK REPORTS.



   All offices, departments or agencies of the town government shall
submit to the purchasing agent, at times and in a form as he or she shall
prescribe, reports showing stocks of all supplies which are no longer used or
which have become obsolete, worn-out or scrapped.



(1995 Code, § 1-5060)  (Ord. passed 6-7-1983)



§ 34.11  SURPLUS STOCK.



   The purchasing agent shall have authority to transfer surplus stock to
other offices, departments or agencies of the town government.



(1995 Code, § 1-5061)  (Ord. passed 6-7-1983)



§ 34.12  SUPPLIES UNSUITABLE FOR PUBLIC USE, SALE OR EXCHANGE.



   The purchasing agent shall have the authority to sell all supplies
which have become unsuitable for public use, or to exchange the same for or
trade in the same on new supplies. These sales shall be made to the highest
bidder and in conformance with §§ 34.02 through 34.06. All other unsuitable
equipment or supplies may be disposed of through negotiated bids, public
auctions or other appropriate means as determined by the purchasing agent and
the Town Manager. All moneys received from these sales shall be paid into the
appropriate fund of the town.



(1995 Code, § 1-5062)  (Ord. passed 6-7-1983)



§ 34.13  GIFTS AND REBATES.



   The purchasing agent and every officer and employee of the town are
expressly prohibited from accepting, directly or indirectly, from any person,
company, firm or corporation to which any purchase order or contract is or
might be awarded, any rebate, gift, money or anything of value whatsoever,
except where given for the use and benefit of the town.



(1995 Code, § 1-5063)  (Ord. passed 6-7-1983)



§ 34.14  COOPERATIVE PURCHASING.



   The purchasing agent shall have authority to join with other units of
government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of the
town would be served thereby; provided, that the purchasing agent of the town
is given the authority to make purchases of supplies and equipment through
the property division of the State Budget and Control Board, without the
formality of publication and receiving competitive bids.



(1995 Code, § 1-5064)  (Ord. passed 6-7-1983)



CHAPTER 35:  MUNICIPAL COURT



Section



   35.01   Created



   35.02   Jurisdiction



   35.03   Powers and duties, generally



   35.04   To hold court



   35.05   Appointment



   35.06   Term



   35.07   Compensation



   35.08   Oath



   35.09   Vacancy



   35.10   Time of court



   35.11   Rules of procedure



   35.12   Director of Public Safety or his or her designee to attend
Court



   35.13   Appearance bonds



§ 35.01 CREATED.



   There is hereby created and established a Municipal Court.



(1995 Code, § 1-7001)  (Ord. passed 2-12-1957)



§ 35.02  JURISDICTION.



   The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to try and determine all
cases arising under the provisions of this code and other ordinances of the
town. It shall also have jurisdiction in criminal cases as is now conferred
by law upon magistrates in the county.



(1995 Code, § 1-7002)



§ 35.03  POWERS AND DUTIES, GENERALLY.



   The Court shall have all judicial powers and duties as are now
conferred upon the Mayor by state law, and all duties and powers as are now
conferred by law upon magistrates in the county, except the Court shall not
have the authority of a magistrate to appoint a constable.



(1995 Code, § 1-7003)



§ 35.04  TO HOLD COURT.



   The Municipal Court shall be held by the Municipal Judge.



(1995 Code, § 1-7004)



§ 35.05  APPOINTMENT.



   The Municipal Judge shall be appointed by the Council.



(1995 Code, § 1-7005)



§ 35.06  TERM.



   The Municipal Judge shall hold his or her office for a term of one year
or until a successor is appointed and qualified.



(1995 Code, § 1-7006)



§ 35.07  COMPENSATION.



   The compensation of the Municipal Judge shall be as determined by the
Council from time to time.



(1995 Code, § 1-7007)



§ 35.08  OATH.



   Before entering upon his or her duties, the Municipal Judge shall take
and subscribe the usual oath of office.



(1995 Code, § 1-7008)  (Ord. passed 2-12-1957)



§ 35.09  VACANCY.



   In the case of a vacancy in the Office of Municipal Judge by death,
resignation or otherwise, the Council may appoint a successor to fill the
unexpired term. In the case of the temporary absence, sickness or disability
of the Municipal Judge, the Council may appoint an interim, temporary
Municipal Judge.



(1995 Code, § 1-7009)



§ 35.10  TIME OF COURT.



   The Municipal Judge shall hold at least one session of Municipal Court
in each week. He or she shall also hold other sessions as may be required to
dispatch the judicial affairs of the town. In the event that the Municipal
Judge cannot attend any session of court, the assistant Municipal Judge(s)
shall hold court in his or her stead.



(1995 Code, § 1-7010)  (Ord. passed 2-19-1957)



§ 35.11  RULES OF PROCEDURE.



   The Municipal Judge shall establish and prescribe all necessary and
proper rules of procedure for the Municipal Court; provided, however, that
the same shall not conflict in any manner with existing state and town laws.



(1995 Code, § 1-7011)



§ 35.12  DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY OR HIS OR HER DESIGNEE TO ATTEND COURT.



   The Director of Public Safety or his or her designee shall attend all
sessions of the Municipal Court and shall be subject to orders of the court
and shall execute the orders, writs and mandates therefrom and perform other
duties in connection with the court as may be provided by ordinance or state
statute.



(1995 Code, § 1-7012)  (Ord. passed 2-19-1957)



§ 35.13  APPEARANCE BONDS.



   (A)   In any case in Municipal Court where a bond or other
recognizance is required, if the qualifications of the proposed surety on the
bond or recognizance are not known to the Municipal Judge, he or she may, in
his or her discretion, require the person proposing to sign as the surety, in
addition to meeting all other requirements of law to file with the bond or
recognizance bonds or recognizances in civil or criminal cases, or both, on
which that person is surety. The affidavit shall be attached to the bond or
recognizance and kept therewith. In computing and determining the
qualification of the person as surety on the bond or recognizance in
question, the actual value of the person’s real property shall be
calculated at five times the assessed value thereof, as shown by certificate
of the County Auditor and from the actual value so computed shall be deducted
the total amount of all outstanding bonds or recognizances on which the
person is surety, as well as the person’s outstanding encumbrances, liens
upon the real estate, his or her homestead and other exemptions allowed by
law.



   (B)   The Municipal Judge may, unless otherwise prohibited by law,
require a cash bond rather than a surety bond after any conviction.



(1995 Code, § 1-7013)  (Ord. passed 11-25-1963)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to establish Municipal Court, see S.C. Code § 5-7-230



CHAPTER 36:  TOWN POLICIES; PERSONNEL



Section




General Provisions




   36.01   Personnel administration; adoption



   36.02   At-will employment



   36.03   Reimbursement of expensesincurred  by Mayor and Council



   36.04   Work environment




ADA Grievance Procedure




   36.15   Complaints; procedures




Public Buildings and Property




   36.30   Mowing of tree strips



   36.31   Use of public buildings



   36.32   Marking of town equipment



   36.33   Town vehicles leaving the town limits



   36.34   Surplus equipment



   36.35   Disabled Access Inventory of Town Facilities



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 36.01  PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION; ADOPTION.



   All of the personnel functions, procedures and the like for the town
shall be administered in accordance with the town’s Personnel Policy
Manual, duly approved and adopted by the Council.



(1995 Code, Ch. 6)



§ 36.02  AT-WILL EMPLOYMENT.



   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the town, notwithstanding any
policies, memoranda or handbooks promulgated by the town or any employment
practices of the town that:



   (A)   All employees of the town are employed at-will and may resign
or be discharged from employment at any time; and



   (B)   Only the Town Manager shall have the right to enter into
contracts for other than at-will employment on the town’s behalf. Any
contract for other than at-will employment must:



      (1)   Be in writing;



      (2)   Be executed by the Town Manager;



      (3)   Specify the duration of the employment; and



      (4)   Specifically state that the contract is being created
pursuant to the Town Manager’s authority under this section.



(Ord. 01-06-04, passed 1-6-2004)



§ 36.03  REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES INCURRED BY MAYOR AND COUNCIL.



   (A)   Lodging.



      (1)   The cost of lodging shall be reimbursed for Council
members only. An itemized receipt shall be filed with the Town Purchasing
Agent as provided herein. During conventions, seminars and similar
activities, lodging shall be on the recommended list. Lodging expenses
incurred in excess of the amount charged at the headquarters/seminar hotel
shall not be reimbursed unless lodging at the headquarters/seminar hotel is
not available. All reservations for lodging shall be made by the Municipal
Clerk or the Town Manager.



      (2)   The cost of additional services such as pay movies, room
service, valet service, personal telephone calls and the like shall be at the
expense of the Council member concerned. The cost of laundry and dry cleaning
is reimbursable if the official’s absence extends over more than seven
calendar days. An itemized receipt shall be filed as provided herein.



      (3)   Costs necessary to perform official duties shall be
reimbursed provided an itemized receipt is filed as provided herein.



   (B)   Meals.  Council members traveling on official business shall
be granted a per diem of $75 per day.



   (C)   Mileage.  When utilizing private vehicles, Council members’
mileage for official town business trips shall be reimbursed at the standard
mileage rate currently in effect as recognized by the United States Internal
Revenue Service.



   (D)   Voucher submittal.  Itemized receipts and vouchers shall be
filed with the Town Purchasing Agent within five days after return from
travel. The town shall pay valid claims within seven days from date of filing.



(Ord. 02-19-02B, passed 2-19-2002; Ord. 06-15-04, passed 6-15-2004)



§ 36.04  WORK ENVIRONMENT.



   (A)   The town will endeavor to provide a work environment free of
recognized hazards through the establishment and implementation of loss
control policies and procedures, and their subsequent amendments and
additions, designed to provide protection to town employees, public and
private property, and members of the public.



   (B)   The town will support compliance with all Federal and state
safety regulations; provide and require the use of personal protective
equipment by all employees; and insure that all employees are advised of and
understand their loss control responsibilities in the performance of their
work.



(Res. 04172018-A, passed 4-17-2018)



ADA GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE



§ 36.15  COMPLAINTS; PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The town hereby establishes a resolution of complaints
alleging any violation of U.S. Department of Justice Disabilities Act, being
42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq. Title II states, in part, that “no otherwise
qualified disabled individual shall, solely by reason of the disability, be
excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of or be subjected to
discrimination” in programs or activities sponsored by a public entity.



   (B)   Complaints should be addressed to: Town Manager, Town of
Winnsboro, P.O. Box 209, Winnsboro, SC 29180.



      (1)   Complaints must be filed in writing within 30 days after
the complainant becomes aware of the alleged violation, contain the name and
address of the person filing it, and briefly describe the circumstances
surrounding the alleged violation of the regulations.



      (2)   An investigation, as may be appropriate, shall follow a
filing of complaint and shall be conducted by Ms. Rice. The investigation
shall be informal but thorough and shall afford complainant and his or her
representatives, if any, opportunity to submit evidence relevant to the
complaint.



      (3)   A written determination as to the validity of the
complaint and a description of the resolution, if any shall be issued by Ms.
Rice and a copy forwarded to the complainant no later than 30 days after its
filing.



      (4)   The complainant, in instances where he or she is
dissatisfied with the initial resolution, may appeal the decision of the ADA
Coordinator to the Town Manager. These requests should be in writing and
submitted within 30 days following receipt of the Coordinator’s decision.
Request for reconsideration of the case should be addressed to: Mr. James
Futrell, Town Manager, Town of Winnsboro, P.O. Box 209, Winnsboro, SC 29180.



      (5)   Files and records of the town relating to the complaints
filed shall be maintained by the ADA Coordinator.



      (6)   Use of the grievance procedure by a complainant is not a
prerequisite to the pursuit of other remedies such as the filing of an ADA
complaint with the responsible federal department or agency.



      (7)   These rules shall be construed to protect the
substantive rights of interested persons to meet appropriate due process
standards and to assure that the town complies with the ADA and implementing
regulations.



(1995 Code, § 1-6045)



PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND PROPERTY



§ 36.30  MOWING OF TREE STRIPS.



   (A)   The appearance of the town will be improved whenever possible.
Regarding moving of tree strips, the main arteries will be moved by town
crews within the town limits.



   (B)   The arteries are:



      (1)   Congress Street;



      (2)   Washington Street;



      (3)   Moultrie Street; and



      (4)   Zion Street from Bratton Street to Moultrie Street.



(1995 Code, § 3-3001)  (Res. passed 1-23-1979)



§ 36.31  USE OF PUBLIC BUILDINGS.



   (A)   A listing of real property including public buildings is
maintained in a real property inventory list in the Town Hall.



   (B)   Whenever possible, town-owned buildings or property not used
by the town should be revenue-producing and not a drain on the taxpayers.



(1995 Code, § 3-3002)  (Res. passed 1-23-1979)



§ 36.32  MARKING OF TOWN EQUIPMENT.



   Decals identifying all motorized vehicles owned by the town (trucks,
motor cars and the like) shall be placed on town equipment identifying it as
such except where exempted by Town Manager. If possible, decals will be
placed on lawnmowers so that private use will not be made of public equipment.



(1995 Code, § 3-3003)  (Res. passed 1-23-1979)



§ 36.33  TOWN VEHICLES LEAVING THE TOWN LIMITS.



   No town vehicle will be taken out of town for private purposes.



(1995 Code, § 3-3004)  (Res. passed 1-23-1979)



§ 36.34  SURPLUS EQUIPMENT.



   All surplus equipment of the town will be offered for sale from time to
time at advertised auctions.



(1995 Code, § 3-3005)  (Res. passed 1-23-1979)



§ 36.35  DISABLED ACCESS INVENTORY OF TOWN FACILITIES.



   The “Disabled Access Inventory of Town Facilities” for the town is
located in the Personnel Director’s office.



(1995 Code, § 3-3006)  (Ord. passed 11-5-1984)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      51.   GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL



      52.   GAS REGULATIONS



      53.   WATER REGULATIONS



      54.   SEWER REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 50:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   50.01   Utility departments established



   50.02   Prohibited acts



   50.03   Utility connections not to be made unless indebtedness
satisfied



   50.04   Town policies



   50.05   Natural gas distribution system combined with combined
utility system



   50.06   Development impact fees for water and wastewater disposal
facilities



§ 50.01  UTILITY DEPARTMENTS ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Gas, Water and Sewer Department
and an Electric Department which shall be respectively headed by directors
appointed by the Town Manager.



   (B)   The directors shall supervise and be responsible for the
operation of the gas, water and sewer services, and the electrical service
provided by the town.



(1995 Code, § 4-1001)



Cross-reference:



   Combined utility systems, see § 50.05



§ 50.02  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any connection
whatever with either the electric, water or sewer systems of the town, unless
that person shall have been duly authorized to make the connection by the
appropriate director.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with or
maliciously break or injure any electric meter, water meter, water meter box,
street light, street light post or other electrical or water works equipment
of the town.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bypass or attempt to
bypass any electric or water meter in the town without special written
permission of the appropriate director authorizing the bypass.



   (D)   No person, other than a duly authorized agent or employee of
the utility department, shall turn on or attempt to restore water or electric
service into any house, store or lot, after the service has been cut off for
nonpayment of bills or noncompliance with the provisions of this code or
other rules and regulations of the town.



(1995 Code, § 4-1002)  (Ord. passed 1-26-1948)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.03  UTILITY CONNECTIONS NOT TO BE MADE UNLESS INDEBTEDNESS SATISFIED.



   (A)   No person who owes any past due utility bill to the town for
electric, water, natural gas and/or sewer service and who applies for any or
all of the above utility services from the town, at a new or additional
location, shall not receive any listed services from the town at the new or
additional location until all past due indebtedness to the town is paid in
full.



   (B)   Town utility employees are directed not to make any utility
connections while the past due indebtedness remains owing to the town by the
customer.



(1995 Code, § 4-1003)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1970)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.04  TOWN POLICIES.



   (A)   Water and sewerage rates should be set so that rates reflect
the cost of these services. They should not be subsidized by electrical and
gas services. This is especially necessary because not all customers
subscribe to electrical and gas services.



   (B)   Free electricity, water, gas or sewer shall not be provided to
any person or organization.



(1995 Code, § 4-1004)  (Res. passed 1-23-1979)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.05  NATURAL GAS DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM COMBINED WITH COMBINED UTILITY
SYSTEM.



   (A)   The Town Council hereby makes the following findings of fact:



      (1)   The combined utility system and the natural gas
distribution system of the town each constitutes an “enterprise” as that
term is defined in S.C. Code § 6-17-20, as amended; and



      (2)   The proposed expansions of the natural gas distribution
system, waterworks system and sewage collection and treatment system to be
financed by the bonds are deemed by the Town Council to be related to the
combined utility system and the natural gas distribution system and the
construction of the proposed project shall be considered an improvement,
extension or betterment of the existing combined utility system and natural
gas distribution system.



   (B)   The combined utility system, consisting of the waterworks
system, the sewage collection and treatment system and electric distribution
system shall, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
section, be combined into one system to be known as the “combined utility
system” of the town.



(1995 Code, § 4-1005)  (Ord. passed 2-10-1987)



§ 50.06  DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES FOR WATER AND WASTEWATER DISPOSAL
FACILITIES.



   (A)   The City Council amends the existing schedule of rates and
charges for water and sewer customers to include development impact fees.



   (B)   The rates adopted shall go into effect 90 days from the
adoption of this section.



   (C)   The Town Manager and the staff of the Water and Sewer
Department will provide notice to the known developers in Fairfield and
Richland Counties of the institution of the new impact fee charges by making
available the town’s schedule of rates, as amended, and the date when the
charges will take effect. The Town Manager and the staff of the Water and
Sewer Department will also provide any person applying for service a copy of
the new rate schedule and the date when the new rates go into effect.



   (D)   Persons completing application for water and sewer service
between the adoption of this section and the effective date for the amended
rate schedule will be permitted to be connected under the existing rate
schedule. Developers who enter into a Water Utility Development and Service
Agreement between adoption of this section and 90 days, may receive the water
capacity and allotted meters without the adopted development impact fee. At
the expiration of this 90 day period, water and sewer applicants and Water
Utility Development and Service Agreements will include charges for
developmental impact fees.



(Ord. 050515, passed 5-19-2015)



Cross-reference:



   Planning and zoning, see Ch. 154



CHAPTER 51:  GARBAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL



Section



   51.01   Definitions



   51.02   Disposal; containers required



   51.03   Collection of garbage



   51.04   Annual review



§ 51.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARBAGE.  Includes all animal, fruit and other vegetable matter and
all organic refuse resulting from the preparation of food.



   WASTE MATTER.  Includes grass, ashes, tin cans, metal ware, broken
glass, crockery, stoneware and all non-putrescible wastes.



(1995 Code, § 6-1001)  (Ord. passed 3-11-1958)



§ 51.02  DISPOSAL; CONTAINERS REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or place any
garbage, within the meaning of this chapter, in any alley, street, river or
other public place within the town, nor shall any person deposit or place any
garbage upon private property, whether owned by that person or not, within
the limits of the town unless the garbage shall be enclosed in a suitable
container.



   (B)   Containers shall be constructed of metal or other
town-approved materials in a manner as to be strong, not easily corrodible,
rodent-proof and shall have a tight-fitting cover. Containers shall have a
capacity of not more than 90 gallons nor less than 20 gallons and if one
container is not sufficient to hold the quantity of garbage accumulated
between collections, a sufficient number of containers shall be provided by
the homeowner.



   (C)   Boxes, papers, tree cuttings and odd articles shall be in
lengths not to exceed five feet and not to exceed 70 pounds in weight.



(1995 Code, § 6-1002)  (Ord. passed 3-11-1958; Ord. 08-18-09-A, passed
8-18-2009)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.03  COLLECTION OF GARBAGE.



   (A)   The town, in furtherance of its decision to provide for the
collection of garbage as defined herein, will establish a department,
identified for budgetary purposes as the “Sanitation Department.” The
function of the Department will be the removal of garbage, as defined by §
51.01, generated within the town limits.



   (B)   The Sanitation Department will provide collection services to
residential properties and commercial properties (owned or leased) that limit
their waste generation to no more than two containers a week. A separate
collection for yard debris (tree limbs, leaves, grass cuttings, weeds,
bushes, vegetation and the like) will be provided, as scheduled, by Council
resolution. Residential-sized curbside containers provided by the town will
be collected once per week, or as hereafter scheduled by Council resolution.



   (C)   Commercial properties (owned or leased), located within town
limits that generate in excess of two containers per week or require special
sized containers for collection are required to contract with private haulers
of garbage, as Council finds the providing of these services will not produce
savings for commercial property using containers larger than described in §
51.02(B) for onsite retention of garbage and is not cost-effective for the
taxpayers of the town.



(1995 Code, § 6-1003)  (Ord. passed 3-11-1958; Ord. 08-18-09-A, passed
8-18-2009)



§ 51.04  ANNUAL REVIEW.



   (A)   The annual costs for garbage collection will be reviewed by
Council in May each year and Council will provide for the anticipated
operational expenses within the new budget including the percentage of the
costs to be derived from general tax revenues and from user fees.



   (B)   Fees in existence on the date of adoption of this section will
remain in effect until changed by a duly adopted ordinance of Council.



   (C)   The budget for the Sanitation Department will be established
in conformity with § 51.03(A), until the time as Council deems, by
ordinance, that providing garbage collection is not cost-effective for the
town, that a more economical, healthy and safe public or private alternative
is available, and that dissolution of the Department is in the best interest
of the citizenry.



   (D)   This section shall take effect upon the date of adoption.



(Ord. 08-18-09-A, passed 8-18-2009)



CHAPTER 52:  GAS REGULATIONS



Section




General Regulations




   52.01   Rates subject to revision



   52.02   Meters to be used



   52.03   Appliances to conform to Building Code



   52.04   No free service to be furnished



   52.05   Gas not to be resold



   52.06   Billing for service; due date; payable to Finance Director



   52.07   Service contract; firm supply



   52.08   Contract; preferred interruptible service



   52.09   Rates based on supply cost



   52.10   Payment of bills; disconnection



   52.11   Tampering prohibited



   52.12   Procedure for nonpayment termination of electrical and gas
service




Rates and Charges




   52.25   Title; application



   52.26   Purpose



   52.27   Gas rates and charges



   52.28   Effective date



   Appendix A: Forms



GENERAL REGULATIONS



§ 52.01  RATES SUBJECT TO REVISION.



   All rates prescribed by this chapter shall at all times be subject to
revision, and all rights of customers hereunder, except the right of any
customer who has heretofore entered into a contract for the purchase of
interruptible gas for industrial use, shall be in all respects subordinate to
the obligations and undertakings of the town and any bond which is may
hereafter undertake to issue.



(1995 Code, § 4-4001)  (Ord. passed 4-21-1970)



§ 52.02  METERS TO BE USED.



   All gas shall be furnished on a metered basis, through meters of a
standard and approved design and type. A separate meter shall be installed
for each domestic, commercial and industrial user. The bills rendered by the
town to its natural gas customers shall always be determined from and in
accordance with the meter readings taken by the town at regular intervals.



(1995 Code, § 4-4002)  (Ord. passed 4-21-1970)



§ 52.03  APPLIANCES TO CONFORM TO BUILDING CODE.



   Natural gas service shall not be made available to any premises unless
the gas piping, valves, fittings, fixtures or gas-burning devices upon the
premises conform to the requirements of the 2006 International Building Code
as adopted by the town and made a part of this code of ordinances. Services
may be refused or terminated by the town where it has been determined that
the customer is violating the provisions of the Building Code or other
provisions of the code of ordinances of the town pertaining to gas
installations.



(1995 Code, § 4-4003)  (Ord. passed 4-21-1970)



§ 52.04  NO FREE SERVICE TO BE FURNISHED.



   No gas shall be furnished, nor shall any service be rendered free of
charge to any person, firm, corporation, municipal corporation, political
division or subdivision or public agency, including the town, and any other
municipality served by the system, and each of the foregoing shall be
classified in the same manner as any other customer.



(1995 Code, § 4-4004)  (Ord. passed 4-21-1970)



§ 52.05  GAS NOT TO BE RESOLD.



   Natural gas sold and delivered by the town to any customer shall not be
resold or delivered by the customer to any other person, and service may be
suspended by the town for any unauthorized sale or delivery.



(1995 Code, § 4-4005)  (Ord. passed 4-21-1970)



§ 52.06  BILLING FOR SERVICE; DUE DATE; PAYABLE TO FINANCE DIRECTOR.



   All gas meters shall be read and bills rendered monthly. All bills
shall be due and payable, from and after the date specified thereon, at the
office of the Finance Director of the town.



(1995 Code, § 4-4006)  (Ord. passed 4-21-1970)



§ 52.07  SERVICE CONTRACT; FIRM SUPPLY.



   The following terms, conditions and monthly charges for firm natural
gas shall be applicable to residential consumers, and to commercial users who
contract for the purchase of a firm supply of natural gas.



   (A)   This class of service shall be available to all customers
within the service area of the system who make the required deposit.



   (B)   The rate schedule for gas consumed shall be set by Council or
its designee.



   (C)   A deposit, which shall be set by Council, shall be paid by
each customer prior to the occurrence when service to the customer shall
commence.



   (D)   No new natural gas service shall be made to any mobile home as
herein defined until the cost of installation of the natural gas service to
the mobile home has been paid in full by the customer to the town. Refund of
the installation costs shall not be made by the town in the event of removal
of the mobile home to another site, or for any other reason.



   (E)   Each separate dwelling unit, whether constituting a single
house or a unit in a duplex, apartment house or any other form of a dwelling
building, shall be considered as a separate unit for the purpose of this
section, and each unit shall be separately metered. A house trailer shall be
considered a separate dwelling unit within the meaning of this regulation.
Similarly, each commercial establishment shall be treated as a separate unit.
A MOBILE HOME as herein referred to is defined as being any house trailer,
whether on wheels or permanent foundation, and any prefabricated house which
is capable of being moved in substantial portions by transportation of the
sections on wheels, trucks or other conveyances.



(1995 Code, § 4-4007)  (Ord. passed 4-21-1970)



§ 52.08  CONTRACT; PREFERRED INTERRUPTIBLE SERVICE.



   The following terms, conditions and charges shall apply to all
industrial customers who shall contract for preferred interruptible gas
service.



   (A)   Service in this category shall be available on all occasions
except when the use of gas by those who have contracted for a firm supply of
gas shall exhaust the supply of gas available.



   (B)   Gas purchased shall be paid for at the rate established by
Council or its designee.



   (C)   A deposit set by Council shall be paid by each customer prior
to the occasion when service to the customer shall commence.



(1995 Code, § 4-4008)  (Ord. passed 4-21-1970)



§ 52.09  RATES BASED ON SUPPLY COST.



   The rate schedule is based upon the town’s purchase of gas from the
supplier(s) as approved by the State Public Service Commission. If the
supplier(s) increases or decreases this gas tariff in the future, then
adjustments to this rate schedule may be made by the town to include the
effect of the increases or decreases, and the adjustments shall automatically
become a part of this rate schedule.



(1995 Code, § 4-4009)  (Ord. passed 4-21-1970)



§ 52.10  PAYMENT OF BILLS; DISCONNECTION.



   (A)   It is the policy of the town to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills.  The town’s form for
application for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to
the title, address, room number, and telephone number of the official in
charge of billing, clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the
effect:



      (1)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date
set forth on the bill; and



      (2)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a
second bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not
paid within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be
discontinued for nonpayment; and



      (3)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may
present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the town
official in charge of utility billing.  This official shall be authorized to
order that the customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the
authority to make a final determination of the customer’s complaint.



   (B)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be
entertained; only questions of proper and correct billing will be
considered.  In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the
hearing procedure provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time
specified, but in no event until the charges have been due and unpaid for at
least 30 days.



   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the town to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated
only after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a
turn-on charge in the sum of $20.



(1995 Code, § 4-4010)  (Ord. passed 4-21-1970)



§ 52.11  TAMPERING PROHIBITED.



   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person or persons to
tamper with or change any gas meter, or to make any connection to the gas
system without written permission from the town, or to reconnect service when
it has been disconnected for nonpayment of a bill for service, until the bill
has been paid in full, including penalty, reconnection charge and, where
applicable, mileage charge.



(1995 Code, § 4-4011)  (Ord. passed 4-21-1970)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 52.12  PROCEDURE FOR NONPAYMENT TERMINATION OF ELECTRICAL AND GAS SERVICE.



   These procedures are established to ensure the disconnection of
electric and natural gas service by the town for nonpayment is fair with
regard to all utility customers and that they are uniformly applied to all
customers.  These procedures are established in accordance with S.C. Code
§§ 5-31-2510, 5-31-2520, 5-31-2530, 5-31-2540 and 5-31-2550.



   (A)   Collection cycle and schedule for disconnection of service for
nonpayment.



      (1)   The town will observe the following collection cycle and
schedule for disconnection of service for nonpayment.



         (a)   The collections cycle begins on the day the bill
is printed and dated. This is day zero in the cycle.



         (b)   On day 18, the account is past due. If this or any
collections event day occurs on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, the collection
event occurs on the next business day.



         (c)   On day 18, a bill is noted as delinquent and a
1.5% late fee is assessed.



         (d)   On or about day 30, a notice is printed on the
next bill. This is mailed on or about day 30.



         (e)   On day 40, the service is eligible for
disconnection at the property.



      (2)   If any of the above dates in the collection cycle fall
on a Saturday, Sunday or official holiday of the town, the collection event
occurs on the next business day. (The town hereafter in this procedure will
be referred to as the utility.)



   (B)   Notification procedures and time limits. The utility is
committed to providing notice to all customers of the expected disconnection
date. The utility will provide either adequate notice of the disconnection
date on the original bill or send a separate notice via mail that provides
notice of the disconnection date. The notice shall be placed in the mail at
least seven days prior to the termination date.



      (1)   The utility shall observe the following disconnection
procedures.



         (a)   The utility will generate a list each day at 8:00
a.m. of the customers eligible for disconnection on that day.



         (b)   Utility staff members will review each account in
the morning to see if the customer has made a payment by 5:00 p.m. on the
previous business day to prevent the cut-off. Staff will also check to see if
the customer is a special-needs customer and/or if the customer will require
third-party notification (staff will contact these customers to arrange
payment options).



         (c)   Customers eligible for disconnection are added to
the cut-off list.



         (d)   Service technicians will check the weather to
determine whether a disconnection is appropriate for that day.



         (e)   Service technicians will go into the field to make
disconnections. The utility ensures that all disconnections are completed by
2:00 p.m. to give the customer time to come in and pay before the end of the
business day at 5:00 p.m.



         (f)   If the customer comes in and makes a payment
before the end of the business day, the utility will use its reasonable
efforts to reconnect service as soon as possible, provided the customer pays
a $20 reconnection fee. If the customer requests reconnection after 5:00 p.m.
of the business day, an additional $30 reconnection fee is required.



      (2)   As a matter of normal practice, the utility will not
disconnect electric or natural gas service on Fridays or on days before an
official utility holiday. However, at the utility’s discretion,
disconnections may occur on any day of the week, provided the utility has
followed the notification and disconnection procedures for nonpayment.



   (C)   Payment plans.  The utility recognizes that at times
customers will face extraordinary circumstances that lead to difficult
financial situations. It is for these times the utility has established a
payment plan program to assist customers in satisfying their delinquent
account.



      (1)   Payment plans for delinquent accounts will be managed as
follows.



         (a)   Accounts charged-off as bad debt will require that
the customer pay half the bad debt balance plus the deposit to secure another
account. The balance on the bad debt must be paid in 30 days.



         (b)   A payment arrangement of up to four months may be
offered with the requirement that the bills on the payment plan and any
current bills be paid each month.  The payment plan will be calculated to
remove the arrears amount within the agreed time (maximum of four months)
while keeping ongoing charge current.



         (c)   If a customer has extraordinary circumstances and
is not eligible for financial assistance, the utility may offer the customer
a payment arrangement. Customers with extraordinary circumstances are
eligible for arrangements.  An EXTRAORDINARY CIRCUMSTANCE is broadly defined
as a significant event or events affecting a customer’s life and ability to
pay. Utility customer service representatives will use their best judgment in
applying the extraordinary circumstances determination and are expected to
seek advice and confirmation from supervisory staff as needed. The
representative granting approval must enter appropriate account notes.



         (d)   Suitable payment arrangements will include a
minimum 33% of the delinquent amount paid at the time of payment arrangement
and remaining delinquent amount paid within a maximum period of four months.
A minimum of one-third of the delinquent amount, and all current amounts must
be paid monthly. Payment arrangements may be made only three times in a
12-month period; otherwise payment in full is required.



      (2)   Payment arrangements may be made on closed accounts if
the customer does not have active service. Payment arrangements are not made
on deposits for new accounts, reconnection fees or administrative
investigative fees.



   (D)   Availability of public or private assistance in paying bills. 



      (1)   Annually, the utility will include as part of the
regular monthly bill or as a bill stuffer a list of social service agencies
that have agreed to have their agency name and contact information sent to
the customers.



      (2)   As part of the normal process of working with customers
who request assistance, the utility will provide information concerning
financial assistance programs in the local area. If interested, customers
will need to apply to the appropriate agency. The agency receiving the
application will evaluate their application and make their determination as
to eligibility and if appropriate, notify the utility of the results. The
utility does not make any financial assistance determinations.



   (E)   Standards for determining weather conditions.  The utility
will not disconnect any electric or natural gas service on days that the
forecast high temperature is 99ºF or higher during cooling months or the
forecast high temperature is 35ºF or lower in heating months. These
guidelines shall reflect actual temperature forecasts and not the projected
heat indexes or wind chill forecasts. The forecast temperatures shall come
from www.noaa.gov, www.weather.com and www.accuweather.com at 8:00 a.m. on
the day of scheduled cut-off. If any of the three on-line resources shows a
forecast high temperature outside the disconnect threshold (above 99ºF or
below 35ºF), the utility will not disconnect service for non-payment on that
day.



   (F)   Third-party notification system.



      (1)   The utility is committed to a third-party notification
program for its electric and natural gas customers. As a result, at least by
August 30 of each year, the utility will notify all customers that a
third-party notification program is available. The customer will be asked to
contact the utility and complete a form that will be kept on file by the
utility. A copy of this form is attached. The form must be renewed by the
customer annually to ensure service continuity.



      (2)   Disconnection procedures for customers participating in
the third-party notification program are as follows:  the utility will
attempt to contact the third party to notify them the cut-off is to occur one
day prior to disconnection, using the phone number provided by the customer
on the third-party notification form. The third party will have until the
close of the business day 5:00 p.m. to pay the amount due. The services will
be disconnected the following day.



   (G)   Recognition of special needs customers.  The utility is
committed to meeting the requirements of our special needs customers and will
keep on file a master list of special needs customers.



      (1)   To be recognized as a special needs customer, the
customer and a state licensed healthcare provider are required to complete
the medical certification form (see Appendix A) certifying the customer or a
member of the customer’s household suffers from a health condition which
would be especially dangerous to the patient’s health if the electricity or
natural gas service is disconnected for non-payment. The form, documenting a
qualifying condition, must be faxed or e-mailed from the office of the
licensed healthcare provider. The certifying healthcare provider must be
licensed in this state as a medical doctor, physician’s assistant, nurse
practitioner or advanced-practice registered nurse.



      (2)   The form must be resubmitted by the customer annually by
October 15 to continue participation in the program.



      (3)   All special needs customers will be encouraged to
participate in the third-party notification program. The third-party
notification form (see Appendix A) must be completed and submitted to the
utility to participate in the program and resubmitted annually by October 15
to continue participation in the program.



      (4)   A special needs customer will be given the same
privilege as other customers to participate in a payment plan (detailed
herein). If a special needs customer is subject to disconnection and has not
taken advantage of a payment plan, the utility will observe the following
schedule for disconnection of service for nonpayment.



         (a)   The utility will notify the special needs customer
and an authorized third party (authorized by the special needs customer on
the third-party notification form) prior to the impending service
disconnection.



         (b)   In addition to the third-party notification, the
utility will leave a notice at the front door of the special needs
customer’s location subject to disconnection one day prior to the schedule
disconnection date. In the event the stated terms are not met, the utility
will disconnect service and may do so at any time specified in the
notification until those terms are met.



         (c)   After disconnection, if the customer pays in full
or arrangements are made to enter into a payment plan, the utility will use
reasonable efforts to reconnect service as soon as possible, provided the
customer pays a $20 reconnect fee during regular business hours and/or pays
an additional $30 fee after normal business hours.



      (5)   Special needs customers are in no way released from
their obligation to pay their monthly bill according to the terms as noted on
the monthly bill.



(Ord. 11-20-06-A, passed 11-20-2006; Ord. 040511, passed 4-5-2011)



Statutory reference:



   Authorization, see S.C. Code §§ 5-31-2510, 5-31-2520, 5-31-2530,
5-31-2540 and 5-31-2550



RATES AND CHARGES



§ 52.25  TITLE; APPLICATION.



   (A)   This subchapter shall be more commonly known as the town’s
Gas Utility Department’s Schedule of Rates and Charges.



   (B)   The Schedule of Rates and Charges and service fees is located
under § 52.27.



(Ord. 112006B, passed 12-5-2006; Ord. 120611, passed - -2011)



§ 52.26  PURPOSE.



   (A)   It is the purpose of this subchapter to establish a schedule
of rates and charges to be collected by the town from users of the town’s
gas utility system. These rates and charges shall be for the services
provided, as established for each user class as shown in § 52.27, and
incorporated by an order that the town’s gas utility system will recover,
from each user and user class, revenue which is proportional to its use of
the town’s gas lines in terms of volume and load. User charges are levied
to defray the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement of the
gas works and a reasonable return on the town’s investment for other public
uses that benefit the citizens of the town.



   (B)   User charges shall be uniform in magnitude within a user class.



(Ord. 112006B, passed 12-5-2006; Ord. 120611, passed - -2011)



§ 52.27  GAS RATES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   Effective the first billing cycle after the effective date of
the adoption of this subchapter, each metered customer shall pay a monthly
usage charge in accordance with the schedule of gas rates and charges.



   (B)   Charges for monthly service shall be comprised of a basic
facilities charge, a distribution/transportation charge and purchased gas
charge (PGC). Additional meter and/or demand charges may apply to certain
categories of industrial customers. All customer classes share in the cost of
line loss which is calculated as 2% of the commodity cost.



 


Customers/Charge Type

 

Rate





Residential Customers:


Basic facilities charge:
 
$16.00 per month (no usage included) plus


Purchased gas charge:
 
Calculated cost per therm delivered to the customer each month in accordance
with the cost of gas purchased by the system plus


Distribution/transportation charge:
 
$0.89 per therm delivered to the customer during the month


Commercial Customers:


Basic facilities charge:
 
$35.00 per month (no usage included) plus


Purchased gas charge:
 
Calculated cost per therm delivered to the customer each month in accordance
with the cost of gas purchased by the system plus


Distribution/transportation charge:
 
$0.89 per therm delivered to the customer during the month


Big Business:


Basic facilities charge:
 
$75.00 per month (no usage included) plus


Purchased gas charge:
 
Calculated cost per therm delivered to the customer each month in accordance
with the cost of gas purchased by the system plus


Distribution/transportation charge:
 
$0.89 per therm delivered to the customer during the month


Small Industrial:


Basic facilities charge:
 
$100.00 per month (no usage included) plus


Purchased gas charge:
 
Calculated cost per therm delivered to the customer each month in accordance
with the cost of gas purchased by the system plus


Distribution/transportation charge:
 
$0.89 per therm delivered to the customer during the month


Firm Industrial Gas Service:


Basic facilities charge:
 
$300.00 per month (no usage included) for firm customers with monthly
consumption under 2,500 decatherms;

$550.00 per month (no usage included) for firm customers with monthly
consumption over 2,500 decatherms plus


Demand charge:
 
$14.00 per month per decatherm of contract demand plus


Purchased gas charge:
 
Cost per decatherm delivered to the customer and calculated each month in
accordance with the cost of gas purchased by the system plus overrun
penalties to town, if incurred under their wholesale gas contract, plus


Distribution/transportation charge:
 
$1.30 per decatherm delivered to the customer during the month


Daily deliveries in excess of a firm customer’s contract demand are
considered interruptible. The customer will be billed monthly for excess
deliveries on the basis of the rates charges for interruptible deliveries
outlined below.


Interruptible Industrial Gas Service:


Basic facilities charge:
 
$300.00 per month (no usage included) for firm customers with monthly
consumption under 2,500 decatherms;

$550.00 per month (no usage included) for firm customers with monthly
consumption over 2,500 decatherms plus


Purchased gas charge:
 
Cost per decatherm delivered to the customer and calculated each month in
accordance with the cost of gas purchased by the system plus overrun
penalties to town, if incurred under their wholesale gas contract, plus


Distribution/transportation charge:
 
$1.30 per decatherm delivered to the customer during the month


All gas delivered under this category is subject to interruption because of
unavailability of gas from the town’s wholesale supplier or unavailable
line capacity within the town’s system.


Interruptible Only Industrial Customers:


Interruptible only industrial customers shall be charged, based upon their
particular needs and requirements. Customers currently falling under this
category and their established charges are:     Performance Fibers


Transportation Only Industrial Customers:


Transportation only industrial customers shall be charged, based upon their
particular needs and requirements. Customers currently falling under this
category and their established charges are:     [Under review]




 



   (C)   These rates and charges reflect those adopted with the
town’s budget ordinance and shall take effect upon signing, with billings
for monthly service sent on or after January 1, 2012.



(Ord. 112006B, passed 12-5-2006; Ord. 120611, passed - -2011)



§ 52.28  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   The provisions set forth in this subchapter shall be in full force and
effect from and after its passage and adoption.



(Ord. 112006B, passed 12-5-2006; Ord. 120611, passed - -2011)



APPENDIX A:  FORMS



Form




   A-1   Special Needs Customer Medical Certification Form





   A-2   Third-Party Notification Form




FORM A-1.  SPECIAL NEEDS CUSTOMER MEDICAL CERTIFICATION FORM.




TOWN OF WINNSBORO





SPECIAL NEEDS CUSTOMER MEDICAL CERTIFICATION FORM




   (Please Type or Print All Information)



Customer Information to be completed by customer:



Name                                                
               Account Number                          
                 



Social Security Number                                    
                                                   
                   



Work Phone                          Home Phone          
                   Cell Phone                        
         



Account Address                                        
                                                   
                     



Patient’s Name                                      
                                                   
                           



Please read the following and initial each one:



_____   I certify that the patient named above is a member of my household
residing at the above listed address.



_____   I understand that this Certificate will expire on October 15 and
must be resubmitted annually by this date to continue participating in the
Special Needs Customer Program.



_____   I further understand that this in no way releases me from my
obligation to pay my monthly bill in accordance with the standard payment
terms.



Customer’s Signature                                    
             Date                                  
                   



Certificates are not issued for water service that is subject to
disconnection.



Medical Information below to be completed by a SC Licensed Healthcare Provider



I certify that I have examined the patient named above and, in my
professional opinion as a medical doctor, physician’s assistant, nurse
practitioner or advanced-practice registered nurse licensed by the State of
South Carolina, I certify it would be especially dangerous to my patient’s
health if the electricity and/or natural gas is disconnected for nonpayment
of bills for the reason circled below. (The town will attempt to notify these
customers of a planned outage whenever reasonably possible.)



 

Nebulizer for asthma, lungs
 
Feeding (pump) machine
 
Oxygen machine


Heart monitor
 
Infant apnea monitor
 
Ventilator/respirator


Home dialysis treatment
 
Refrigeration for insulin
 



 



(CPAP machines for adult sleep apnea do not qualify.)



A detailed explanation for reasons not mentioned above must be submitted for
review.



Health Care Provider Name                                  
   Office Phone                                        



SC Medical License Number                                  



Circle one that applies: Medical Doctor, Physician’s Assistant, Nurse
Practitioner, Advanced-Practice Registered Nurse



Office Address                                         
                                                   
                           



Health Care Provider Signature                              
                       Date                        
           



This form must be faxed (803-635-3697) or e-mailed (kbelton@truvista.net)
from the office of the SC licensed healthcare provider to the Town of
Winnsboro.



Special Needs Customers are in no way released from their obligation to pay
their monthly bills according to the terms as noted on the bill.



(Ord. 11-20-06-A, passed 11-20-2006)



FORM A-2: THIRD-PARTY NOTIFICATION FORM.




TOWN OF WINNSBORO





THIRD-PARTY NOTIFICATION FORM





(Please Type or Print All Information)




Name                                                
             Account Number                            
             



Social Security Number ____________________



Work Phone                                Home Phone    
                      Cell Phone                      
         



Account Address                                        
                                                   
                         



The Town of Winnsboro is committed to a third-party notification system for
its electric/natural gas customers. The intent of this program is to offer
our customers the opportunity to have a third party notified in the event of
disconnection of electric and natural gas service due to non-payment of bills.



Customers wishing to take advantage of this system must complete this form in
its entirety and return it to P.O. Box 209, Winnsboro, SC 29180. By
submitting this form, the customer authorizes the Town of Winnsboro to
release his or her utility account information to any or all of the parties
listed by the customer below. The customer also assumes the responsibility to
notify the Town of Winnsboro of any changes to the contact information listed
on this form.



In the event that service for the above utility account is scheduled for
disconnection, the town will call the telephone numbers for the customer and
the third party listed on the Third-Party Notification Form to notify them of
the utility’s intention to disconnect the customer’s service.



This form relates to electric and natural gas service and the town reserves
the right to disconnect any other service for which payment is past due.



In the event that the town attempts to notify the account holder (customer)
and the authorized third party listed below and is unable to reach any or all
parties, the town will continue with service disconnection as scheduled.



This form must be renewed annually by October 15 to ensure service continuity.



Authorized Third Party:



Name                                                
                                                   
                                 



Work Phone                               Home Phone      
                    Cell Phone                        
     



Street Address                                          
                                                   
                           



City, State, Zip                                        
                                                   
                           



Customer Authorization:



I,                           , understand and agree to the terms
listed herein and authorize the Town of Winnsboro to notify the above
authorized third party as to the status of payment or non-payment of my Town
of Winnsboro utilities account. 1 further understand that failure of the Town
of Winnsboro, upon reasonable attempt described here, to notify me or the
authorized third party will not preclude the Town of Winnsboro from
disconnecting my electric service.



Customer Signature:                                      
               Date:                                
             



Customer Printed Name                                    
                                                   
                   



Third Party Signature:                                    
               Date:                                
               



Third Party Printed Name                                  
                                                   
                 



Date:                                                



(Ord. 11-20-06-A, passed 11-20-2006)



CHAPTER 53:  WATER REGULATIONS



Section



Water Service



   53.01   Service



   53.02   Meter responsibility



   53.03   Tampering with meter



   53.04   Payment of utility bills generally; penalty and
discontinuance of service for delinquency or nonpayment; reconnection charges



   53.05   Free service prohibited



   53.06   Shortages



   53.07   Maintenance, operation, service



   53.08   Water customer accounts



   53.09   Right to enter property



   53.10   Hazardous connections



   53.11   Cross-connections



   53.12   Public health and safety



   53.13   Records and billing



Water Rates, Tap Fees, Deposits and the Like



   53.25   Service deposits



   53.26   Water taps



   53.27   Water rates



Drought Management and Response



   53.40   Purpose and intent



   53.41   Definitions



   53.42   Drought Management Plan



   53.43   Drought response ordinance; policy and authority



   53.44   Moderate drought phase



   53.45   Severe drought phase



   53.46   Extreme drought phase



   53.47   Rationing



   53.48   Enforcement of restrictions



   53.49   Variances



   53.50   Status of provisions



Violations



   53.65   Non-service



   53.66   Service discontinuance



 



   53.99   Penalty



WATER SERVICE



§ 53.01  SERVICE.



   The town shall provide necessary utility service to the customer at the
point of street right-of-way from meter connections or property line easement
established for the utility service. Service lines and collection lines from
the right-of-way or property line easement shall be installed, owned and
maintained by the customer subject to regulations given in this chapter.



(1995 Code, § 4-2001)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)



§ 53.02  METER RESPONSIBILITY.



   The town shall be responsible for all damaged meters due to ordinary
wear, improper installation or servicing by the town. The customer shall be
responsible for all damaged or destroyed meters resulting from negligence and
shall be charged for repairs or replacement based on the current prevailing
prices and repair rates.



(1995 Code, § 4-2002)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)



§ 53.03  TAMPERING WITH METER.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, tamper with or
“straight line” a water service, or bypass a meter which has been
installed for the purpose of measuring water service. Any meter found in a
condition which would cause the meter to inaccurately measure the use of
water or the attachment to a meter or distribution wire of any divide,
mechanism or wire which would permit the use of unmetered water or would
cause a meter to inaccurately measure the use thereof shall be evidence that
either the person in whose name the meter was installed or the person for
whose benefit it was diverted caused the water to be diverted from going
through the meter or the meter to inaccurately measure the use of water.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person other than authorized town
personnel to restore water service when the service was discontinued for
non-payment. If any person other than authorized personnel causes water
service to be restored prior to paying in full the outstanding balance, then
it shall be evidence that either the person in whose name the meter was
installed or the person who benefitted caused the service to be restored.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, without first obtaining
permission from the appropriate town official, to tamper with, adjust, run
on, turn off or exercise any control over any fire hydrant, water valve,
water service or any related object (except in case of extreme emergency)
which belongs to the town and used to supply and distribute water.



(1995 Code, § 4-2003)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.04  PAYMENT OF UTILITY BILLS GENERALLY; PENALTY AND DISCONTINUANCE OF
SERVICE FOR DELINQUENCY OR NONPAYMENT; RECONNECTION CHARGES.



   (A)   All utility bills are due and payable 15 days from the date of
billing. If the total amount of the charges has not been received on the
fifteenth day, a penalty of 1.5% shall be applied to the entire bill. If
unpaid after 25 days from the date of billing, services shall be discontinued.



   (B)   When any of the due dates for discontinuance of service fall
on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, an additional day shall be granted before
the discontinuance of service.



   (C)   A charge shall be levied for reestablishing utility service
after cut-off for nonpayment. If the service is reestablished after normal
working hours, the charge shall be one and one-half times the normal fee.



   (D)   Persons moving into a location where utility service is
connected and on, must notify the town of their occupancy within 48 hours.
Failure to notify the town in the specified time shall constitute a
misdemeanor on the part of the occupant and that person shall be responsible
for all charges then due and payable for that service.



   (E)   Persons moving from a location where utility service is
connected and on, must notify the town immediately and request discontinuance
of service. Failure to notify the town as stated above shall constitute a
misdemeanor.



(1995 Code, § 4-2004)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982; Ord. passed 10-2-1984) 
Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.05  FREE SERVICE PROHIBITED.



   No water service shall be furnished, nor shall any service be rendered
free of charge to any person, firm, corporation, municipal corporation,
political division or subdivision or public agency, including the town, and
any other municipality served by the system, and each of the foregoing shall
be classified in the same manner as any other customer.



(1995 Code, § 4-2005)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.06  SHORTAGES.



   When it shall be determined by the Town Council that a water supply
shortage is imminent for any reason, the Council may, by resolution, restrict
the quantity of water furnished to any customer, and the restrictions may be
imposed on customers outside the town limits before restricting the quantity
of water furnished within the town limits.



(1995 Code, § 4-2006)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)



§ 53.07  MAINTENANCE, OPERATION, SERVICE.



   The town shall provide personnel to maintain, operate and service the
system as required by the rules and regulations of the State Department of
Health and Environmental Control and the State Water Pollution Control
Authority. The town agrees to use reasonable diligence in providing a regular
and uninterrupted supply of potable water and services, but in case the
supply of water shall be interrupted or fail by accident, deficiency or any
cause whatsoever, the town shall not be liable for the interruption or
failure, and the town shall not be liable for any damages sustained by the
customer by reason thereof.



(1995 Code, § 4-2007)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)



§ 53.08  WATER CUSTOMER ACCOUNTS.



   All services will be metered and shall be read and billed monthly as
previously stated. Where water meters fail to register or operate correctly,
bills shall be arrived at by computing an average bill based on the immediate
past two or three billings for the account. Where water consumption is
abnormally high due to leakage or broken pipes on the customer’s property,
the town shall have the authority to adjust the customer’s bill, taking
into consideration the reasons for the leak and the customer’s promptness
in having the leak repaired. Upon proof of repair the adjustment will be made
by computing an “average bill” for the account, subtracting the average
bill from the total consumption, dividing this amount by two and adding this
amount back to the average bill.



(1995 Code, § 4-2008)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)



§ 53.09  RIGHT TO ENTER PROPERTY.



   The town shall have the right to enter the customer’s property
without notice for the purpose of making repairs, disconnecting or
reconnecting service, or reading meters.



(1995 Code, § 4-2009)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)



§ 53.10  HAZARDOUS CONNECTIONS.



   The town shall make inspections of existing building’s plumbing and
if any condition is found which constitutes a health hazard or potential
health hazard to the water supply, the town shall require immediate
corrective action be taken by the customer or sever the water connection
until the hazard is corrected by the customer to be satisfaction of the town.



(1995 Code, § 4-2010)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)



§ 53.11  CROSS-CONNECTIONS.



   Under no circumstances shall any part of the water system be
cross-connected in any way with any other water source except as specifically
approved by the State Department of Health and Environmental Control. Any
hazardous cross-connection between the water system and any source of
contamination is prohibited.



(1995 Code, § 4-2011)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)



§ 53.12  PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY.



   In the interest of the public health and safety, the town shall be
permitted to take emergency action as may be deemed necessary in the
operation of the water system, including the right to close down any water
line or portion of the water system for the purpose of making corrections,
alterations or repairs.



(1995 Code, § 4-2012)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)



§ 53.13  RECORDS AND BILLING.



   While the town will make every reasonable effort to see that each
customer receives its bill, no responsibility will be assumed for
non-delivery where the bill has been mailed at the post office, provided the
bill has been mailed to the address which the customer has reported to the
town. All records of business transactions, billings and receipts of funds
shall be maintained by the Town Finance Officer.



(1995 Code, § 4-2013)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)



WATER RATES, TAP FEES, DEPOSITS AND THE LIKE



§ 53.25  SERVICE DEPOSITS.



   As security for the payment of all bills for utility service, each
account may be required to deposit a sum of money which shall be placed in
escrow and may be returned to the customer when the service is discontinued
and the final billing has been paid in full. Service deposits may be refunded
from time to time by the Town Council. Upon payment of the deposits, the
customer shall enter into a meter contract acknowledging responsibilities and
provisions of this chapter.



(1995 Code, § 4-2021)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)



§ 53.26  WATER TAPS.



   No water connection shall be made until the tap fee as set from time to
time by the Town Council is paid. All taps and connections shall be made
using standard equipment and materials.



(1995 Code, § 4-2022)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)



§ 53.27  WATER RATES.



   Water rates for monthly service shall be as fixed from time to time by
the Town Council. In addition to these rates, Council reserves the right to
negotiate and grant special rates to large industrial or commercial customers
as deemed to be in the best interest of the town. The town also reserves the
right to change or adjust utility rates from time to time as needed.



(1995 Code, § 4-2023)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982; Ord. 09-16-08, passed
9-16-2008)



DROUGHT MANAGEMENT AND RESPONSE



§ 53.40  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The town understands the fundamental need to make efficient use of the
limited and valuable water resource under its stewardship in order to protect
the public’s health and safety and environmental integrity. The purpose of
this document is to establish a plan and procedures for managing water demand
and evaluating supply options before and during a drought-related water
shortage. The intent is to satisfy the requirements of the Drought Response
Act of 2000 (S.C. Code §§ 49-23-10 et seq., as amended) with the goal of
achieving the greatest public benefit from domestic water use, sanitation and
fire protection and to provide water for other purposes in an equitable
manner. Therefore, the town has adopted this Drought Management Plan (§
53.42) and drought response ordinance (§§ 53.43 through 53.50) that provide
the policies and the authority to fulfill this obligation. The Drought
Management Plan outlines the framework by which the town will internally
prepare for water shortages. The ordinance provides the regulations by which
the town will manage and control its customer water usage during various
levels of a drought.



(Ord. 06-03-03, passed 6-3-2003)



§ 53.41  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AESTHETIC WATER USE.  Water use for ornamental or decorative purposes
such as fountains, reflecting pools and waterfalls.



   COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL USE. Water use integral to the production of
goods and/or services by any establishment having profit as its primary aim.



   CONSERVATION.  Reduction in water use to prevent depletion or waste of
the resource.



   CUSTOMER.  Any person, company or organization using finished water
owned or supplied by the town.



   DOMESTIC WATER USE.  Water use for personal needs or for household
purposes such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation or for
cleaning a residence, business, industry or institution.



   DROUGHT ALERT PHASES.  There are four drought alert phases to be
determined by the Drought Response Committee for this state. The four phases
are:



      (1)   Incipient drought;



      (2)   Moderate drought;



      (3)   Severe drought; and



      (4)   Extreme drought.



   DROUGHT RESPONSE COMMITTEE.  A committee composed of state and local
representatives created for the purpose of coordinating responses to water
supply shortages within drought management areas and making recommendations
for action to the State Department of Natural Resources and/or the Governor.
The COMMITTEE is composed of state agency representatives from the State
Emergency Management Division of the Office of the Adjutant General, State
Department of Health and Environmental Control, State Department of
Agriculture, State Forestry Commission and State Department of Natural
Resources, as well as local committees representing counties, municipalities,
public service districts, private water suppliers, agriculture, industry,
domestic users, regional councils of government, commissions of public works,
power generation facilities, special purpose districts and soil and water
conservation districts.



   DROUGHT RESPONSE MANAGEMENT AREAS.   



      (1)   There are four drought management areas corresponding to
the major river basins in the state. The four areas are:



         (a)   West or Savannah;



         (b)   Central or Santee;



         (c)   Northeast or Pee Dee; and



         (d)   Southern or Ashepoo, Combahee and Edisto.



      (2)   In order to prevent overly broad response to drought
conditions, drought response measures shall be considered within individual
drought management areas or within individual counties, as applicable.



   ESSENTIAL WATER USE.  Water used specifically for firefighting,
maintaining in-stream flow requirements and to satisfy federal, state or
local public health and safety requirements.



   FINISHED WATER.  Water distributed for use after treatment. The terms
WATER USE, WATER USER and WATER CUSTOMER refer to FINISHED WATER USE unless
otherwise defined.



   INSTITUTIONAL WATER USE.  Water used by government, public and private
educational institutions, churches and places of worship, water utilities and
organizations within the public domain.



   IRRIGATION WATER USE.  Water used to maintain gardens, trees, lawns,
shrubs, flowers, athletic fields, rights-of-way and medians.



   NON-ESSENTIAL WATER USE.  Categories of water use other than essential
water use. Examples of NON-ESSENTIAL WATER USE include landscape irrigation
and the washing of buildings, parking lots, automobiles and the like.



   RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT (REU).  An equivalency unit defined to be equal
to one single-family residence. The town’s allocated water capacity equals
200 gallons per day per REU.



   SC DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES.  The state agency with primacy to
implement the provisions of the Drought Response Act, being S.C. Code §§
49-23-10 et seq.



   WATER SUPPLY SHORTAGE.  Lack of adequate, available water caused by
drought to meet normal demands.



(Ord. 06-03-03, passed 6-3-2003)



§ 53.42  DROUGHT MANAGEMENT PLAN.



   (A)   Introduction.  To ensure that the town adequately manages its
water system during drought-related conditions, an organized plan is
necessary for system operation and reliability, proper communications,
effective coordination and ultimate allocation of water use. Prior planning
will compliment the town’s ability to respond to drought conditions and to
enforce the related ordinance (§§ 53.43 through 53.50).



   (B)   Designation of water system drought response representative.
Administrating a drought plan requires the skills needed to undertake a
comprehensive public information program and the judgement required to deal
with equity issues arising from enforcement of a mandatory program. Someone
who has these skills will be selected by the water system to manage the water
system’s program and serve as the principal contact for the news media as
the water system’s drought response representative. The drought response
representative for the town is the Water Department Director. His address is
PO Box 209, Winnsboro, SC 29180, phone: (803) 635-4121, e-mail:
winnl@infoave.net.



   (C)   Description of water system layout, water sources, capacities
and yields. The town is located in the Central Drought Response Management
Area of this state.



      (1)   The system serves approximately 9,500 people throughout
the county by way of 3,612 residential taps and 585 commercial taps. The town
also serves a secondary population of 3,400 people by way of two master-meter
connections. Therefore the total population served is 12,900 people.



      (2)   A brief description of the layout of the water system
follows. The primary raw water intake is located on Mill Creek reservoir, a
192-acre lake that is owned by the town. There is a three-level intake
structure and the raw pumps are located at the end of a concrete pier. Both
variable speed raw water pumps are 300 HP vertical turbine pumps rated at
2,777 GPM and 4.0 MGD. A new pump station has been recently added at the Rion
Rock Quarry for recharging the Mill Creek Reservoir. A new pump station in
this same quarry is under construction at this time. In addition, there is
another supplemental raw water source for the town. This is the Sand Creek
pump station. This source has a 65 MGD withdrawal rate and is used to reduce
the withdrawal rate from the reservoir.



      (3)   There are two on-site finished water storage clearwells
at the plant. One is a rectangular 230,000-gallon tank and the other is a
round 200,000-gallon tank. From these, water is pumped into the distribution
system. There are seven storage tanks throughout the distribution system
ranging in size from 75,000 gallons to 875,000 gallons.



   (D)   Identification of water system specific drought or water
shortage indicators. Operators of every water system must develop historical
trends that are valuable indicators of a system’s ability to meet demand
when demand begins to outpace supply. The town has developed triggers for use
during drought or demand water shortages that describe when specific phases
of the drought response ordinance are implemented. The system triggers are as
follows:



      (1)   Moderate Drought Phase:



         (a)   Reservoirs are 80% full;



         (b)   Storage falls below 25% of capacity; and



         (c)   Stream flow is less than 2.8 cubic feet per second.



      (2)   Severe Drought Phase:



         (a)   Reservoirs are 65% full;



         (b)   Storage falls below 35% of capacity; and



         (c)   Stream flow is less than 1.7 cubic feet per second.



      (3)   Extreme Drought Phase:



         (a)   Reservoirs are 50% full;



         (b)   Storage falls below 45% of capacity; and



         (c)   Stream flow is less than 1.0 cubic foot per second.



   (E)   Alternative water supply sources.  Successful drought
management requires a comprehensive program by the water utility. The town
identifies the following alternative water sources: the old town reservoir,
which is located adjacent to the current town reservoir, Sand Creek pumping
station and Rion Quarry #1 and #2. Together these alternate water supplies
yield approximately 1.1 billion gallons of water. The old town reservoir and
both quarry pits are piped directly into the existing town reservoir. These
sources are utilized when the level in the reservoir drops and is not being
replenished fast enough to offset the water demand. The Sand Creek pumping
station can be pumped directly to the water plant or into the reservoir.



   (F)   Description of pre-drought planning efforts.  Before the
occurrence of a water supply shortage and the need to implement the emergency
provisions of the ordinance, it is important that certain pre-response
measures be taken with the aim of conserving the system’s source water, as
well as the water distributed to the customer.



      (1)   Actions taken.  In regards to the conservation measures
listed below, the town has taken the following actions:



         (a)   Identification of all major water users of the
system: Town of Ridgeway and Mid-County Water System;



         (b)   Identification of those users with whom there are
conservation agreements. Once the drought ordinance is issued, these users
are contacted and asked to inform their users to conserve water: Town of
Ridgeway and Mid-County Water System; and



         (c)   A vigorous public education program is critical
for achieving substantial water use reductions. An effective public outreach
program will keep the public informed about the water supply situation, what
actions will mitigate drought emergency problems  and how well the public is
doing in terms of meeting the program goals. Keeping the public involved,
informed  and participating in the decision-making process is key to
implementing an effective Drought Management Plan.



      (2)   Description of the utility’s efforts to develop an
effective drought-related public education program.  The town has a local
access channel on the Fairfield Communications cable network. Drought
information is posted on this channel and customers are kept informed of the
actions of the State Drought Committee, as well as what measures the town is
taking to conserve or limit water use. In addition, press releases are run in
the local paper, the Herald-Independent, to ensure the public stays informed
of the drought.



   (G)   Capital planning and investment.



      (1)   Description of capital planning and investment for
system reliability and demand forecasting. Water utilities routinely find
that capital improvements to the system strongly enhance their ability to get
through times of drought. It is important that every water utility
aggressively plan and build for future needs. The utility must continue to
provide for system operation flexibility, improved pumping and storage
capacity and new technologies to meet the demands of tomorrow.



      (2)   Description of the utility’s capital improvement
program and how past efforts have enhanced the system’s ability to meet
demand during drought conditions.  The town water treatment plant adjusts
the schedule as necessary in order to meet the demands of the customers.
During times of extreme hot weather and higher than usual water consumption,
the operators at the treatment plant are prepared to run a 24-hour schedule
in order to meet the demands of the system. The town is currently
constructing two new water tanks that will allow for increased storage
capacity. The town actively pursues grants and any funding that will allow
for the upgrade and maintenance of the water distribution system. There are
currently plans underway to enlarge the raw water capacity from the reservoir
to the treatment plant. Once this new line is installed, the treatment plant
capacity will reach 4.0 MGD. In addition, the town also has a capital
improvement plan underway to upgrade the telemetry system for the entire
distribution system. This new system will allow better control over the water
levels in each tank and immediate feedback from pumps and tanks in the
distribution system.



   (H)   Description of other system improvements the utility should
consider to prepare for future droughts and increasing water demands.



      (1)   In order to prepare for future droughts, the water
distribution department needs to continue its preventive maintenance program
in order to identify any leaking pipes, meters, hydrants or valves that would
lead to loss of water in the distribution system; and



      (2)   In order for the water treatment plant to be able to
supply and treat a higher volume of water, once the new raw water line has
been installed, the plant will more than likely have to be upgraded.
Personnel are currently evaluating the filter system at the plant in order to
determine if an upgrade will be necessary in order to treat larger amounts of
water.



(Ord. 06-03-03, passed 6-3-2003)



§ 53.43  DROUGHT RESPONSE ORDINANCE; POLICY AND AUTHORITY. 



   (A)   The objective of the drought response ordinance codified as
§§ 53.43 through 53.50 is to establish authority, policy and procedure by
which the town will take the proper actions to manage water demand during a
drought-related shortage. The ordinance satisfies the requirements of the
Drought Response Act of 2000, being S.C. Code §§ 49-23-10 et seq. and has
the goal of achieving the greatest public benefit from limited supplies of
water needed for domestic water use, sanitation and fire protection and of
allocating water for other purposes in an equitable manner.



   (B)   This subchapter outlines the actions to be taken for the
conservation of water supplied by the town. These actions are directed both
towards an overall reduction in water usage and the optimization of supply.



   (C)   To satisfy these goals, the town hereby adopts the following
regulations and restrictions on the delivery and consumption of water. This
subchapter is hereby declared necessary for the protection of public health,
safety and welfare and shall take effect upon its adoption by the town.



   (D)   If it becomes necessary to conserve water in its service area
due to drought, the town is authorized to issue a proclamation that existing
conditions prevent fulfillment of the usual water use demands. The
proclamation is an attempt to prevent depleting the water supply to the
extent that water use for human consumption, sanitation, fire protection and
other essential needs becomes endangered.



   (E)   Immediately upon issuance of this proclamation, regulations
and restrictions set forth under this subchapter shall become effective and
remain in effect until the water supply shortage has ended and the
proclamation rescinded.



   (F)   Water uses that are regulated or prohibited under this
subchapter are considered to be non-essential and continuation of the uses
during times of water supply shortages is deemed to constitute a waste of
water, subjecting the offender(s) to penalties.



(Ord. 06-03-03, passed 6-3-2003)



Editor’s note:



   The ordinance codified as §§ 53.43 through 53.50 officially approved
the Drought Management Plan of § 53.42.



§ 53.44  MODERATE DROUGHT PHASE. 



   (A)   Upon notification by the Drought Response Committee that a
moderate drought condition is present and is expected to persist and/or upon
determination by the town that a moderate water supply shortage exists based
on trigger levels, the town will seek voluntary reductions from its customers
in the use of water for all purposes and voluntary reductions on using water
during certain peak water demand periods. Specifically, the goal during this
phase is to achieve a reduction of 20% in residential water use and 15% in
other water uses, such as commercial, industrial, institutional and
irrigation; and a reduction in overall water use of 15%.



   (B)   To accomplish this, the town will take the following actions:



      (1)   Issue a proclamation to be released to local media, town
customers and to the State Department of Natural Resources Drought
Information Center that moderate drought conditions are present;



      (2)   Provide written notification to the State Department of
Natural Resources Drought Information Center and routinely publish in a
newspaper of general circulation in the service area of the water system the
voluntary conservation measures that the customers are requested to follow
during moderate drought conditions, including:



         (a)   Reduce residential water use to 65 gallons per
person per day and a maximum of 200 gallons per household per day;



         (b)   Eliminate the washing down of sidewalks, walkways,
driveways, parking lots, tennis courts and other hard surfaced areas;



         (c)   Eliminate the washing down of buildings for
purposes other than immediate fire protection;



         (d)   Eliminate the flushing of gutters;



         (e)   Eliminate the domestic washing of motorbikes,
boats, cars and the like;



         (f)   Eliminate the use of water to maintain fountains,
reflection ponds and decorative water bodies for aesthetic or scenic
purposes, except where necessary to support aquatic life;



         (g)   Reduce watering of lawns, plants, trees, gardens,
shrubbery and flora on private or public property to the minimum necessary.
Encourage outdoor watering to be done during off-peak hours;



         (h)   Reduce the amount of water obtained from fire
hydrants for construction purposes, fire drills or for any purpose other than
firefighting or flushing necessary to maintain water quality; and



         (i)   Limit normal water use by commercial and
individual customers, including but not limited to the following:



            1.   Stop serving water in addition to another
beverage routinely in restaurants;



            2.   Stop maintaining water levels in scenic and
recreational ponds and lakes, except for the minimum amount required to
support aquatic life; and



            3.   Cease water service to customers who have
been given a ten-day notice to repair one or more leaks and have failed to do
so.



      (3)   Intensify maintenance efforts to identify and correct
water leaks in the distribution system;



      (4)   Cease to install new irrigation taps on the water
system; and



      (5)   Continue to encourage and educate customers to comply
with voluntary water conservation.



(Ord. 06-03-03, passed 6-3-2003)



§ 53.45  SEVERE DROUGHT PHASE. 



   (A)   Upon notification by the Drought Response Committee that a
severe drought condition is present and is expected to persist and/or upon
determination by the town that a severe water supply shortage exists based on
trigger levels, the town will seek voluntary reduction in the use of water
for all purposes and mandatory restrictions on nonessential usage and
restrictions on times when certain water usage is allowed. Specifically, the
goal during this phase is to achieve a reduction of 25% in residential water
use, 20% in all other water use categories, and a reduction in overall water
use of 20%.



   (B)   To accomplish these goals, the town will take the following
actions:



      (1)   Issue a proclamation to be released to the local media,
town customers and to the State Department of Natural Resources Drought
Information Center that severe drought conditions are present;



      (2)   Provide written notification to the State Department of
Natural Resources Drought Information Center and routinely publish in a
newspaper of general circulation in the service area of the water system the
voluntary conservation measures and mandatory restrictions to be placed on
the use of water supplied by the utility, including:



         (a)   Voluntary reduction of residential water use by
the utility’s customers to 55 gallons per person per day and a maximum of
170 gallons per household or REU per day;



         (b)   Control landscape irrigation by the utility’s
customers by staggering watering times;



         (c)   Mandatory restrictions on the use of water
supplied by the utility for activities, including:



            1.   Eliminate the washing down of sidewalks,
walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts and other hard surfaced
areas;



            2.   Eliminate the washing down of buildings for
purposes other than immediate fire protection;



            3.   Eliminate the flushing of gutters;



            4.   Eliminate domestic washing of motorbikes,
boats, cars and the like;



            5.   Eliminate the use of water to maintain
fountains, reflection ponds and decorative water bodies for aesthetic or
scenic purposes, except where necessary to support aquatic life;



            6.   Eliminate filling or maintaining public or
private swimming pools; and



            7.   Eliminate obtaining water from fire hydrants
for construction purposes, fire drills or any purpose other than firefighting
or flushing necessary to maintain water quality.



         (d)   Limit use of water by commercial and individual
customers, including but not limited to the following:



            1.   Stop serving water in addition to another
beverage routinely in restaurants;



            2.   Stop maintaining water levels in scenic and
recreational ponds and lakes, except for the minimum amount required to
support aquatic life;



            3.   Limit irrigating golf courses and any portion
of its grounds;



            4.   Cease water service to customers who have
been given a ten-day notice to repair one or more leaks and have failed to do
so; and



            5.   Limit expanding commercial nursery
facilities, placing new irrigated agricultural land in production or planting
or landscaping when required by site design review process.



      (3)   Intensify maintenance efforts to identify and correct
water leaks in the distribution system;



      (4)   Continue to cease installation of new irrigation taps on
the water system;



      (5)    Publicize widely the penalties to be imposed for
violations of mandatory restrictions and the procedures to be followed if a
variance in the restrictions is requested;



      (6)   Expand the use of education and public relations efforts
and emphasize the penalties associated with violating the mandatory
restrictions; and



      (7)   Provide written notification monthly to the State
Department of Natural Resources Drought Information Center regarding the
success of the voluntary and mandatory restrictions.



(Ord. 06-03-03, passed 6-3-2003)



§ 53.46  EXTREME DROUGHT PHASE. 



   (A)   Upon notification by the Drought Response Committee that an
extreme drought condition is present and is expected to persist and/or upon
determination by the town that an extreme water supply shortage exists based
on the trigger levels, the town will impose mandatory restrictions in the use
of water for all purposes and on the times when certain water usage is
allowed. Specifically, the goal during this phase is to achieve a reduction
of 30% in residential water use, 25% in all other categories of water uses
and a reduction in overall water use of 25%.



   (B)   To accomplish these goals, the town will take the following
actions:



      (1)   Issue a proclamation to be released to the local media,
the town customers and to the State Department of Natural Resources Drought
Information Center that extreme drought conditions are present;



      (2)   Provide written notification to the State Department of
Natural Resources Drought Information Center and routinely publish in a
newspaper of general circulation in the service area of the water system the
mandatory restrictions to be placed on the use of water supplied by the
utility, including:



         (a)   Limiting residential water use to 45 gallons per
person per day and a maximum of 150 gallons per household or REU per day;



         (b)   Eliminate landscape irrigation by the utility’s
customers;



         (c)   Mandatory restrictions on the use of water
supplied by the utility for activities, including:



            1.   Eliminate the washing down of sidewalks,
walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts and other hard surfaced
areas;



            2.   Eliminate the washing down of buildings for
purposes other than immediate fire protection;



            3.   Eliminate the flushing of gutters;



            4.   No domestic washing of motorbikes, boats,
cars and the like;



            5.   Eliminate the use of water to maintain
fountains, reflection ponds and decorative water bodies for aesthetic or
scenic purposes, except where necessary to support aquatic life;



            6.   Eliminate filling or maintaining public or
private swimming pools; and



            7.   Eliminate obtaining water from fire hydrants
for construction purposes, fire drills or any purpose other than firefighting
or flushing necessary to maintain water quality.



         (d)   Limit normal water use by commercial and
individual customers, including but not limited to the following:



            1.   Stop serving water in addition to another
beverage routinely in restaurants;



            2.   Stop maintaining water levels in scenic and
recreational ponds and lakes, except for the minimum amount required to
support fish and wildlife;



            3.   Limit irrigating golf courses and any portion
of their grounds;



            4.   Cease water service to customers who have
been given a ten-day notice to repair one or more leaks and have failed to do
so; and



            5.   Limit expanding commercial nursery
facilities, placing new irrigated agricultural land in production, or
planting or landscaping when required by site design review process.



      (3)   Intensify maintenance efforts to identify and correct
water leaks in the distribution system;



      (4)   Continue to cease installation of new irrigation taps on
the water system;



      (5)   Outline other conservation measures; examples are:



         (a)   Place a moratorium on the issuance of all new
water service connections and contracts for all new water main extensions. As
part of the public information process, provide notice to developers of the
moratorium;



         (b)   Encourage all residential water customers to
voluntarily reduce overall monthly water usage to 70% of the customer’s
monthly average. If voluntary reduction of usage is not successful, the town
may, at its option, implement the following excessive use rate schedule for
water:



 


Tier I

 

0 – 6,000 gallons/REU

 

Regular rate




Tier II

 

6,001 – 8,000 gallons/REU

 

2 times regular rate




Tier III

 

Over 8,000 gallons/REU

 

3 times regular rate




 



         (c)   Impose a drought surcharge per 1,000 gallons of
water that increases with higher usage. The general principle behind the
drought surcharge is that the fee is imposed on water use in excess of 6,000
gallons of normal monthly use. The drought surcharge is a temporary fee
imposed during the current water supply shortage and is not a cost-based
rate. The drought surcharge is temporary and will be terminated at a time as
the town determines the water supply is above the trigger levels; and



         (d)   If the conservation measures of the ordinance or
the Plan prove inadequate to mitigate the effects of the drought conditions
or water supply availability, the town may take additional actions, including
but not limited to:



            1.   Decreasing the gallon/REU limits in the
different tiers; and



            2.   Reduction of water system pressure as needed.



      (6)   Publicize widely the penalties to be imposed for
violations of mandatory restrictions and the procedures to be followed if a
variance in the restrictions is requested;



      (7)   Expand the use of education and public relations efforts
as conducted under the moderate and severe drought phase and emphasize the
penalties associated with violating the mandatory restrictions; and



      (8)   Provide written notification monthly to the State
Department of Natural Resources Drought Information Center regarding the
success of the mandatory restrictions.



(Ord. 06-03-03, passed 6-3-2003)



§ 53.47  RATIONING.



   If a drought threatens the protection of public health and safety, the
town is hereby authorized to ration water.



(Ord. 06-03-03, passed 6-3-2003)



§ 53.48  ENFORCEMENT OF RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   If any customer of the town fails to comply with the mandatory
water use restrictions of this subchapter, the customer shall be given a
written notice of the failure to comply, which cites the date of the
violation, and shall be assessed surcharges in accordance with the following
schedule:



      (1)   First violation: a $150 surcharge shall be added to the
customer’s water bill;



      (2)   Second violation: an additional $150 surcharge shall be
added to the customer’s water bill; and



      (3)   Third violation: the customer’s water service shall be
terminated and restored only after payment of a surcharge of $1,000 in
addition to all previously assessed surcharges, and a reconnection fee of $50.



   (B)   Law enforcement agencies and other authorized agencies or
designated employees in the respective jurisdiction which is being supplied
water by the town shall diligently enforce the provisions of the drought
response ordinance.



(Ord. 06-03-03, passed 6-3-2003)



§ 53.49  VARIANCES. 



   (A)   Customers, who in their belief are unable to comply with the
mandatory water use restrictions of this drought response subchapter, may
petition for a variance from restrictions by filing a petition with the town
within ten working days after the issuance of the proclamation requiring
water use restrictions. All petitions for variance shall contain the
following information:



      (1)   Name and address of the petitioner;



      (2)   Purpose of water usage;



      (3)   Special provision from which the petitioner is
requesting relief;



      (4)   Detailed statement as to how the curtailment declaration
adversely affects the petitioner;



      (5)   Description of the relief desired;



      (6)   Period of time for which the variance is sought;



      (7)   Economic value of the water use;



      (8)   Damage or harm to the petitioner or others if petitioner
complies with the ordinance;



      (9)   Restrictions with which the petitioner is expected to
comply and the compliance date;



      (10)   Steps the petitioner is taking to meet the restrictions
from which the variance is sought and the expected date of compliance; and



      (11)   Other information as needed.



   (B)   In order for the variance to be granted, the petitioner must
demonstrate clearly that compliance with the ordinance cannot be technically
accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage without having
an adverse impact upon the best interests of the community. The town is
authorized to grant the request for variance.



   (C)   In addition, the town is authorized to grant temporary
variances for existing water uses otherwise prohibited under the ordinance if
it is determined that failure to grant variances could cause an emergency
condition adversely affecting health, sanitation and fire protection for the
public.



      (1)   No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify
any violation of this subchapter occurring prior to the issuance of the
variance.



      (2)   Variances granted by the town shall include a timetable
for compliance and shall expire when the water supply shortage no longer
exists, unless the petitioner has failed to meet specified requirements.



(Ord. 06-03-03, passed 6-3-2003)



§ 53.50  STATUS OF PROVISIONS.



   (A)   If any portion of this subchapter is held to be
unconstitutional for any reason, the remaining portions of this subchapter
shall not be affected



   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall prevail and control in
the event of any inconsistency between this subchapter and other rules and
regulations of the town.



   (C)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed to invalidate or be
interpreted in a manner inconsistent with any covenants now in effect and
given as security to holders of bonds secured by revenues of the system.



(Ord. 06-03-03, passed 6-3-2003)



VIOLATIONS



§ 53.65  NON-SERVICE.



   In addition to penalties as set forth in § 53.99, the town reserves
the right to sever a water connection or remove a water meter if it is found
that any provision of this chapter has been violated.



(1995 Code, § 4-2072)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.66  SERVICE DISCONTINUANCE.



   When service has been discontinued for violation of this chapter, all
charges for services to date become immediately due and payable. Service will
not be reinstated until payment in full has been made for all charges
including bills, cost of repairs, service charges, reconnection fees and
penalties.



(1995 Code, § 4-2073)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)



§ 53.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision or section of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in an
amount not to exceed $200 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.



(1995 Code, § 4-2071)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)



CHAPTER 54:  SEWER REGULATIONS



Section




Sewer Systems Generally




   54.01   Sanitary sewer system



   54.02   Substances prohibited



   54.03   Industrial waste



   54.04   Permitted substances



   54.05   Septic tanks prohibited



   54.06   Repairs to septic tanks



   54.07   Septic/sludge discharge



   54.08   Outdoor toilet facilities prohibited



   54.09   Permit; connection to town system



   54.10   Sewer lines; materials used




Sewer Rates, Tap Fees and the Like




   54.25   Tap fees, generally



   54.26   Same; motels, hotels, apartments



   54.27   Sewer rates



   54.28   No free service




Sewer Use




   54.40   Definitions



   54.41   Prohibited use of public sewers



   54.42   Permissive use of public sewers



   54.43   Operations and control



   54.44   Sewer charges and surcharges



   54.45   Determination of character and concentration of wastes



   54.46   Protection from damage



   54.47   Enforcement



   54.48   Sanitary sewer extensions



   54.49   Fats, oils and grease



   54.50   Amendments




Violations




   54.60   Service discontinuance



 



   54.99   Penalty



SEWER SYSTEMS GENERALLY



§ 54.01  SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.



   No person shall cause any wastewater to be discharged from any
building, residence or other structure other than into the town sanitary
sewer system or an approved domestic sewage treatment system.



(1995 Code, § 4-2031)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)



§ 54.02  SUBSTANCES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall deposit in, allow to escape into, or cause or permit to
escape into the sanitary sewer system of the town any material or substance
that would damage or injuriously affect the operation of the system or which
violate DHEC and/or EPA standards. Deposits shall include but not be limited
to petroleum products, grease, chemicals, clothing, rags, remnants, gases,
refuse or any other substance that will affect, injure or retard the
biological treatment system receiving the waste material. By reference,
prohibited substances are also cited in the sewer use ordinance adopted
February 16, 1982 with the latest amendments, codified below, and the
Industrial Pretreatment Program update dated January, 2008.



(1995 Code, § 4-2032)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982; Ord. 102114, passed
10-21-2014)



Cross-reference:



   Sewer use, see §§ 54.40 through 54.49



§ 54.03  INDUSTRIAL WASTE.



   Industrial wastes will not be permitted into the system in excess of
the capacity of the treatment facility to effectively treat the wastes. By
reference, industrial wastes are cited in the sewer use ordinance codified in
§§ 54.40 through 54.49.



(1995 Code, § 4-2033)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)



§ 54.04  PERMITTED SUBSTANCES.



   By reference permitted substances are cited in the sewer use ordinance
codified in §§ 54.40 through 54.49.



(1995 Code, § 4-2034)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)



§ 54.05  SEPTIC TANKS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful to install a septic tank within the town if a
connection can be made to the sewer system of the town. In the event a
connection to the town system is not available, all plans and specifications
for septic tanks shall be in accordance with and shall meet standards as
established by the Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC).



(1995 Code, § 4-2035)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)



§ 54.06  REPAIRS TO SEPTIC TANKS.



   No major repairs shall be permitted to any private sewer system in the
town, provided that the useful life of the private sewer system has been
expended, unless written permission is obtained from the town. The provision
of this section shall not be applicable unless the sewer system of the town
is available to the property served by the private sewer system.



(1995 Code, § 4-2036)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)



§ 54.07  SEPTIC/SLUDGE DISCHARGE.



   (A)   The town and the county have commercial companies who are in
the business of pumping septic tanks for some of the town’s citizens.



   (B)   The purpose of this section is in order for the town
wastewater treatment plant to be informed as to what is being discharged into
the town’s system and to be in compliance with all regulations.



   (C)   The only point of discharge of septic/sludge will be at the
town’s wastewater treatment plant, located on Highway 321 Bypass. The hours
of operation will be 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. The
driver of the truck will contact the operator on duty, and will be shown
where to discharge septic/sludge after it is tested.



   (D)   Fees established will be charges based on whether the
discharge is septic or sludge. Anyone caught discharging septic/sludge at any
other point in the town’s system will be reported to the Department of
Health and Environmental Control (DHEC) for violation of this section.



   (E)   No commercial company from any other town or county will be
authorized to discharge septic/sludge into the town’s system.



   (F)   The town has the right to refuse any entity from discharging
septic/sludge into the wastewater treatment system.



(1995 Code, § 4-2036.1)  (Ord. passed 1-7-1986)



§ 54.08  OUTDOOR TOILET FACILITIES PROHIBITED.



   No outdoor toilet facilities shall be permitted within the town. The
owner of any real estate upon which outdoor toilet facilities are located
shall be charged with the responsibility of removing the housing for the
outdoor toilet from the premises and of filling of the pit with dirt fill or
other suitable fill to bring to surrounding ground level. Upon failure of the
owner of any outdoor toilet facilities to remove the housing and fill the
pit, after ten days’ notice by the town in writing by certified mail to the
owner, the town may enter upon the premises, remove the housing and fill the
pit. The town shall then make a reasonable charge to the owner for the labor
and materials used and give notice to the owner by mail. If the owner fails
to pay the charges within 30 days, the town shall cause a lien to be filed
against the property and its owner.



(1995 Code, § 4-2037)



§ 54.09  PERMIT; CONNECTION TO TOWN SYSTEM.



   Any person desiring to connect with the town’s sanitary sewer system
shall apply for a connection as described herein and paying applicable tap
fees. Application for sewer connection shall be made in writing on forms
provided by the town. The application may be denied if not consistent with
town requirements.



(1995 Code, § 4-2038)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)



§ 54.10  SEWER LINES; MATERIAL USED.



   All sewer line construction material must be consistent with
specifications as outlined in the gas, water and sewer manual and approved by
the Department Director.



(1995 Code, § 4-2039)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)



SEWER RATES, TAP FEES AND THE LIKE



§ 54.25  TAP FEES, GENERALLY.



   The tap fees for connection to the town’s sanitary sewer system to be
paid at the time application for connection is made shall be as fixed from
time to time by the Town Council. Customers desiring sewer service may
negotiate payment of tap fee.



(1995 Code, § 4-2051)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)



§ 54.26  SAME; MOTELS, HOTELS, APARTMENTS.



   The tap fees for motels, hotels and apartments shall be as fixed from
time to time by the Town Council.



(1995 Code, § 4-2052)



§ 54.27  SEWER RATES.



   The sewer service charge shall be based on rates applied to the water
consumption. The sewer rates shall be as fixed from time to time by the Town
Council.



(1995 Code, § 4-2053)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)



Cross-reference:



   Water rates, see § 53.27



§ 54.28  NO FREE SERVICE.



   No sewer shall be furnished, nor shall any service be rendered free of
charge to any person, firm, corporation, municipal corporation, political
division or subdivision, or public agency, including the town, and any other
municipality served by the system, and each of the foregoing shall be
classified in the same manner as any other customer.



(1995 Code, § 4-2054)



SEWER USE



§ 54.40  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The Town Manager, or his or her designated
representative.



   BOD (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND).  A measure of the degree of
pollutional strength of wastes of any nature. BOD, expressed in parts per
million by weight, shall mean the pounds of oxygen required to satisfy the
five-day oxygen demand of a million pounds of domestic sewage or industrial
wastes, or a combination of both when tested in accordance with the
procedures given in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, and published by the American Public
Health Association.



   COLOR.  The optical density of the visible wave length of maximum
absorption.



   COMBINED SEWER.  A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.



   DOMESTIC SEWAGE.  Liquid waste from bathrooms, toilet rooms, kitchens
and home laundries.



   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES.  The liquid wastes from commercial and industrial
processes and operations, as distinct from domestic sewage.



   MAY.  The action referred to is permissive.



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or ground water.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, company, association, corporation,
institution or group.



   pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution and indicates the strength of acidity or
alkalinity of a substance. A pH value of 7.0 is considered neutral. A
stabilized pH will be considered as a pH which does not change beyond the
specified limits when the waste is subjected to aeration. A pH below 7.0 is
acid, pH above 7.0 is alkaline.



   POTW. Public-owned treatment works.



   PPM.  Parts per million by weight expressed in pounds. One million
pounds of water or sewage equals approximately 120,000 gallons.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE.  The wastes from the preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food that has been shredded to the degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particles greater than one-half inch in
any dimension.



   PUBLIC SEWER.  A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
shall have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.



   RECEIVING STREAM.  The body of water, stream or watercourse receiving
the discharge waters from the sewage treatment plant or formed by the
discharge of the sewage treatment plant.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer which carries sewage or polluted industrial
wastes and to which storm, surface and ground waters or unpolluted industrial
waste are not intentionally admitted.



   SEPTIC TANK. A private domestic sewage treatment system consisting of
an underground tank distribution box and drain field designed and constructed
in accordance with any and/or all existing local and state requirements.



   SEWAGE.  A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
any ground, surface and storm water as may be naturally present.



   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement or device and structures for
treating sewage.



   SEWAGE SYSTEM.  All facilities for collecting, conveying, pumping,
treating and disposing of sewage.



   SEWER.  A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.



   SHALL.  The action referred to is mandatory.



   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN.  A sewer which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted wastes.



   SUB-DISTRICT.  Any residential subdivision, real estate development,
commercial, industrial or institutional complex.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  Solids that either float on the surface of or in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.



   TOWN.  The Town of Winnsboro.



(1995 Code, § 4-3001)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1982)



§ 54.41  PROHIBITED USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.



   (A)   Water discharges.  No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged into any sanitary sewers any storm water, surface water, ground
water, roof runoff or sub-surface drainage.



   (B)   Prohibited discharges, water/wastes.  Except as hereinafter
provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or waste into any public sanitary sewer:



      (1)   Any clothing, rags, textiles, remnants or wastes, cloth,
scraps and the like, except fibers, scraps and the like which will pass
through one-fourth inch mesh screen or its equivalent in screening ability;



      (2)   Any liquid or vapor in amounts which will inhibit
biological activity at the treatment plant, resulting in interference or
causing damage, but in no case in quantities that the temperature exceeds
150ºF at the town sewage system or 104ºF at the treatment plant unless SC
DHEC, upon request of the town, approves alternate temperature limits;



      (3)   Any water or waste containing more than 100 parts per
million by weight of fats, oils or grease;



      (4)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their
nature or quality may cause fire or explosion, or be in any way injurious to
persons, the sewerage system, the sewage treatment works or the operation of
the sewage treatment works;



      (5)   Any liquid wastes in which the suspended solids exceed
400 parts per million by weight;



      (6)   Any liquid wastes having a BOD of more than 250 parts
per million except as hereinafter provided for;



      (7)   Any waters or wastes having a stabilized pH lower than
6.0 or higher than 9.0 or having other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage works;



      (8)   Any waters or wastes containing a poisonous or toxic
substance or any other materials in sufficient quantity to injure or
interfere with any sewage treatment process, or constitute a hazard to humans
or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving stream at the sewage
treatment plant;



      (9)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of a
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to
handle the materials in the sewerage system;



      (10)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of
creating a public nuisance;



      (11)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;



      (12)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal,
glass, bones, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, butcher’s offal
or any other solid or viscous substances capable of causing obstruction to
the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the
sewerage system;



      (13)   Any materials which form excessive amounts of scum that
may interfere with the operation of the sewage treatment works or cause undue
additional labor in connection with its operation;



      (14)   Any waters or wastes containing dyes or other color
which cannot be removed by biological processes and which require special
chemical treatment;



      (15)   Any waters or wastes containing lint in quantities as
to be detrimental to sewer lines, sewage pumps or sewage treatment works; or



      (16)   Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants
(BOD and the like) released at a flow rate and/or pollutants concentrated
which a user knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the POTW.
In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentration or
qualities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than 15
minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration, quantities or
flow during normal operation.



   (C)   Special arrangements.  The approving authority, without
limitation by other sections of this chapter, may authorize any person to
discharge industrial wastes of unusual strength or character into the sewers
of the town under approved conditions of pretreatment. The approving
authority may prohibit entry of particular industrial wastes into the
sanitary sewer whenever the action is necessary to prevent damage to the
system or to determine the effects of the wastes on the sewage system.



   (D)   Pretreatment standards.  Upon the promulgation of any federal
or state categorical pretreatment standards or an individual standard, that
standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this subchapter
shall apply.



(1995 Code, § 4-3002)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1982; Ord. passed 6-3-1986)



§ 54.42  PERMISSIVE USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.



   (A)   The town shall reserve the right to inspect and grant
permission for all connections to the sewerage system and require the payment
of a tap fee before permission to connect can be granted to any person. The
tap fee shall be as specified in the water and sewer ordinance codified in
Chapter 53 and the other subchapters of this chapter.



   (B)   Where necessary in the opinion of the approving authority, and
whenever the total volume of sewage to be discharged by any person in any one
day shall exceed 5,000 gallons, the person shall be required, at no expense
to the town, to construct holding or storage tanks in order to equalize the
discharge over a 24-hour period. The tanks shall be so equipped as to
thoroughly mix the sewage so that its quality shall be uniform when
discharged to the public sewers. The control of the volume of discharge of
the sewage to the sewer shall be by a waterworks type rate controller or
other approved device, the operation and setting of which shall be directed
by the approving authority when normal operations of the person will be
interrupted for 24 hours, or longer, and when and in what quantities wastes
will be available for discharge.



   (C)   Whenever the waste characteristics of sewage being discharged
by any person exceed those requirements of § 54.41(B), or where necessary in
the opinion of the approving authority, the person discharging sewage shall
construct or cause to be constructed at no expense to the town any
preliminary handling or treatment as may be required to:



      (1)   Reduce the BOD to 250 parts per million by weight, and
the suspended solids to 400 parts per million by weight; or



      (2)   Change the objectionable characteristics or constituents
to come within the maximum limits provided for in § 54.41(B).



   (D)   Plans, specifications and other pertinent information relating
to proposed preliminary treatment or handling facilities shall be submitted
for the approval of the approving authority and no construction of the
facilities shall be commenced until the approval is obtained in writing.



   (E)   Where the preliminary treatment or holding facilities are
provided for any purpose, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation at no cost to the town.



   (F)   Any person who is now discharging any sewage into the town
public sewers may be required to make written application to the approving
authority giving complete information as to the nature and characteristics of
the sewage sample of the waste made by an independent laboratory.



   (G)   Any person having been granted authority by the approving
authority to discharge sewage into the town’s public sewers and who shall
change or cause to be changed the nature or quantity of the sewage, shall
before making the change, receive the approval of the approving authority a
complete analysis of a composite sample of the sewage as determined by an
independent laboratory.



   (H)   Any person who should wish to make the connection and
discharge sewage as described above, shall make written application to the
approving authority and may be required to furnish the approving authority a
complete analysis of a composite sample of the sewage as determined by an
independent laboratory, in addition to compliance with all other provisions
of this subchapter.



   (I)   Grease, oil and sand separators or traps shall be provided
when in the opinion of the approving authority they are necessary for the
proper handling and control of liquid wastes containing grease, oil or sand
in excessive amounts. The separators shall not be required for private living
quarters or dwelling units, but may be required for certain industrial or
commercial establishments, public eating places, hospitals, hotels, schools
or other institutions. The separators shall be readily accessible for
inspection by the approving authority. They shall be functional (maintained
and cleaned) by the sewer user.



   (J)   Any person discharging industrial wastes into the public
sewers may be required to construct and maintain a suitable control or
inspection manhole either downstream from any pretreatment, storage or other
approved works, or if pre-treatment is not required, at the point where the
sewage enters the public sewers. The manhole shall be located so as to be
readily accessible and shall be constructed in a manner as may be approved by
the approving authority so as to facilitate the inspection or measuring as
may be necessary for proper sampling and/or control of the waste discharged.



   (K)   All industrial users proposing to connect or discharge to the
sewerage system shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting
to or contributing to the system.



   (L)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all
provisions of this subchapter and all other applicable regulations, user
charges and fees established by the town. Permits may contain the following:



      (1)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for
the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer;



      (2)   Limits on the average and maximum wastewater
constituents and characteristics;



      (3)   Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge
and sampling facilities;



      (4)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection and sampling facilities;



      (5)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for
tests and reporting schedule;



      (6)   Compliance schedule;



      (7)   Requirements for submission of technical reports or
discharge reports;



      (8)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records
relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the town, and affording town
access thereto;



      (9)   Requirements for notification of the town or any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the
volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
wastewater treatment system;



      (10)   Requirements for notification of slug discharges; and



      (11)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the town to
ensure compliance with this subchapter or state and federal pretreatment
requirements.



   (M)   Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific person
for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be
reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises or a new or changed operation without the approval of the town. Any
succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of
the existing permit.



(1995 Code, § 4-3003)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1982; Ord. passed 6-3-1986)



§ 54.43  OPERATIONS AND CONTROL.



   (A)   The approving authority and duly authorized representatives of
the town shall be permitted to enter upon all properties at all reasonable
times for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and
testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The town shall
notify, if available, the person or a representative of the person prior to
entering the premises.



   (B)   In the event of imminent danger to the public health and
safety, the approving authority and duly authorized representatives shall be
permitted to take any emergency action as may be deemed necessary in the
operation of the sewerage system, including but not limited to the right to
close down any sewer or portion of the sewerage system for the purpose of
making connections, alterations or repairs. During that event the approving
authority will make every effort to minimize inconvenience and return the
service to full operation as quickly as possible.



   (C)   All tests and analyses of the characteristics of sewage to
which reference is made in this chapter shall be made in accordance with the
procedures given in the latest edition of Standard Methods of Examination of
Water and Wastewater, as revised, published by the American Public Health
Association. The tests and analyses shall be determined at the control
manhole provided for in § 54.42(J), or at the point of discharge of any
sewage at the site of their origin on the premises of any person discharging
the sewage into the sewers.



   (D)   The volume of flow used in computing waste user charges and
surcharges shall be based upon metered water consumption as shown in the
records of meter readings maintained by the Town Water Department or other
water authority. Customers may install sewer meters at their own expense to
measure sewage. In the event that a person discharging wastes into the
sanitary sewer system produces evidence satisfactory to the approving
authority that greater than 10% of his or her water used does not reach the
town sanitary sewer, the user may apply to the approving authority for a
reduced percentage of total water consumption to be used in computing sewer
charges.



   (E)   Where the person discharging wastewater into the sanitary
sewers of the town procures any part or all of his or her water supply from
sources other than one recognized and accepted by the approving authority,
all or part of which is discharged into the sanitary sewer, the person
discharging the waste shall install and maintain, at his or her expense,
water meters of a type approved by the approving authority for the purpose of
determining the proper volume of flow to be charged. The approving authority
has a right to read the private meters.



   (F)   All sewer taps shall conform to the requirements of the
approving authority in location, size, type, materials and method used and
shall be accomplished only by a licensed plumber authorized by the approving
authority. It shall become the responsibility of each person requesting
connection to the public sewer to notify the approving authority and arrange
for final inspection of the connection before placing in use.



   (G)   Any person using the public sewer shall be responsible for any
stoppage or damage caused by abuse of the sewerage system through the sewer
connection of that person and shall be held accountable for all expenses
incurred by the town or other property owners as a result of the abuse.



   (H)   All sewage disposal within the area of the town shall be
regulated by the approving authority, and disposal shall be by public sewers
and sewerage system, except that where no public sewer exists within 300
radial feet of a building or where connection is impractical for technical
reasons, the person owning that property may apply for a permit to construct
and operate an approved septic tank system or similar system approved by the
approving authority, provided that the quantity of sewage to be so disposed
of does not exceed 1,000 gallons per day as determined in division (D) of
this section, and further provided that the septic tank system is properly
maintained so as to eliminate any hazard to the public health or cause a
public nuisance. Once septic tanks require pumping out, they will be
abandoned, pumped and filled with sand. The sewage from this building will be
tapped to the available sewer line.



   (I)   Any person desiring connection to be made with the sewerage
system shall make application on the appropriate form to the approving
authority stating the name of the owner of the property, the location of the
lot, and kind of connection desired. Every application shall be signed by the
person making the application and shall be accompanied by the appropriate
connection fee. Fees shall be those as periodically adopted by the Town
Council.



   (J)   Upon ten days’ written notice, the approving authority
reserves the right to prevent or discontinue sewer connection by any person
until a time as the sections of this chapter have been fulfilled to the
satisfaction of the approving authority. When deemed necessary by the
approving authority to protect the sewerage system or the public, the
approving authority may discontinue or prevent sewer connection without
notice to the person.



   (K)   It shall be unlawful for any person to reconnect a sewer when
the same has been cut off for non-compliance with sections of this chapter,
or any other reason, until specifically approved in writing by the approving
authority. This approval shall be contingent upon satisfaction of all
sections of this chapter, including but not limited to payment of all
penalties, charges, claims, damages, judgments and costs incident thereto.



   (L)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make or undertake to
make or cause to be made any connection to the sewerage system without first
having made application, paid fee and received approval.



   (M)   In no event shall any person be allowed to discharge or cause
to be discharged any domestic sewage or industrial waste to the ground
surface, stream, watercourse, ditch, lake, other body or surface water, storm
sewers or storm drains.



   (N)   Any sewerage discharge within the town located within 300 feet
of any public sewer may be considered by the approving authority as a user of
the public sewer, and is subject to all provisions of this chapter.



   (O)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from
inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency
without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the town that the release of the
information would divulge information, processes or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. When requested by the
person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose
trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection
by the public but shall be made available upon written request to
governmental agencies for uses related to this subchapter, the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, state disposal system
permit and/or the pretreatment program; provided, however, that these
portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state
agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report.



   (P)   The town shall annually publish in the largest daily newspaper
a list of person(s) which were in significant noncompliance with pretreatment
requirements during the 12 previous months. The notification shall also
summarize enforcement actions taken against the person(s) during the same 12
months.



(1995 Code, § 4-3004)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1982; Ord. passed 6-3-1986) 
Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.44  SEWER CHARGES AND SURCHARGES.



   (A)   The town shall adopt at least annually an adequate schedule of
sewer charges and surcharges to defray the cost of operating and maintaining
the sanitary sewerage system of the town. The costs to be used as a basis of
determining charges shall include but are not necessarily limited to direct
operation and maintenance, administration, collection and billing of charges,
bond redemption, studies and reports, professional fees, repairs, capital
improvements and depreciation. The charges adopted shall be such that each
user pays his or her proportionate share of all cost herein noted.



   (B)   The sewer charges and surcharges shall be published in a form
for public distribution and notice, shall become a part of this chapter upon
adoption and public notification, and shall be based on the cost of treatment
per 1,000 gallons of sewage.



   (C)   The approving authority shall levy monthly sewer user charges
and the charges shall be due and payable immediately. The user charges shall
be based on actual water consumption, as obtained from water meter readings
as provided under § 54.43(D) and (E), except where sewer system meters are
installed. Failure to pay this bill within 15 days shall cause the bill to
become delinquent. After five days of delinquency, the approving authority
may discontinue service as provided for in § 54.43.



   (D)   The approving authority may, at its discretion, allow
industrial waste which exceeds the limitation of § 54.41(B)(6) to be
discharged into the sanitary sewerage system, provided that the person
discharging the waste shall agree to the payment of a surcharge to offset any
cost to treat the BOD or suspended solids in excess of allowable limits. This
surcharge shall be imposed in addition to any other charges made for sewer
service.



   (E)   The surcharge covering the cost of treatment of the industrial
wastes shall be determined in the following manner.



      (1)   The approving authority shall fix the rate to be charged
during the new fiscal year, at the beginning of the fiscal year, for the
excess BOD or suspended solids, from actual costs per 1,000 pounds removed
from the combined domestic and industrial wastes as experienced at the sewage
treatment plant(s) of the town during the preceding fiscal year.



      (2)   The rate shall be applied to the amount of excessive BOD
and suspended solids as determined by averaging at least three waste
discharge samples taken in accordance with provisions of § 54.43(C), and §
54.45(A) and (B).



   (F)   Tap fees, cutting of pavement if required, and other expenses
concerning sewer connections shall be as periodically established by the Town
Council.



(1995 Code, § 4-3005)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1982)



§ 54.45  DETERMINATION OF CHARACTER AND CONCENTRATION OF WASTES.



   (A)   The wastewater of each industrial discharger into the town’s
sewerage system shall be subject to periodic inspection for a determination
of character and concentration not less than semi-annually or more often as
may be deemed necessary by the approving authority. The inspection and tests
may also be made immediately after any approved process change which might
affect the quantity or quality of the waste discharged.



   (B)   Samples shall be collected in a manner as to be representative
of the actual quality of the waste. Laboratory methods used in the
examination of the waste shall be those set forth in Standard Methods as
hereinbefore described, a copy of which is on file at the office of the
Superintendent of Public Utilities, for inspection by any interested parties.



   (C)   The determination of the flow, character and concentration of
industrial wastes as provided herein shall be used as a basis for charges and
surcharges.



(1995 Code, § 4-3006)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1982)



§ 54.46  PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.



   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any equipment or materials belonging
to the town. This protection shall also apply to any part of the system,
whether town-owned or not, if it is such as to adversely affect the proper
operation and maintenance of the town system. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to penalties outlined in § 54.99(B) as well as
prosecution if deemed appropriate.



(1995 Code, § 4-3007)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1982)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.47  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Enforcement.  The town may suspend the wastewater discharge
permit when the suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the town, in order
to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to
the environment, or causes the town to violate any condition or its NPDES
permit. Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the wastewater discharge permits shall immediately stop or
eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of any person to comply
voluntarily with the suspension order, the town shall take any steps as
deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to
prevent or minimize damage to the sewerage system or endangerment to any
individuals. The town shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or
the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
non-complying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the person
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the town within 15 days
of the date of occurrence.



   (B)   Revocation of permit. Any person who violates the following
conditions of this subchapter, or applicable state and federal regulations,
is subject to having his or her permit revoked:



      (1)   Failure to factually report the wastewater constituents
and characteristics of his or her discharge;



      (2)   Failure to report significant changes in operations, or
wastewater constituents and characteristics;



      (3)   Failure of reasonable access to the premises for the
purpose of inspection or monitoring; or



      (4)    Violation of any conditions of the permit.



   (C)   Legal action.  If any person discharges sewage, industrial
wastes into the town’s wastewater disposal system contrary to the
provisions of this subchapter, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or
any order of the town, the Town Attorney may commence an action for
appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the Circuit Court of this county.



   (D)   Penalties.



      (1)   In addition to the penalties provided in § 54.99, the
town may recover reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs, court
reporters’ fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law
against the person found to have violated this subchapter or the orders,
rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder.



      (2)   Any person who knowingly makes any false statements,
representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or
other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this
subchapter, or wastewater discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this subchapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the provisions of §
54.99. 



(1995 Code, § 4-3008)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1982; Ord. passed 6-3-1986) 
Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.48  SANITARY SEWER EXTENSIONS.



   (A)   Any entity proposing to build local or lateral sanitary sewers
or extensions to connect directly or indirectly into the town’s sanitary
sewerage system shall conform its plan and specifications to the requirements
of the approving authority. The plans and specifications shall be prepared by
a registered engineer who is authorized by the laws of this state and
approved or approvable by any and all local, county and state authorities
having jurisdiction.



   (B)   The following administrative procedures shall be followed:



      (1)   Submit preliminary construction plans to the approving
authority in sufficient detail to indicate location, system layout, line
sizes, service connections, flows, character of sewage, relationship with and
connection to the town’s system, and total development plans;



      (2)   Receive preliminary acceptance from the approving
authority and other jurisdictional agencies;



      (3)   Prepare construction drawings and documents for
approving authority acceptance;



      (4)   Secure all other necessary agency approvals of
construction drawings and contract documents;



      (5)   Upon receipt of required approvals, proceed with
construction, notifying the approving authority of construction schedules;



      (6)   Provide the approving authority with permission for
on-site inspection during construction; and



      (7)   Furnish to the approving authority a certificate of
completion, instrument of conveyance and warranty together with any other
legal documents as may be required for annexation, reimbursement and similar
special provisions.



   (C)   Construction of the proposed sewerage system shall be
accomplished by a registered contractor licensed under the laws of this state
who shall have paid all business licenses required by the town.



   (D)   Public bids must be received and tabulated for any portion of
the proposed system which qualifies for reimbursement from the town. These
tabulated bids must be submitted to and approved by the approving authority
before award of construction contracts.



   (E)   Upon completion of construction, the engineer employed by the
subdistrict shall inspect and furnish to the approving authority, at no cost
to the town, his or her certificate of completion indicating that the subject
sewerage system has been constructed in accordance with the approved plans
and specifications, and shall provide four copies of as-constructed drawings.



   (F)   The owner or his or her authorized agent shall submit a
warranty which is a legal instrument in which the owner warrants the
materials, equipment and construction of the system for 12 months. The owner
shall further warrant to the approving authority that all fees have been paid
by him or her such that there is no outstanding indebtedness remaining and
holding the town harmless in each instance.



   (G)   All known sewer taps shall be made during construction and the
location of all taps shall be recorded on the as-constructed drawings.



   (H)   All sewerage system extensions must be compatible with present
and future plans and needs of the town.



   (I)   When all other requirements of this chapter have been met and
approved the owner shall prepare and submit to the approving authority an
instrument of conveyance, conveying the constructed system to the town, at no
cost to the town, and the system shall thereafter be owned, operated and
maintained by the town as provided for in this chapter. The instrument of
conveyance shall also include permanent easements and rights-of-way fully
described and duly recorded at the appropriate authority.



(1995 Code, § 4-3009)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1982)



§ 54.49  FATS, OILS AND GREASE.



   (A)   Purpose.  This section is intended to aid in the prevention
of sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions caused by the introduction,
discharge and contribution of fats, oils, greases, grease complexes, scum,
sludge and other organic polar compounds into the town’s wastewater
collection system or publicly-owned treatment works by commercial,
industrial, institutional and all other non-residential activities.



   (B)   Definitions.   For the purpose of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



      COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT and INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT.  Any user
that has the potential to use, contribute to or otherwise impact the town’s
wastewater collection system or POTW. The establishments include, but are not
limited to, maintenance facilities, repair facilities and equipment cleaning
facilities.



      COOKING ESTABLISHMENT.  Any person primarily engaged in the
activities of cooking, preparing, serving or otherwise making available for
human consumption any form of foodstuff, and which uses one or more of the
following cooking or preparation methods in connection with such activities:
cooking or preparation by frying (all methods), baking (all methods),
grilling, sauteing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling,
blanching, roasting, toasting, poaching or any type of cooking or preparation
that produces a hot non-potable products in or on a receptacle that requires
washing, rinsing or other form of cleaning. The establishments include, but
are not limited to, restaurants, cafeterias, extended care facilities, school
cafeterias (public and private), churches and day-care facilities where meals
for more than six children are prepared, served or otherwise made available
for human consumption and bio-fuel companies.



      EMULSIFIER.  Any chemical additive that promotes the suspension
of fats, oils and grease in water.



      GREASE.  All greases, grease complexes, fats, oils, scum,
sludges and all other organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or
plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. Such
substances are detectable and measurable using analytical procedures
established in 40 C.F.R. 136.



      GREASE TRAP or GREASE INTERCEPTOR.  A device for separating and
retaining waterborne greases before the wastewater which contains such grease
exits, the grease trap or interceptor into the town’s wastewater collection
system or POTW. The grease trap or interceptor also collects settable solids
generated by or incidental to commercial, industrial and food preparation
activities.



      NON-COOKING ESTABLISHMENT.  Any person primarily engaged in the
rendering or preparation of pre-cooked foodstuffs that do not require or
involve any form of cooking. The establishments include, but are not limited
to, establishments that are primarily engaged in the rending preparation of
cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs. These businesses are encouraged to explore
methods of exemption and alternate compliance status.



      TOWN.  The town and its utility service area.



      USER.  Any person primarily engaged in any commercial,
industrial, institutional or other non-residential activity who introduces,
contributes or discharges (or causes or permits the introduction,
contribution or discharge of) wastewater into the town’s wastewater
collection system or POTW, including but not limited to any person who
introduces, contributes or discharges wastewater into the wastewater
collection system or POTW through any mobile source.



      WASTEWATER.  Any substance introduced, contributed to or
discharges into the town’s wastewater collection system or publicly-owned
treatment works (POTW).



   (C)   Grease trap and interceptor installation, maintenance,
record-keeping and removal.



      (1)   No later than one year after adoption of this section,
all users shall install grease traps or interceptors designed to limit the
introduction, contribution and discharge of greases into the town’s
wastewater collection system of POTW. Grease traps and interceptors with
appropriate sampling or inspection points shall be installed at the user’s
expense whenever any user operates a commercial, industrial or institutional
cooking establishment. Grease traps and interceptors must have a minimum
capacity of 1,000 gallons or more as required to affect a grease
concentration maximum of 100 mg/l.



      (2)   Alternate methods of compliance may be approved by the
town if the user demonstrates that compliance with this section is impossible
or impractical at the time of adoption of this section as a result of limited
space. However, any proposed alternative method of compliance will be
required to meet the performance criteria specified in division (C)(1) and
the user must adequately demonstrate to the satisfaction of the town that the
proposed alternative method will satisfy those performance criteria. In
addition, any alternative method must be cleaned at a more frequent interval
than is required of grease traps and interceptors under division (C)(5).
Under-the-counter types of grease traps and interceptors shall be cleaned at
least daily. Prior to approval of any proposed alternative method of
compliance, documentation of the proposed method’s actual performance
criteria must be submitted to the Wastewater Director or the town’s
designated enforcement official for review and approval.



      (3)   Grease traps and interceptors may also be required in
other facilities, as deems necessary by the Wastewater Director or the
town’s designated enforcement official.



      (4)   Upon the prior written approval of the Wastewater
Director, non-cooking establishments may be exempted from the requirements of
this section after an inspection of the subject premises and submission of
adequate supporting documentation, as deemed necessary in the discretion of
the Wastewater Director. At a minimum, such supporting documentation shall
include: blueprints of the subject premises, a full and detailed description
of the operations and activities at the subject premises, and a full and
detailed list of all potential sources of grease at the subject premises.



      (5)   Users shall empty and service grease traps and
interceptors to comply with the performance criteria in division (C)(1) as
often as necessary, but in any event no longer than every 60 days. The town
may require a specific schedule if deemed necessary the Wastewater Director
or designee. Under-the-counter types of grease traps and interceptors shall
be cleaned at least daily and shall comply with the performance criteria in
this division. There shall be no reintroduction of wastewater back into the
grease trap or interceptor unless and until the wastewater has been proven to
contain 100 mg/l or less of grease. Under no circumstances shall the sludge
or scum layer be reintroduced or discharged into the town’s wastewater
collection system or POTW.



      (6)   Users shall supply an adequate sampling point downstream
of the grease trap or interceptor, prior to mixing with other sanitary flows,
and an accessible entry into each chamber of the grease trap or interceptor.
The minimum requirement for the sampling point shall be a four-inch vertical
clean-out. The town shall have the right to inspect at any time and without
prior notice.



      (7)   Users shall retain detailed records on-site for a
minimum of three years reflecting all maintenance carried out pursuant to
this section. At a minimum, such records shall contain the following
information: date of service, name of the employee involved and a receipt
reflecting all services rendered by the waste hauler providing the service.



      (8)   Users are required to keep the grease trap or
interceptor free of inorganic solids such as grit, towels, gloves,
cigarettes, eating utensils and the like, which could clog or settle in the
trap or interceptor, thereby reducing the effective volume or capacity of
trap or interceptor.



      (9)   Emulsifiers will not be discharged into the town’s
wastewater collection system. Emulsifiers solidify downstream and coat the
lines increasing the likelihood for blockages and overflows.



      (10)   Users are required to ensure that all waste material
removed from grease traps and interceptors is disposed of in a manner that
complies with all federal, state and local statutes, rules, regulations,
policies and ordinances.



      (11)   Except as provided herein, for a period of one year
following the adoption of this section, no enforcement actions will be taken
under this section for failure to achieve the performance criteria specified
in division (C). If, during such period, an obstruction of any of the
town’s sanitary sewer main(s) occurs and causes a sewer overflow, spill,
leak or other event with any environmental impact, and such overflow, spill,
leak or other event may be attributed in part or in whole to a particular
user, then the town will seek enforcement action under this subchapter. For
purposed of this section, an overflow, spill, leak or other event shall be
deemed to have an environmental impact when such overflow or other event
involves an amount of wastewater equal to or in excess of 1,000 gallons, or
any amount of wastewater reaches any body of surface water.



   (D)   Enforcement.  The town shall enforce this section to the
provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 110612B, passed 11-5-2012)



§ 54.50  AMENDMENTS.



   The town, through its duly qualified officers, reserves the right to
amend this subchapter in part or in whole whenever it may deem necessary, but
that right will be exercised only after due notice by publication one time in
the daily press at least ten days before any final action.



(1995 Code, § 4-3010)  (Ord. passed 2-16-1982)



VIOLATIONS



§ 54.60  SERVICE DISCONTINUANCE.



   When service has been discontinued for violation of this chapter, all
charges for services to date become immediately due and payable. Service will
not be reinstated until payment in full has been made for all charges
including bills, cost of repairs, service charges, reconnection fees and
penalties.



(1995 Code, § 4-2073)  (Ord. passed 3-2-1982)



§ 54.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision or section of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in
an amount not to exceed $200 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.



(1995 Code, § 4-2071)



   (B)   (1)   Any person who is found to have violated an order of
the Town Council or who willfully or negligently fails to comply with any
provisions of §§ 54.40 through 54.50, and the orders, rules, regulations
and permits issued hereunder, shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than
$500 for each offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue
shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.



      (2)   Any person who is convicted of violations of the
provisions of § 54.47(D) shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of
not more than $500. 



(1995 Code, § 4-3008) 



(Ord. passed 2-16-1982; Ord. passed 3-2-1982; Ord. passed 6-3-1986)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      71.   PARKING



      72.   PARADES AND PROCESSIONS



      73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



      74.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   70.01   Adoption of state law



   70.02   Only licensed operators may drive vehicles



   70.03   Obedience to traffic signals



   70.04   Speed limits



   70.05   Vehicles not be operated unless taxes are paid



   70.06   Bicycles, roller skates and skateboards



   70.07   Railroads



   70.08   U-turns and left-hand turns



   70.09   Careless operation unlawful



   70.10   Through trucks prohibited; alternate routes



§ 70.01  ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.



   There is hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof as if set
out in full those provisions of state law known as the Uniform Traffic Act as
contained in S.C. Code, Title 46, Chapter 7.



(1995 Code, § 8-1001)



Editor’s note:



   The prior codification contained the following Editorial Note: The
cited state law may be incorporated by reference in an ordinance by
municipalities, Op. Atty Gen., No. 2460, p. 125 (1967-68). Municipalities may
further regulate traffic, provided the additional regulations do not conflict
with state law, S.C. Code §§ 56-5-30 and 56-5-710.



§ 70.02  ONLY LICENSED OPERATORS MAY DRIVE VEHICLES.



   No vehicle shall be operated within the town limits other than by a
properly licensed driver.



(1995 Code, § 8-1002)



§ 70.03  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC SIGNALS.



   Drivers of all vehicles shall abide by signals of traffic officers and
all automatic and stationary traffic signs and signals within the town limits.



(1995 Code, § 8-1003)



§ 70.04  SPEED LIMITS.



   The speed limits within the town shall be as posted.



(1995 Code, § 8-1004)



Cross-reference:



   Speed limits, see also Chapter 73, Schedule III



§ 70.05  VEHICLES NOT TO BE OPERATED UNLESS TAXES ARE PAID.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any resident of the town, who owes
delinquent personal property taxes to the town upon any motor vehicle, to own
or operate the motor vehicle within the town limits or upon the public
streets and ways of the town while the personal property taxes are due and
owing to the town.



   (B)   Personal property taxes assessed against any motor vehicle
owned by a resident of the town shall be delinquent when the taxes are past
due and unpaid and have gone into execution as provided for by this code.



(1995 Code, § 8-1005)  (Ord. passed 9-5-1972)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.06  BICYCLES, ROLLER SKATES AND SKATEBOARDS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to ride a
bicycle, roller skates, skateboards or operate a reasonable facsimile thereof
on the sidewalks at any time in the business district of the town. The
BUSINESS DISTRICT is defined as being that area within the boundaries of
Vanderhorst Street on the west, Zion Street on the east, College Street on
the north and Moultrie Street on the south.



   (B)   No person shall ride a bicycle, roller skates, skateboard or
operate a device of a reasonable facsimile upon any of the streets of the
town after dark; provided, however, that a bicycle may be operated on streets
within the town limits provided that the same is properly equipped with a
white light on the front of the same and a red light or a red reflector upon
the rear thereof.



(1995 Code, § 8-1006)  (Ord. passed 9-5-1978)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.07  RAILROADS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any railway company to permit its
engines or the cars of any train to block a public street or road crossing in
the town for a longer period than five minutes.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or any railroad company
operating any train through the town to operate the train or engine or part
thereof at speed greater than 20 mph.



(1995 Code, § 8-1007)  (Ord. passed 5-7-1946; Ord. passed 1-26-1948) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.08  U-TURNS AND LEFT-HAND TURNS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons operating a motor
vehicle to make a U-turn on the streets designated in Chapter 73, Schedule I.



(1995 Code, § 8-1008)  (Ord. passed 9-6-1988)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.09  CARELESS OPERATION UNLAWFUL.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle
within the limits of the town without care and caution and full regard for
safety of persons or property. Any person failing to do so shall be guilty of
careless driving or riding. The operation of any vehicle when the same or any
of its parts or appliances is not in proper or safe condition shall be prima
facie evidence of careless driving or riding.



   (B)   Careless operation is unlawful and may be a lesser included
offense of reckless driving. Violations of this section shall be punished by
fine or imprisonment or both, in the discretion of the court, not to exceed
the statutory limits of authority granted to the Municipal Court of the town.



(Ord. 051600A, passed 5-16-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.10  THROUGH TRUCKS PROHIBITED; ALTERNATE ROUTES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle, trailer
or semi-trailer, the total length of which exceeds 25 feet, except emergency
vehicles and trucks delivering goods and merchandise and school buses,
without a permit from the Director Public Safety on any street which has been
designated by resolution of Town Council and posted pursuant to S.C. Code
Ann. § 56-5-720 with signs prohibiting trucks.



(Ord. 02-04-03A, passed 2-4-2003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Alternative routes, see Chapter 73, Schedule II



CHAPTER 71:  PARKING



Section



   71.01   Regulation of parking areas



   71.02   Vehicles improperly parked may be removed



   71.03   Vehicles not to be parked on streets or sidewalks for
routine repairs



   71.04   Parking of vehicles containing dangerous substances



   71.05   [Reserved]



   71.06   [Reserved]



   71.07   Two-hour parking in business district



   71.08   Parking of heavy vehicles



§ 71.01  REGULATION OF PARKING AREAS.



   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any of the driveways
leading from the public streets of the town to and into the parking area in a
manner as to obstruct the flow of vehicular traffic into and from the parking
area, and it shall also be unlawful to park any vehicle in the parking area
in a manner as to prohibit the free movement of any other parked vehicle or
to obstruct the use of the remaining part of the parking area.



(1995 Code, § 8-2002(b))  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Speed limits of this area, see Chapter 73, Schedule III



§ 71.02  VEHICLES IMPROPERLY PARKED MAY BE REMOVED.



   (A)   Any motor vehicle improperly parked or left standing upon the
streets or public ways of the town in a manner as to constitute a hazard to
pedestrian or motor vehicular traffic may be moved by any police officer and
delivered to the Director of Public Safety for keeping or, in the event the
vehicle may be removed by towing to a safe place within the town, as directed
by the Public Safety Director. The Public Safety Director is hereby
designated as the custodian of removed vehicles until they are claimed by the
owners or persons entitled thereto. All cost of towing or removal shall be
paid by the owner or driver of the motor vehicle before return of the vehicle
may be made by the Director of Public Safety.



   (B)   Any motor vehicle or other article of personal property parked
or left standing upon the streets of the town for 48 hours may be removed
therefrom by any police officer, and for this purpose the police officer may
solicit and use the aid and assistance of a towing truck or towing apparatus
in the event he or she cannot move the property. The vehicle or property when
removed from the public streets shall be delivered into the custody of the
Public Safety Director who shall immediately advise the owner, driver or
person entitled thereof of the removal and the amount of actual costs
incurred by the town in the removal. The owner or person rightfully entitled
to the vehicle or personal property may obtain it from the Public Safety
Director by paying the cost of the removal.



(1995 Code, § 8-2003)



§ 71.03  VEHICLES NOT TO BE PARKED ON STREETS OR SIDEWALKS FOR ROUTINE
REPAIRS.



   No person shall perform mechanical work or repair work, unless of an
emergency nature, upon any truck or vehicle parked or placed upon any street
or sidewalk in the town limits.



(1995 Code, § 8-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.04  PARKING OF VEHICLES CONTAINING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
park and leave standing upon the public streets and public ways of the town
any truck or motor vehicle, or any motor vehicle tank trailer, used for the
transportation of gasoline, fuel oil, liquefied petroleum gas or other
flammable or explosive liquids at any time between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. of
the following day, and between 6:00 p.m. of the day preceding any Sunday or
legal holiday and 8:00 a.m. of the day following a Sunday or legal holiday;
provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to any
motor vehicle or tank truck while actually discharging or delivering
therefrom its cargo or the product carried thereon and while the vehicle is
under the actual control of its driver or operator.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
park or leave standing at any time, upon the public streets or public ways of
the town, any motor vehicle transporting thereon any explosive chemicals,
high explosives or radioactive products or materials, unless the motor
vehicle is under the actual control of its driver or operator and the driver
or operator is present at all times while the motor vehicle is left standing
or parked upon the streets of the town.



   (C)   Trucks or motor vehicles parked or left standing upon the
public streets or public ways of the town in violation of the provisions of
this section may be moved under the order and direction of the Public Safety
Department to a safe parking or storage location.



(1995 Code, § 8-2005)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.05  [RESERVED]



§ 71.06  [RESERVED]



§ 71.07  TWO-HOUR PARKING IN BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   (A)   Parking spaces designated as two-hour parking spaces are set
forth in Chapter 74, Schedule I.



   (B)   The town shall have lines or markings painted or placed upon
the curb and on the street for the purpose of designating the parking space
and the vehicle operator shall keep the vehicle within the lines or markings
so established; provided, however, in the event that the vehicle is of a type
which, because of the length or size, would project into the traveled portion
of the street when so parked in accordance with the above provisions, the
operator may park the vehicle parallel to the curb, or within the front
thereof between designated spaces for a period not to exceed ten minutes.
Parking of vehicles in any other manner, or for a longer period, shall
constitute a violation of this section and the operator shall be punished as
hereinafter set forth.



   (C)   Any person parking a vehicle in any space designated above
shall not leave the vehicle in the space for more than two hours (120
minutes). Failure to move the vehicle totally from that space and to another
location shall constitute a violation of this section and shall subject the
person and/or registered owner of the vehicle to the punishments and/or
penalties hereinafter set forth.



   (D)   It shall be the duty of police officers, acting in accordance
with instruments issued by the Public Safety Director, to report:



      (1)   The state license number of the vehicle;



      (2)   The time during which the vehicle is parked in violation
of any provision of this section; and



      (3)   Any other facts, including make of vehicle, a knowledge
of which is necessary to a thorough understanding of the circumstances
attending the violation.



   (E)   Each police officer shall attach to any vehicle found
violating the provisions of this section a notice to the owner or operator
showing the violation and penalty and instructing the owner or operator to
report to the office of the Public Safety Director in regard to the
violation. Each owner or operator may, within 72 hours of the time when the
notice was attached to the vehicle, pay to the Clerk to Municipal Court. The
failure of the owner or operator to make the payment within 72 hours shall
render the owner or operator subject to a penalty of $10. The failure of the
owner or operator to make the payment of $10 within a 30-day period of the
issuance of the notice shall render the owner or operator subject to a
penalty of $25 or to the penalties hereinafter provided for violation of this
section.



   (F)   Any person who shall violate any provisions of this section,
or any person who shall assist in the violation, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction be punished as provided in § 10.99.



   (G)   Any person who shall hinder, obstruct or remove any marks made
by a police officer in the performance of his or her duties in enforcing this
section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be
punished as provided in § 10.99.



   (H)   Rolling of tires, that is, the deliberate movement of the
vehicle only far enough to obliterate any markings placed upon the tire by
the police for the purpose of determining time that a vehicle is parked,
shall be a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in
§ 10.99.



   (I)   Parking regulations as herein set forth shall be in effect
from the hours of 9:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m. each Monday through Saturday.
Sundays and holidays upon which the places of business of the town are closed
are excluded from the operation of the provisions thereof.



(1995 Code, § 8-2007)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.08  PARKING OF HEAVY VEHICLES.



   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of the zoning ordinance or
town code, it shall be unlawful to park or leave unattended, or to allow any
tractor-trailer unit (regardless of weight) or any truck or other such
vehicle (except for a vehicle commonly designated as a pickup truck) with
over a two-ton load capacity or which weighs more than 10,000 pounds (tare or
empty weight) to be parked or left unattended, on or within any portion of a
residential zoning district, including any lot, yard, driveway, street or
public right-of-way. TRACTOR-TRAILER UNIT means the entire unit or the
tractor alone or the trailer alone.



   (B)   This shall not apply to:



      (1)   Service vehicles while actively engaged in temporary
loading or unloading or service; or



      (2)   Campers or recreational vehicles in compliance with the
provisions of the zoning ordinance.



(Ord. 12-6-05, passed 12-6-2005)



CHAPTER 72:  PARADES AND PROCESSIONS



Section



   72.01   Definitions



   72.02   Permit required



   72.03   Application



   72.04   Standards of issuance



   72.05   Parade route



   72.06   Notice of rejection



   72.07   Alternative permit



   72.08   Appeal procedure



   72.09   Contents of permit



   72.10   Possession of permit



   72.11   Public conduct during parades



   72.12   Revocation of permit



   72.13   Violations



   72.14   Post-parade cleanup



§ 72.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARADE.  Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or
procession of any kind, or rallies or demonstrations, or any similar display
in or upon any street, sidewalk, public place, park or other outdoor places
owned or under control of the town.



   PARADE PERMIT. A permit as required by this chapter.



   PERSON.  Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, group or organization of any kind.



   PUBLIC SAFETY DIRECTOR.  The Public Safety Director of this town.



   TOWN.  The Town of Winnsboro, South Carolina.



   TOWN MANAGER.  The Town Manager of this town.



(1995 Code, § 3-1031)  (Ord. 05-16-89, passed 6-6-1989)



§ 72.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, participate in, aid,
form, or start any parade or procession on any of the streets or in any other
public places within the corporate limits of the town without first having
secured a special permit from the Town Manager to do so; provided, however,
that funeral processions and governmental agencies, acting within the scope
of their official functions, are exempted from this chapter.



(1995 Code, § 3-1032)  (Ord. 05-16-89, passed 6-6-1989)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 72.03  APPLICATION.



   A person seeking the issuance of a parade permit shall file an
application with the Public Safety Director on forms provided by the Public
Safety Director.



   (A)   Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be
filed with the Town Manager not less than seven days before the date on which
it is proposed to conduct the parade and not less than 30 days before the
date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade, if the number of actual
or anticipated participants exceeds 200.



   (B)   Contents.  The application for a parade permit shall set
forth the following information:



      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the person
seeking to conduct the parade and the signature of the person or his or her
authorized agent;



      (2)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf
of or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads
of the organization;



      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who
will be the parade chairperson;



      (4)   The date the parade is to be conducted;



      (5)   The route to be traveled, to include the starting point
and the point of termination;



      (6)   The approximate number of persons who and animals and
vehicles which will constitute the parade, the type of animals and
description of the vehicles;



      (7)   The hours when the parade will start and terminate;



      (8)   The location by either street and block location or
other reasonable physical description of any and all assembly areas for the
parade together with the time at which units of the parade will begin to
assemble;



      (9)   The purpose of the parade, although there will be no
refusal of a permit based on purpose alone, unless the purpose comes into
conflict with the condition and requirements hereinafter set forth under
standards of issuance; and



      (10)   Any additional information which the Public Safety
Director or Town Manager shall find it reasonably necessary to a fair
determination as to whether a permit should be issued.



   (C)   Late applications.  Where good cause is shown therefor, the
Public Safety Director of the Town Manager shall have the authority to
consider any application hereunder which is filed in less than the required
periods applicable for the size of parade proposed.



   (D)   Application fee.  A fee to cover the expenses incident to
filing, processing and distribution shall be paid by the person applying for
the permit at the time of the filing of the application. Application fee is
not refundable regardless of the application’s approval or disapproval. The
town has the option of waiving permit application fees.



(1995 Code, § 3-1033)  (Ord. 05-16-89, passed 6-6-1989)



§ 72.04  STANDARDS OF ISSUANCE.



   (A)   The Public Safety Director or the Town Manager shall issue a
permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the
application and from other information, reasonable and reliable in nature and
in content as may otherwise be obtained, he or she finds that:



      (1)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially
interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic and will proceed
along the prescribed route of march only once;



      (2)   The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at
assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and
police protection, or ambulance service;



      (3)   The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to
cause injury to persons or property or to provoke disorderly conduct;



      (4)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin
to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delay en
route; and



      (5)   The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of
advertising any product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held
purely for private profit; provided, however, the prohibition against
advertising any product, goods or event shall not apply to signs identifying
organizations or sponsors furnishing or sponsoring floats or transportation
for the parade.



   (B)   Additionally, if the Public Safety Director or the Town
Manager finds that the parade permit requested is both subsequent and similar
in purpose and/or persons to parades previously requested and held during the
same calendar year and are so unreasonably repetitious as to constitute an
inconvenience to the public in its use of the parade routes and their
contiguous places of business and of public use, access and enjoyment, he or
she may deny the application.



(1995 Code, § 3-1034)  (Ord. 05-16-89, passed 6-6-1989)



§ 72.05  PARADE ROUTE.



   Parade routes are to be restricted to Congress Street in the town
unless otherwise designated and approved. The parade procession may travel
either Evans or streets south of Moultrie Street for staging areas depending
on the direction of travel of the parade.



(1995 Code, § 3-1035)  (Ord. 05-16-89, passed 6-6-1989)



§ 72.06  NOTICE OF REJECTION.



   The Public Safety Director or the Town Manager shall act upon the
application for a parade permit within three days after the filing thereof.
If the Public Safety Director or the Town Manager disapproves the
application, he or she shall mail to the applicant, by return receipt
registered mail within three days after the date which the application was
filed, a notice of his or her action, setting forth the reason(s) for his or
her denial of the permit and a return of the post-parade cleanup deposit if
applicable.



(1995 Code, § 3-1036)  (Ord. 05-16-89, passed 6-6-1989)



§ 72.07  ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.



   The Public Safety Director or the Town Manager in denying an
application for a parade permit shall be empowered to authorize the conduct
of the parade with variances in either or all of the following: date, time or
duration if a compelling interest is involved. An applicant desiring to
accept an alternate permit shall, within three days after notice of the
action of the Public Safety Director or the Town Manager, file a written
notice of acceptance with the Public Safety Director or the Town Manager. An
alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have
the effect of a parade permit under this chapter.



(1995 Code, § 3-1037)  (Ord. 05-16-89, passed 6-6-1989)



§ 72.08  APPEAL PROCEDURE.



   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a
parade permit to the Town Council. The appeal shall be taken within five days
after receipt of the notice of denial. The Town Council shall act not later
than its next regular meeting after receipt of the notice of appeal.



(1995 Code, § 3-1038)  (Ord. 05-16-89, passed 6-6-1989)



§ 72.09  CONTENTS OF PERMIT.



   Each parade permit shall state the following information:



   (A)   Date of the parade;



   (B)   Starting time and termination time of parade;



   (C)   The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be
occupied by the parade; and



   (D)   The number of persons, animals and motor vehicles that will be
in the parade.



(1995 Code, § 3-1039)  (Ord. 05-16-89, passed 6-6-1989)



§ 72.10  POSSESSION OF PERMIT.



   The parade chairperson or other person heading or leading the activity
shall carry the parade permit upon his or her person during the conduct of
the parade.



(1995 Code, § 3-1040)  (Ord. 05-16-89, passed 6-6-1989)



§ 72.11  PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES.



   (A)   Interference.  No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct,
impede or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or any person, vehicle
or animal participating or used in a parade.



   (B)   Driving through parades.  No driver of any vehicle shall
drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when the vehicles
or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade.



   (C)   Parking on parade route.  The Public Safety Director shall
have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the
parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of
the route of a parade. The Public Safety Director may post signs to that
effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended
any vehicle in violation thereof.



(1995 Code, § 3-1041)  (Ord. 05-16-89, passed 6-6-1989)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 72.12  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   The Public Safety Director or the Town Manager shall have the authority
to summarily revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon violation of the
standards of issuance as set forth in this chapter.



(1995 Code, § 3-1042)  (Ord. 05-16-89, passed 6-6-1989)



§ 72.13  VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with
the provisions of this chapter, or the terms and conditions of any permit
issued hereunder or any other applicable regulations, ordinances or laws.



(1995 Code, § 3-1043)  (Ord. 05-16-89, passed 6-6-1989)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 72.14  POST-PARADE CLEANUP.



   It shall be the responsibility of the party to whom the parade permit
is issued to provide for the post- parade cleanup. A cleanup deposit may be
required by the town to ensure proper cleanup. A determination concerning
proper cleanup beyond normal street cleaning and sanitation efforts shall be
determined by the Streets and Sanitation Department Director.



(1995 Code, § 3-1044)  (Ord. 05-16-89, passed 6-6-1989)



CHAPTER 73:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   U-turns



      II.   Truck routes



      III.   Speed limits



SCHEDULE I.  U-TURNS.



   The following turns are prohibited:



 


Prohibited on Street

 

Nature of Turn

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed



Congress Street
 
U-turn in either direction or to make a left-hand turn into a parking space
on Congress Street
 

-

 

9-6-1988




 



(1995 Code, § 8-1008)  Penalty, see § 10.99



SCHEDULE II.  TRUCK ROUTES.



   (A)   Prohibited routes.  The following shall be designated as
“No Through Trucks Streets” posted pursuant to S.C. Code Ann. § 56-5-720
with signs prohibiting through trucks. This resolution shall take effect upon
approval in writing by the State Department of Transportation and the
placement of the requisite signs.



 


Street

 

Extent

 

Ord./Res. No.

 

Date Passed



Evans Street
 
From its junction with State Highway 200 (Newberry Road) to its junction with
US 321 Business (North Congress Street)
 

Res. -

 

2-4-2003



US 321 Business (North Congress Street)
 
From its junction with Peay’s Ferry Road to its junction with Moultrie
Street
 

Res. -

 

2-4-2003




 



   (B)   Alternate routes.



 


Approaching Town From (Direction, Street)

 

Trucks Should Use

 

Ord./Res. No.

 

Date Passed





Through Trucks Alternate Routes:


East via Highway 200
 
At intersection of Highway 200 and Highway 321 Business:

To continue traveling west: use Highway 200 to junction with Highway 34;

To travel north or south: travel Highway 200 to Highway 321 Bypass. Turn
right to travel north or turn left to travel south
 

Res. -

 

2-4-2003



North via Highway 321
 
Utilize Highway 321 Bypass
 

Res. -

 

2-4-2003



South via Highway 321
 
Utilize Highway 321 Bypass
 

Res. -

 

2-4-2003



West via Highway 34
 
At intersection of Highway 34 and Highway 321 Bypass: turn left to travel
north or turn right to travel south
 

Res. -

 

2-4-2003



Through Trucks Unable to Clear Highway 200 Underpass:


East via Highway 200
 
Just before underpass bear to right onto Peay’s Ferry Road continue to
intersection with North Congress Street (Highway 321-Bus.). Turn right onto
North Congress, travel to North Congress and Highway 200 intersection, turn
left onto Highway 200
 

Res. -

 

2-4-2003



West via Highway 34
 
At intersection of Highway 34 and North Congress Street (Highway 321-Bus.),
and Highway 200, turn right onto North Congress Street, continue until first
street on left (Peay’s Ferry), turn left onto Peay’s Ferry and continue
until merge with Highway 200
 

Res. -

 

2-4-2003



UniRoyal Freight Trucks et al.:


North or south via Highway 321 Bypass
 
From north turn left onto Moultrie Street; or from south turn right onto
Moultrie Street. Travel Moultrie Street to intersection of South Congress
Street. Turn right onto South Congress Street. Travel South Congress Street
to junction with Old Camden Road. Turn left onto Old Camden Road. Proceed 1/8
mile to Maple Street. Turn right onto Maple Street. Proceed to UniRoyal Plant
 

Res. -

 

2-4-2003





 



SCHEDULE III.  SPEED LIMITS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle at a
speed greater than the following:



 


Street/Area

 

Speed Limit (mph)

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed



The parking area and driveways connected thereto and lying between Liberty
Street on the south, Washington Street on the north, Congress Street on the
west, and the right-of-way of the Southern Railway Company on the east
 

15 mph

 

-

 

- -




 



(1995 Code, § 8-2002(a))  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 74:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Two-hour parking areas



SCHEDULE I.  TWO-HOUR PARKING AREAS.



   The following parking areas are designated as two-hour parking spaces:



 


Spaces on Street/Area

 

Time Restriction

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed



Between the streets of Moultrie on the south end of town and College Street
on the north end of town
 
Between 9:00 a.m until 5:00 p.m. each Monday through Saturday
 

-

 

- -



Washington Street behind the Town Clock from Congress Street to the railroad
tracks
 
Between 9:00 a.m until 5:00 p.m. each Monday through Saturday
 

-

 

- -




 



(1995 Code, § 8-2007)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   ANIMALS



      91.   TREES



      92.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



      93.   [RESERVED]



      94.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      95.   PARKS AND RECREATION



      96.   NUISANCE; PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



CHAPTER 90:  ANIMALS



Section




General Provisions




   90.01   Keeping hogs or pigs prohibited



   90.02   Keeping of livestock regulated



   90.03   Animal enclosures not to be nuisances



   90.04   Livestock displays authorized



   90.05   Keeping of certain animals declared to be a nuisance




Pets




   90.15   Definitions   



   90.16   Enforcement



   90.17   Dogs running at large



   90.18   Tags



   90.19   Restraint



   90.20   Abandonment and/or maltreatment



   90.21   Killing, stealing, maiming and removing tag



   90.22   Confinement/control



   90.23   Impoundment



   90.24   Kennels



   90.25   Exceptions



   90.26   Investigation



   90.27   Interference



   90.28   Records



   90.29   Exotic animals



 



   90.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 90.01  KEEPING OF HOGS OR PIGS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any hogs or pigs within the
corporate limits.



(1995 Code, § 6-4001)  (Ord. passed 9-23-1958)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.02  KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK REGULATED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any cow, horse,
mule, sheep, goat, pony or other like domestic animal except hogs or pigs
within the corporate limits, except under the following conditions.



      (1)   All animals are to be confined within an enclosed area,
but at no time shall the area be less than one-half acre for each animal kept
or placed in the enclosure. ENCLOSED AREA, as used herein, shall be construed
to mean a space within which the animal or animals can move about freely
without necessity for removal of fences or opening of gaps or gates.



      (2)   The area within which animals are kept shall be enclosed
with a substantial and permanent fence constructed of at least four strands
of barbed wire or of heavy gauge woven wire. Fences of light gauge wire such
as chicken wire shall not be used to enclose domestic animals.



      (3)   The barns, stables, shelters or enclosed areas used in
connection with the keeping of any domestic animal(s) or fowl within the town
shall be maintained in a condition as not to become the breeding places for
flies, mosquitoes or the source of foul or offensive odors.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or manager of any domestic
animal or fowl of any description willfully or negligently to permit any
domestic animal or fowl to run at large upon public or private property.



(1995 Code, § 6-4002)  (Ord. passed 9-23-1958; Ord. 08-18-09-C, passed
8-18-2009)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.03  ANIMAL ENCLOSURES NOT TO BE NUISANCES.



   Upon complaint of any person regarding foul or offensive odors or
insects originating or breeding in or upon the enclosures, barns, stables or
shelters used in the keeping of domestic animals or fowl within the town,
State Department of Health and Environmental Control (DHEC) is authorized and
empowered to investigate the alleged origin of the odors or insects and
determining if the complaints are justified. In the event it is determined by
SC DHEC that offensive odors or insects are originating from the manner in
which domestic animals or fowl are being kept, or from the enclosures, barns,
stables or shelters used in connection therewith, to an extent as to be
offensive or annoying to other persons, the owner or manager of the animals
shall be notified in writing of SC DHEC’s findings and shall be given five
days in which to eliminate or correct the origin of the odors or insects.
Unless proper correction or elimination of the source of the odors or insects
is made by the owner or manager of the animal(s) or fowl as directed by SC
DHEC, it shall be unlawful for the owner or manager to continue to keep any
domestic animal(s) or fowl within the enclosure.



(1995 Code, § 6-4003)  (Ord. passed 9-23-1958; Ord. 08-18-09-C, passed
8-18-2009)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.04  LIVESTOCK DISPLAYS AUTHORIZED.



   Live displays of livestock for educational purposes by a licensed
establishment shall be permitted within the town. These live displays shall
be subject to periodic inspections by the Health Department which shall
report any violations thereof to the Town Health Department or other
officials of the town. Permits for these displays may be revoked by the town
at any time without notice.



(1995 Code, § 6-4004)  (Ord. passed 9-23-1958)



§  90.05  KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS DECLARED TO BE A NUISANCE.



   (A)   Any fowl, bird, dog, cat, or other animal that shall, by sound
(i.e., frequent or long continued noise), odor, or sight, affect the comfort,
peace, quiet, or health of the people is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess, or
maintain an animal in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance.
Animal Control and Law Enforcement Officers may institute criminal
misdemeanor process upon probable cause and immediately impound animals
declared to be in violation of this section.



(Ord. 041514A, passed 4-15-2014)  Penalty, see § 90.99



PETS



§ 90.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONMENT.  A situation in which an owner of a dog or cat or other
domesticated animal does not provide for humane disposal of the animal, or
transfer ownership to a responsible person or who does not provide or arrange
for adequate food, water, shelter or care during the owner’s absence.



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.  The person or persons employed by the town
and given authority to uphold and enforce the animal control ordinance.



   ANIMAL SHELTER.  The County Animal Shelter so designated and operated
for the purpose of impounding and caring for all animals found running at
large or in violation of these rules and regulations as they apply to the
town.



   AT LARGE.  A dog which is off the premises of the owner or keeper and
not under the physical control of the owner or keeper by means of a leash or
other similar restraining device. “Premises” shall not be deemed to
include property within the right-of-way for public streets, roads and
sidewalks and the area between sidewalks and streets and highways.



   EXOTIC ANIMALS.  One which would ordinarily be confined to a zoo, or
one which would ordinarily not be native to this state or county or to North
America. It includes but is not limited to such animals as mountain lions,
tigers, lions, bears, panthers, leopards, wolves, rhinoceroses, elephants and
other such animals.



   EXPOSED TO RABIES. Any dog or cat which has been bitten by or exposed
to any animal known to have been infected with rabies. This determination
shall be made by the Control Officer.



   KENNEL.  Any person, group of persons or business breeding, buying,
selling or boarding dogs and/or cats on the premises. This definition shall
not include litters of dogs or cats under the age of four months.



   MALTREATMENT. A situation in which any person physically abuses and/or
cruelly treats any animal.



   OWNER.  Any person, group of persons or corporation owning, keeping or
harboring dog(s) or cat(s) or other domestic animals.



   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any animal repeatedly found at large, or making loud
or objectionable noises, chasing vehicles or behaving in any manner which is
deemed to be doing damage to property or to public health and well-being, or
which is known to have bitten two or more persons, or which has been
determined by the Animal Control Officer to be a detriment to public health,
welfare or safety; or any dog, cat or domestic animal that constitutes a
physical threat to human beings, other dogs or cats, or livestock by virtue
of its specific training or demonstrated behavior.



   RESTRAINT.  A situation in which a dog is controlled by a leash, on or
within a vehicle being driven or parked, or within the property limits or
within the dwelling of its owner or keeper.



   SPAYED FEMALES. Any female which has been operated upon to prevent
conception.



   VICIOUS ANIMAL.  Any dog or cat evidencing characteristics usually
associated with a dog or cat which attacks or attempts to attack other
animals or persons without provocation by other persons or animals.



(1995 Code, § 6-4011)  (Ord. passed 2-7-1978; Ord. passed 6-6-1978; Ord.
990202B, passed 2-2-1999)



§ 90.16  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The provisions of these rules and regulations shall be
enforced by the Animal Control Officer.



   (B)   The town shall provide such personnel in the yearly budget
ordinance under the Public Safety Department.



(1995 Code, § 6-4012)  (Ord. passed 2-7-1978; Ord. passed 6-6-1978; Ord.
990202B, passed 2-2-1999)



Cross-reference:



   Public Safety, see Chapter 32



§ 90.17  DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any dog owner to allow the owner’s
dog or dogs to run at large beyond the premises owned, rented or controlled
by the owner when not controlled by a leash. The PREMISESOWNED, RENTED OR
CONTROLLED shall not be deemed to include any area within the boundaries of
the right-of-way for public streets, highways, sidewalks and the area between
the sidewalks and the street and sidewalks and the highway. For emphasis and
clarity, the provisions of this division (A) shall be deemed to apply for
violations that are only momentary.



   (B)   Any dog found in the town running at large beyond the premises
owned, rented or controlled by the owner of the dog and not secured by a
leash, shall be impounded by the Town Animal Control Officer and retained at
the County Animal Shelter.



(Ord. 990202B, passed 2-2-1999)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.18  TAGS.



   (A)   All dogs within the town shall have collars and tags with the
name, address and telephone number of the dog’s owner stamped or printed on
the collar or tag, and current rabies vaccine tag.



   (B)   Any dog or cat at large without a tag may be picked up by the
Animal Control Officer and held at the County Animal Control Shelter to be
reclaimed by the owner after paying the appropriate fee.



(1995 Code, § 6-4014)  (Ord. 990202B, passed 2-2-1999)



§ 90.19  RESTRAINT.



   (A)   The owner or person in possession of a cat and/or dog shall be
responsible for the actions of the animal and shall be civilly liable for
damages to persons and property, whether the same be public property or
private property, personal or real estate. In addition to the above damages,
should the animal become a nuisance or affect the health and safety of a
resident, then the complainant may take out a warrant and a summons will be
issued to the owner or person in possession thereof.



   (B)   No owner shall keep or have unrestrained within the town
limits a vicious dog and any person found guilty of violating this provision
shall forfeit all right, title and interest in the animal; and the Animal
Control Officer shall turn the animal over to the County Animal Control
Officer for destruction.



(1995 Code, § 6-4015)  (Ord. passed 2-7-1978; Ord. passed 6-6-1978; Ord.
passed 8-21-1979; Ord. 990202B, passed 2-2-1999)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.20  ABANDONMENT AND/OR MALTREATMENT.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner to abandon any animal in the town.
Moreover, it shall be unlawful for any person to maltreat any animal in the
town.



(1995 Code, § 6-4016)  (Ord. passed 2-7-1978; Ord. passed 6-6-1978; Ord.
990202B, passed 2-2-1999)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.21  KILLING, STEALING, MAIMING AND REMOVING TAG.



   Any person who shall wrongfully remove the tag from or steal any dog or
cat or wrongfully kill, maim, entice, steal or maltreat any dog or cat shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1995 Code, § 6-4017)  (Ord. passed 2-7-1978; Ord. passed 6-6-1978; Ord.
990202B, passed 2-2-1999)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.22  CONFINEMENT/CONTROL.



   (A)   The owner shall confine or control within a building or secure
enclosure every vicious dog or cat, and shall not take the dog or cat out of
the building or enclosure unless the dog or cat is securely muzzled and under
adequate control to safeguard other persons and/or the animal’s safety.



   (B)   Every female dog or cat in heat shall be kept confined by its
owner in a building or secure enclosure or in a veterinary hospital or
boarding kennel, in a manner so as not to create a nuisance by attracting
other animals.



(1995 Code, § 6-4018)  (Ord. passed 2-7-1978; Ord. passed 6-6-1978; Ord.
990202B, passed 2-2-1999)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.23  IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   All animals impounded will be turned over to the County Animal
Control Officer for disposition.



   (B)   Immediately after impounding any animal the Town Animal
Control Officer will make every reasonable effort to notify the owner of its
impoundment.



   (C)   The operation of the Animal Control Shelter is a
responsibility of this county. Impoundment, setting of fees, redemption,
adoption, disposition and operation of the shelter will be in accordance with
the rules and regulations established by the county.



(1995 Code, § 6-4019)  (Ord. passed 2-7-1978; Ord. passed 6-6-1978; Ord.
passed 8-21-1979; Ord. 990202B, passed 2-2-1999)



§ 90.24  KENNELS.



   Every person, group of persons or business engaged in the operation of
a kennel as defined in § 90.15 shall pay an annual license fee of $25.



(1995 Code, § 6-4020)  (Ord. passed 6-6-1978; Ord. 990202B, passed 2-2-1999)



§ 90.25  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The licensing requirements of this subchapter shall not apply
to any dog belonging to a nonresident of the town and kept within the
boundaries of the town for not longer than 30 days, provided that the dog, at
the time of entry into the town, shall be kept properly inoculated against
rabies, and while kept within the town meet all other requirements of these
rules and regulations.



   (B)   Persons bringing dogs into the town must have readily
available a valid rabies vaccination certificate. Dogs which cannot qualify
will either be deported or inoculated by a state veterinarian.



   (C)   Veterinary hospitals and clinics operated by licensed
veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals and humane shelters are
exempt from the provisions of these rules and regulation.



(1995 Code, § 6-4021)  (Ord. 990202B, passed 2-2-1999)



§ 90.26  INVESTIGATION.



   For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by these rules and
regulations and to enforce its positions, the Animal Control Officer shall
obtain a search warrant and is empowered to enter upon any premises upon
which it is suspected a violation of the provisions of these rules and
regulations exists; and he or she shall have power to issue summons and allow
the owner to post bond and appear before the City Recorder for charges
contained therein. It is further provided that the Animal Control Officer may
obtain a search warrant to enter the premises where any animal is kept or
suspected of being kept in a reportedly cruel or inhumane manner, and demand
to examine the animal and to take immediate possession of the animal when, in
his or her opinion, it requires removal from the premises to protect the
animal. Any person aggrieved by any event arising from the exercise of the
provision hereof may request a hearing before a municipal judge by requesting
a hearing within five days of the occurrence which gives rise to the
grievance.



(1995 Code, § 6-4022)  (Ord. passed 2-7-1978; Ord. passed 6-6-1978; Ord.
990202B, passed 2-2-1999)



§ 90.27  INTERFERENCE.



   No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest the Animal Control
Officer in the performance of this duty or seek to release any animal in the
custody of the Animal Control Officer except as herein provided.



(1995 Code, § 6-4023)  (Ord. passed 2-7-1978; Ord. passed 6-6-1978; Ord.
990202B, passed 2-2-1999)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.28  RECORDS.



   Accurate and detailed records of the impoundment and disposition of all
animals coming into the custody of the Animal Control Officer, together with
recorded bite cases, and all financial records shall be kept in a manner
specified by the town.



(1995 Code, § 6-4024)  (Ord. passed 2-7-1978; Ord. passed 6-6-1978)



§ 90.29  EXOTIC ANIMALS.



   No person, firm or corporation shall keep or permit to be kept on his,
her or their premises any exotic animal as a pet, for display or for
exhibition purposes. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
to keep, maintain, possess or have under his, her or their control within the
borders of the town any exotic animals. The prohibition of exotic animals is
primarily based upon a concern to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the town. This section shall not be construed to apply to
zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions or circuses.



(Ord. 990202B, passed 2-2-1999)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person violating any provisions of §§ 90.15 through
90.29 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not
more than $100 or imprisonment of not more than 30 days, and if the violation
be continued, each day’s violation may be deemed a separate offense.



(1995 Code, § 6-4025)  (Ord. passed 2-7-1978; Ord. passed 6-6-1978; Ord.
990202B, passed 2-2-1999)



CHAPTER 91:  TREES



Section



   91.01   Definitions



   91.02   Creation and establishment of a Town Tree Board



   91.03   Term of office



   91.04   Compensation



   91.05   Duties and responsibilities



   91.06   Operation



   91.07   Street tree species to be planted



   91.08   Spacing



   91.09   Distance from curb and sidewalk



   91.10   Distance from street corners and fire hydrants



   91.11   Utilities



   91.12   Public tree care



   91.13   Tree topping



   91.14   Pruning; corner clearance



   91.15   Dead or diseased tree removal on private property



   91.16   Removal of stumps



   91.17   Interference with Town Tree Board



   91.18   Arborists’ license and bond



   91.19   Review by Town Council



 



   91.99   Penalty



§ 91.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARK TREES.  Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in
public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the town, or to
which the public has free access as a park.



   STREET TREES.  Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on
land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or
ways within the town. Tree ownership along streets is determined by street
ownership.



(1995 Code, § 3-1051)  (Ord. passed 6-3-1986)



§ 91.02  CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF A TOWN TREE BOARD.



   There is hereby created and established a Town Tree Board for the town,
which shall consist of seven members, citizens and residents of this town,
who shall be appointed by the Council of the town.



(1995 Code, § 3-1052)  (Ord. passed 6-3-1986)



§ 91.03  TERM OF OFFICE.



   The term of the seven persons to be appointed by the Council shall be
three years, except that the term of two of the members appointed to the
first Board shall be for one year and the term of two other members of the
first Board shall be for two years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur
during the term of any member, his or her successor shall be appointed for
the unexpired portion of the term.



(1995 Code, § 3-1053)  (Ord. passed 6-3-1986; Ord. 03-16-10, passed
3-16-2010)



§ 91.04  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.



(1995 Code, § 3-1054)  (Ord. passed 6-3-1986)



§ 91.05  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   It shall be the responsibility of the Board to study, investigate,
counsel and develop and/or update annually, and administer a written plan for
the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition
of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. The
plan will be presented annually to the Town Council and, upon its acceptance
and approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive town tree plan for
the town. The Board, when requested by the Town Council, shall consider,
investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter of
question coming within the scope of its work.



(1995 Code, § 3-1055)  (Ord. passed 6-3-1986)



§ 91.06  OPERATION.



   The Board shall keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the
members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.



(1995 Code, § 3-1056)  (Ord. passed 6-3-1986)



§ 91.07  STREET TREE SPECIES TO BE PLANTED.



   (A)   The following list constitutes the official street tree
species for the town:



 



Small:
 
Medium (Cont’d)


Bradford Pear
 
Sourwood


Cherry Laurel
 
Southern Magnolia


Crab Apple
 
Weeping Willow


Crepe Myrtle
 
White Ash


Flowering Dogwood
 


Japanese Red Maple
 
Large:


Popcorn Tree
 
American Birch


Redbud
 
American Linden (Basswood)


Wax Myrtle
 
Bald Cypress


 
Black Gum


Medium:
 
Green Ash


American Holly
 
Hackberry


Deodar Cedar
 
Hickories


Ginko
 
Laurel Oak


Leyland Cypress
 
Northern Red Oak


Live Oak (Darlington Oak)
 
Pecans


Paulownia
 
Pines


Red Cedar
 
Southern Red Oak


Red Maple
 
Sycamore


River Birch
 
Tulip Poplar


Sassafras
 
Water Oak


Sawtooth Oak
 
White Oak


 
Willow Oak


 




 



   (B)   Species other than those included in this list may be planted
as street trees with written permission of the Town Tree Board.



(1995 Code, § 3-1057)  (Ord. passed 6-3-1986)



§ 91.08  SPACING.



   The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three
species size classes listed in § 91.07, and no trees may be planted closer
together than the following: small trees, 30 feet; medium trees, 40 feet; and
large trees, 50 feet; except in special plantings designed or approved by a
landscape architect.



(1995 Code, § 3-1058)  (Ord. passed 6-3-1986)



§ 91.09  DISTANCE FROM CURB AND SIDEWALK.



   The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks
will be in accordance with the three species size classes listed in § 91.07,
and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the
following: small trees, two feet; medium trees, three feet; and large trees,
four feet.



(1995 Code, § 3-1059)  (Ord. passed 6-3-1986)



§ 91.10  DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIRE HYDRANTS.



   No street tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet from any street
corner, measured from the point nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No
street tree shall be planted within ten feet of any fire hydrant.



(1995 Code, § 3-1060)  (Ord. passed 6-3-1986)



§ 91.11  UTILITIES.



   No street trees other than those species listed as small trees in §
91.07 may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility
wire, or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line,
sewer line, transmission line or other utility.



(1995 Code, § 3-1061)  (Ord. passed 6-3-1986)



§ 91.12  PUBLIC TREE CARE.



   (A)   The town shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and
remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys,
avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure
public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of the public
grounds.



   (B)   The Town Tree Board may remove or cause or order to be removed
any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which, by reason
of its nature, is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water
lines or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus,
insect or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street
trees by adjacent property owners, providing that the selection and location
of the trees is in accordance with §§ 91.07 through 91.11.



(1995 Code, § 3-1062)  (Ord. passed 6-3-1986)



§ 91.13  TREE TOPPING.



   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or town
department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public
property. TOPPING is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs
larger than three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to a degree so
as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged
by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wire or other
obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted
from this chapter at the determination of the Town Tree Board.



(1995 Code, § 3-1063)  (Ord. passed 6-3-1986)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.14  PRUNING; CORNER CLEARANCE.



   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within
the town shall prune the branches so that the branches shall not obstruct the
light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection
and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of
the street or sidewalk. The owners shall remove all dead, diseased or
dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the
safety of the public. The town shall have the right to prune any tree or
shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light
along the street from a light or interferes with visibility of any
traffic-control device or sign.



(1995 Code, § 3-1064)  (Ord. passed 6-3-1986)



§ 91.15  DEAD OR DISEASED TREE REMOVAL ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   The town shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or
diseased trees on private property within the town’s service area when the
trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease
which constitutes a potential threat to other trees within the town’s
service area. The Town Tree Board will notify, in writing, the owners of the
trees. Removal shall be done by the owners at their own expense within 60
days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners
to comply with these provisions, the town shall have the authority to remove
the trees and charge the cost of removal on the owner’s property tax notice.



(1995 Code, § 3-1065)  (Ord. passed 6-3-1986)



§ 91.16  REMOVAL OF STUMPS.



   All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface
of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the
surface of the ground.



(1995 Code, § 3-1066)  (Ord. passed 6-3-1986)



§ 91.17  INTERFERENCE WITH TOWN TREE BOARD.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with
the Town Tree Board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the
planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any street
trees, park trees or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this chapter.



(1995 Code, § 3-1067)  (Ord. passed 6-3-1986)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.18  ARBORISTS’ LICENSE AND BOND.



   It shall be unlawful for any firm or individual to engage in the
business or occupation of pruning, treating or removing street or park trees
within the town without first applying for and procuring a business license.
The license fee shall be required of any public service firm or individual
doing the work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. Before any
license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of
possession of liability insurance in the amount of $500,000 for bodily injury
and $500,000 property damage insurance for an aggregate of $1,000,000
indemnifying the town or any person injured or damaged resulting from the
pursuit of such endeavors as herein described. Additionally, the firm or
person shall file evidence of possession of worker’s compensation insurance.



(1995 Code, § 3-1068)  (Ord. passed 6-3-1986; Ord. 03-16-10, passed
3-16-2010)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.19  REVIEW BY TOWN COUNCIL.



   The Town Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and
decisions of the Town Tree Board. Any person may appeal from any ruling or
order of the Town Tree Board to the Town Council who may hear the matter and
make the final decision.



(1995 Code, § 3-1069)  (Ord. passed 6-3-1986)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be, upon
conviction or a plea of guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed $100.



(1995 Code, § 3-1070)  (Ord. passed 6-3-1986)



CHAPTER 92:  FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



Section




Fire Department




   92.01   Fire Department established



   92.02   Volunteer members



   92.03   Driving over fire hose



   92.04   Interfering with equipment



   92.05   Enforcement



   92.06   Tampering with alarm system



   92.07   False fire alarms




Fire Prevention Code




   92.20   Fire Prevention Code adopted



   92.21   Enforcement



   92.22   Variances



   92.23   Appeals



Cross-reference:



   Public Safety, see Chapter 32



FIRE DEPARTMENT



§ 92.01  FIRE DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Town Fire Department to be
headed by the Public Safety Director and any other paid and volunteer members
and employees as may be determined necessary by Council.



   (B)   The Fire Chief shall be the Public Safety Director.



   (C)   The compensation for paid members shall be as may be
determined by Council.



(1995 Code, § 2-2001)



§ 92.02  VOLUNTEER MEMBERS.



   Volunteer members should participate in fire prevention and protection
activities under the rules and procedures for the administration of the
Department established by the Public Safety Director.



(1995 Code, § 2-2002)



§ 92.03  DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.



   No person shall drive or operate any vehicle at any time over or across
any fire hose in or upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public ways of the
town at any place where this hose is being used by the Fire Department.



(1995 Code, § 2-2003)  (Ord. passed 1-26-1948)



§ 92.04  INTERFERING WITH EQUIPMENT.



   No person other than a duly enrolled member of the Fire Department
shall ride upon the fire trucks of the town at any time, nor use, borrow or
interfere with any Fire Department equipment, or attempt to use the equipment
at the scene of a fire unless authorized to do so by the Public Safety
Director or the captain of fire suppression on the scene.



(1995 Code, § 2-2004)  (Ord. passed 1-26-1948)



§ 92.05  ENFORCEMENT.



   Whenever the Fire Department is answering an alarm or operating at the
scene of a fire or other emergency, every enrolled member of the Department
is hereby empowered and authorized to control and direct motor vehicle
traffic, stop or move vehicles, and enforce all provisions of this subchapter
and any other code provisions the enforcement of which is deemed necessary to
assist in the control of the fire or other emergency.



(1995 Code, § 2-2005)  (Ord. passed 1-26-1948)



§ 92.06  TAMPERING WITH ALARM SYSTEM.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to willfully,
maliciously or mischievously interfere or tamper with any fire alarm box or
any of the appliances or apparatus connected therewith, located within the
corporate limits.



(1995 Code, § 2-2006)  (Ord. passed 1-26-1948)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.07  FALSE FIRE ALARMS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to willfully,
maliciously or mischievously turn or give or cause to be turned in or given a
false fire alarm within the corporate limits.



(1995 Code, § 2-2007)  (Ord. passed 1-26-1948)  Penalty, see § 10.99



FIRE PREVENTION CODE



§ 92.20  FIRE PREVENTION CODE ADOPTED.



   There is hereby adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations
governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion,
that certain code adopted in § 150.001, of which code not less than three
copies have been and now are filed in the office of the Clerk and is hereby
adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and the
provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits; provided
however, that in the event of any conflict between the provisions of the 2006
Fire Prevention Code and the provisions of this code of ordinances, state law
or town ordinance, rules or regulations, the provisions of this code, state
law or town ordinances, rules or regulations, shall prevail and be
controlling.



(1995 Code, § 2-2021)



§ 92.21  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Code adopted by this chapter shall be enforced by the Public Safety
Director or the fire suppression officer.



(1995 Code, § 2-2022)



§ 92.22  VARIANCES.



   The Public Safety Director shall have power to grant variances to any
of the provisions of the Code adopted by this subchapter upon application in
writing by the owner or lessee, or his or her duly authorized agent, when
there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter
of the Code; provided that the spirit of the Code shall be observed, public
safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of the variance
when granted or allowed and decision of the Fire Inspector thereon shall be
entered upon the records and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant.



(1995 Code, § 2-2023)



§ 92.23  APPEALS.



   Whenever the Fire Inspector shall disapprove an application or refuse
to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of
the Code adopted by this subchapter do not apply or that the true intent and
meaning of the Code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the
applicant may appeal from the decision of the Fire Inspector to the Manager
within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed.



(1995 Code, § 2-2024)



CHAPTER 93:  [RESERVED]



CHAPTER 94:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section




General Provisions




   94.01   Obstruction generally; consent required



   94.02   Same; removal required within time fixed or required



   94.03   Same; permanent obstruction prohibited



   94.04   Building materials in streets, sidewalks and public places;
permission required



   94.05   Same, protection by barricades, lights



   94.06   Same; removal of conditions



   94.07   Overhanging obstructions



   94.08   Public work force




Excavations




   94.20   Permit required



   94.21   Protection by barricades, lights and the like



   94.22   Restoration of surface



 



   94.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 94.01  OBSTRUCTION GENERALLY; CONSENT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, cause to be obstructed
or permit the obstruction by any means or in any manner and to any extent of
any public sidewalk, footway, public street or highway, public square, alley
or other public place or grounds within the municipality for any purpose,
without the consent of the Manager.



(1995 Code, § 3-1001)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.02  SAME; REMOVAL REQUIRED WITHIN TIME FIXED OR REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to remove, or
cause to be removed, any obstruction on any street, highway or other public
place within the time for which the Manager may have given his or her
permission for the obstruction thereof; or if no time is set when permission
is given, the obstruction shall be removed within the time as the Manager may
require.



(1995 Code, § 3-1002)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.03  SAME; PERMANENT OBSTRUCTION PROHIBITED.



   No permission shall be granted for the placing of a permanent
obstruction on any of the streets, highways or other public places.



(1995 Code, § 3-1003)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.04  BUILDING MATERIALS IN STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES;
PERMISSION REQUIRED.



   Building materials shall not be laid on any sidewalk, street or public
place until the consent of the Manager is first obtained; and it shall be the
duty of the person desiring so to use the streets to inform the Manager when
permission is desired to lay material thereon, and otherwise to obstruct the
places for the purpose of erecting a building adjoining the street, where
some obstruction thereof is necessary, what space will be needed and for what
length of time the obstruction will be necessary, and the Manager shall then
give permission accordingly, imposing then and from time to time, reasonable
conditions as he or she may consider necessary or proper for the protection
of the public and the public property.



(1995 Code, § 3-1004)



§ 94.05  SAME; PROTECTION BY BARRICADES, LIGHTS.



   While the obstructions provided for herein remain on the streets,
sidewalks or other public places, suitable safeguards by day and by night
shall be maintained by the contractor, owner or person in charge of the work,
for the protection of the public, by roping off, using lanterns and other
proper means.



(1995 Code, § 3-1005)



§ 94.06  SAME; REMOVAL OF CONDITIONS.



   At the expiration of the time provided for herein, all obstructions,
materials and trash or other things shall be removed by the owner or
contractor and the street, sidewalk or public place shall be restored to as
good condition in every respect as before the materials or other obstructions
were laid thereon.



(1995 Code, § 3-1006)



§ 94.07  OVERHANGING OBSTRUCTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
build or to extend on or over the streets or sidewalks of the town any
awning, shelter, signboard or other structure without a permit from the
Manager.



   (B)   All awnings, shelters, signboards or other structures built on
or over the sidewalks of the town by permission of the Manager shall be
strongly and securely made, and safely built and fastened so that no danger
to passers-by will be suffered or threatened; shall in no way obstruct,
hinder or interfere with the use of the sidewalk; and shall not have less
than six feet, ten inches clear space above the sidewalk.



   (C)   In the event any judgment should be secured against the town
by reason of injury to person or property inflicted by the instrumentalities
referred to herein, the town shall be entitled to recover against the person,
firm or corporation owning or in control of the instrumentalities the amount
of the judgment, together with the interest thereon and its attorney fees
incurred in connection with bringing action against the person, firm or
corporation.



   (D)   The town, neither by this section nor by the issue of any
permit pursuant thereto nor by any other act on the part of itself or any of
its officers, servants, agents or employees, represents or warrants to any
member of the public the safety of any of the instrumentalities referred to
in this section or waives any of its legal rights to contest or defend any
action brought against it by reason of alleged defects in the
instrumentalities, all of which rights are specifically reserved.



(1995 Code, § 3-1007)  (Ord. passed 1-26-1948)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.08  PUBLIC WORK FORCE.



   (A)   There is herewith established a public work force for the town
and every able-bodied prisoner sentenced in the Municipal Court to
imprisonment for failure to pay a fine imposed by the Court may be required
to work upon the public streets, public ways, municipal parks, municipal
buildings, drains and other municipal public works of the town during the
term of imprisonment.



   (B)   The Public Safety Director is herewith designated as
officer-in-charge of the municipal public works force and shall be
responsible for the proper operation of the municipal work force, the
control, security and supervision of the prisoners serving thereon. The
Public Safety Director may designate the municipal prisoners who are to work
upon the municipal public works force during their imprisonment and prisoners
who are physically unable to perform physical labor or who are dangerous or
who cannot safely be allowed to work on the force may be confined in the
county jail or on the county public work force. Municipal prisoners, when not
engaged in work on the municipal public works shall be confined in the County
Detention Center, or on the county public works force.



(1995 Code, § 3-1009)  (Ord. passed 4-7-1970)



EXCAVATIONS



§ 94.20  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig any ditch, excavation, hole
or opening in any street, sidewalk or public place without the permission of
the Manager or some other proper town officer. Permission shall not be
granted until the purpose for which it is to be made or dug shall be made
known, and then the ditch, excavation, hole or opening shall be used for the
purpose so declared and no other.



(1995 Code, § 3-1021)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.21  PROTECTION BY BARRICADES, LIGHTS AND THE LIKE.



   Every known or reported ditch, excavation, hole or opening in any
street, sidewalk or public place, no matter for what purpose made, shall be
securely and safely covered over with boards or other suitable material, or
enclosed in a secure way as to prevent accidents to persons, animals and
vehicles, both during the night and day, when the workers are not engaged
thereon.



(1995 Code, § 3-1022)



§ 94.22  RESTORATION OF SURFACE.



   Every ditch, excavation, hole or opening in any street, sidewalk or
public place shall be as speedily filled as possible, and shall not be kept
open longer than is absolutely necessary. The street, sidewalk or public
place shall be restored in accordance with State Highway Department
regulations to as good condition with as good materials as existing before
the ditch, excavation, hole or opening was made.



(1995 Code, § 3-1023)



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of § 94.03
shall be fined in the discretion of the court, not exceeding $300 or be
sentenced to 30 days in jail, or both.



(Ord. passed 4-16-2002)



CHAPTER 95:  PARKS AND RECREATION



Section



   95.01   Prohibited acts in town parks



§ 95.01  PROHIBITED ACTS IN TOWN PARKS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to pick, cut, uproot, dig
up, break, remove or in any way injure, damage or destroy any plant, shrub,
grass, flower or tree growing within the limits of the Fortune Springs Park
or within any other public park of the town.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to pasture or graze, under
any condition, any cows, mules, horses, sheep, goats, hogs or cattle of any
kind within the limits of Fortune Springs Park or any other public park of
the town, or to allow any of the aforesaid animals to wander through or stray
into a park or parks at any time whatsoever.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, injure or
deface any building, bench, fence or other structure including the swimming
pool within Fortune Springs Park or other park, or to remove dirt or topsoil
therefrom, or to intentionally or carelessly scatter trash, paper or litter
of any kind therein, or start any fire therein except in places provided.



(1995 Code, § 3-2001)  (Ord. passed 1-26-1948)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 96:  NUISANCE; PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



Section



   96.01   Definitions



   96.02   Powers of the public officer



   96.03   Specific standards



   96.04   Weeds



   96.05   Repair, closing or demolition of unfit dwellings



   96.06   Motor vehicles



   96.07   Littering



   96.08   Service of complaints or orders



   96.09   Power of municipality to declare nuisances not impaired



   96.10   Sale of materials removed or demolished



   96.11   Funds for enforcement



   96.12   Adjudication



   96.13   Provisions hereof are cumulative



   96.14   Exclusive remedies



 



   96.99   General penalty



§ 96.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DILAPIDATED.  Partial ruin or decay as from age, wear or neglect.



   DWELLING.  Any building or structure or part thereof, used and
occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used and includes any
outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith
and shall also include buildings used for business sales such as store
buildings, bars and restaurants and any other buildings of similar nature
which house an enterprise, the object of which is the production of income or
intended to be so used.



   NUISANCE.  Any rubbish, debris, and other unhealthy and unsightly
material or conditions which constitute a public nuisance. Grass, weeds or
any vegetation whatsoever, not edible or planted for some useful or
ornamental purpose, to grow or remain upon the premises so as to exceed an
unsightly height or to throw off any unpleasant or noxious odor or to conceal
any filthy deposit or vermin shall be considered a nuisance, and also
accumulation of trash or waste material upon any property.



   OWNER.  The holder of the title to real estate in fee simple and every
mortgage of record.



   PARTIES IN INTEREST.  The Town of Winnsboro and all individuals,
associates, corporations and others who have interests of record in a lot or
other real property and any who are in possession thereof or have any
interest therein and against whom a complaint has be served under this
chapter.



   PUBLIC AUTHORITY.  Any housing authority or any officer who is in
charge of any department or branch of the government of the town relating to
health, fire, or building regulations or to the activities concerning real
property in the town.



   PUBLIC OFFICER.  The officer or officers who are authorized by this
chapter to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter and his or her
designated agent or agents.



   STREET or HIGHWAY.  The entire width between the boundary lines of
every right-of-way.



   VEHICLE.  A machine propelled by power, other than human power,
designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or
slides and transport persons or property or pull machinery, and shall
include, without limitations, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor
and camper.



(Ord. 4152014-B, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 96.02  POWERS OF THE PUBLIC OFFICER.



   (A)   The public official shall have and exercise such powers as may
be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and
provisions of this chapter, where applicable, including the following powers
and in addition to the others granted in this chapter:



      (1)   To investigate the dwelling condition in the
municipality in order to determine which dwellings therein are unfit for
human habitation;



      (2)   To investigate conditions involving real property within
the municipality regarding cleanliness, rubbish, debris and other unhealthy
and unsightly material or conditions which constitute a public nuisance;



      (3)   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses
and receive evidence;



      (4)   To enter upon any real estate for the purpose of making
examinations, provided such entries be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;



      (5)   To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents,
and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this
chapter; and



      (6)   To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under
this chapter to such officers and agents as he or she may designate.



   (B)   The Building Inspector of the town is hereby  designated as
the public officer and appointed to exercise the power prescribed by this
chapter.



(Ord. 4152014-B, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 96.03  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.



   (A)   Nuisance. Whenever a complaint is filed with the public by a
resident of the municipality charging that any lot or real property within
the limits of the town constitutes a public nuisance, the public officer
shall, if his or her preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such
charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of such real property, a
complaint stating the charges in that respect.



   (B)   He or she shall state in writing his or her findings of fact
and support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon
the owner thereof an order requiring an abatement of the nuisance within 14
days of the date of the service of such order.



   (C)   If the owner fails to comply with the aforesaid order to abate
the nuisance, the public officer will issue a citation which will state the
date and time in which the owner will be required to appear in municipal
court for adjudication of the complaint.



(Ord. 4152014-B, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 96.04  WEEDS.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation owning or occupying any
property within the town shall permit any grass or weeds or any vegetation
whatsoever, not edible or planted for some useful or ornamental purpose, to
grow or remain upon the premises so as to exceed an unsightly height or to
throw off any unpleasant or noxious odor or to conceal any filth deposit or
vermin. Any grass, weeds or other vegetation growing upon the premises in the
town in violation of any of the provisions of this section is hereby declared
to be a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety, cleanliness and
comfort of the inhabitants of the town.



   (B)   The owner of the premises, as to vacant premises or premises
occupied by the owner, and the occupant thereof, in case of premise occupied
by other than the owner thereof, shall remove, trim or cut all grass, weeds
or other vegetation growing or remaining upon the premises, and shall remove
any and all accumulation of trash or waste material remaining upon the
premises.



   (C)   The public officer is hereby authorized to give notice, by
registered mail, return receipt requested to the owner or occupant, as the
case may be, of any premises where grass, weeds, vegetation, trash and waste
material have accumulated, directing and requiring the occupant to trim or
cut the grass, weeds or vegetation, and remove the trash and waste material,
within 14 days after the issuance of the notice.



   (D)   If the owner fails to comply with the aforesaid order to abate
the nuisance, the public officer will issue a citation which will state the
date and time in which the owner will be required to appear in municipal
court for adjudication of the complaint.



(Ord. 4152014-B, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 96.05  REPAIR, CLOSING OR DEMOLITION OF UNFIT DWELLINGS.



   (A)   The Building Inspector of the town is hereby designated as the
public officer and appointed to exercise the powers as follows except for
division (B) of this section. The Town Code Enforcement Officer is hereby
designated as the public officer for that specific section. The public
officer may determine that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation if,
including but not limited to, the following conditions exist, to wit:



      (1)   Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire,
accident, or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light or
sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structure defects;
uncleanliness;



      (2)   Any violation or deviation from the following standard
building codes which constitute the official building code of the town, to
wit:



         (a)   International Building
Code            2006 Edition



         (b)   International Residential
Code         2006 Edition



         (c)   International Plumbing
Code            2006 Edition



         (d)   International Mechanical
Code         2006 Edition



         (e)   International Fuel
Code               2006 Edition



         (f)   International Fire
Code               2006 Edition



         (g)   International Energy Conservation Code   2006
Edition



         (h)   National Electrical
Code               2006 Edition



         (i)   International Existing Building
Code      2006 Edition



   (B)   Property maintenance restoration and preservation. The
following conditions are declared in violation of this chapter. All property
within the town limits whether vacant, improved, or unimproved shall be
maintained by the owner and free of the following:



      (1)   Peeling or cracked building exteriors which can
contribute to wood rot, termite infestation, water damage, and other
conditions which reduce property values shall be promptly repaired;



      (2)   Substantial areas of deteriorated building materials
such as dry rot, and broken or missing portions of stucco and broken or
missing windows and doors, which shall be promptly repaired;



      (3)   Fences and walls in front yard setbacks 3 1/2 feet in
height. Walls are to remain free of sagging, broken, rotted or defective
support posts, missing or broken fence boards and damaged or missing blocks
from block walls;



      (4)   Unoccupied or vacant buildings, structures or parts
thereof shall be kept secured against unauthorized entry and water damage; and



      (5)   If boarded, boarding shall be done in a manner and with
materials specified by the building and zoning official.



   (C)   Whenever a complaint is filed with the public officer by a
resident of the municipality charging that any dwelling is unfit for human
habitation or whenever it appears to the public officer (on his or her own
motion) that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, the public officer
shall, if his or her preliminary investigation disclose a basis for such
charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and all parties in
interest in such dwelling a complaint stating the charges in that respect.



   (D)   If, after notice, the public officer determines that the
dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation, he or she shall
state in writing his or her findings of fact in support of such determination
and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order as
follows:



      (1)   If the repair, alteration or improvements of the
dwelling can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the values of the
dwelling, not to exceed 50% of the value of the dwelling in its condition at
the time of the issuance of the complaint, requiring the owner, within the
time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling, to
render it fit for human habitation or to vacate and close the dwelling as a
human habitation; or



      (2)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling
cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling,
(i.e. a cost exceeding 50% of the value of the dwelling at the time of
issuance of the complaint) issue an order requiring the owner, within the
time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling.



   (E)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter,
or improve or to vacate and close the dwelling within 30 days of the date of
the service of such order, the public officer will issue a citation stating
the date and time at which the owner will be required to appear in municipal
court for adjudication of the complaint.



(Ord. 4152014-B, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 96.06  MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   Parked vehicles to be licensed. It shall be unlawful to park
or store for more than 72 hours on any lot zoned for residential use, except
under a suitable car cover or in enclosed buildings, an automobile, truck,
trailer, bus or other motor vehicle or any kind or type with or without
operative motive power, required or permitted to be registered and/or
licensed under the laws of the state, or any frame, chassis or body thereof,
unless there be affixed to the vehicle current license plates.



   (B)   Abandoned, dismantled, junked, wrecked or inoperative vehicles.



      (1)   Abandonment prohibited. No person shall abandon any
vehicle within the town and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place
within the town, for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such
vehicle to appear to have been abandoned.



      (2)   Dismantled, junked, wrecked, or inoperative vehicle(s)
generally. No person in charge or control of property within the town whether
as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any partially
dismantled, inoperative, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle to remain on
such property longer than 48 hours. The presence of such a vehicle or parts
thereof, is hereby declared a public nuisance. This section shall not apply
with regard to a vehicle on private property under a suitable car cover or in
an enclosed building, or any vehicles on the premise of a business enterprise
operated in a lawful place, manner and licensed by the town when necessary to
the operation of such business enterprise, or a vehicle in an appropriate
storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the
town.



      (3)   Notice to remove. Whenever it comes to the attention of
the town that any nuisance as defined in division (B)(2) of this section, a
notice in writing shall be served upon the occupant of the land where the
nuisance exists or, in case there is no such occupant, then upon the owner of
the property or his or her agency, notifying him or her of the existence of
the nuisance and requesting its removal in the time specified in this section.



      (4)   Responsibility for removal. Upon proper notice and
opportunity to be heard, the owner of the abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicle and the owner or occupant of the private property on
which the same is located, either or all of them, shall be responsible for
its removal.



      (5)   Notice procedure. The town shall give notice of removal
to the owner or occupant of the private property where it is located at least
five days before the time of the compliance. Notice is to be posted in a
conspicuous place upon the private property on which the vehicle is located
and duplicate copies served on the owner and/or occupant or sent by certified
mail to the last known address or the owner and/or occupant of the private
property.



      (6)   Content of notice. The notice shall contain the request
for removal within a specified time.



      (7)   Failure to comply. If the violation described in the
notice has not been remedied within the period of compliance, the Public
Safety Director or his or her designee will issue a citation stating the date
and time at which the owner will be required to appear in municipal court for
adjudication of the nuisance.



      (8)   Leaving dismantled, junked, wrecked or inoperative
vehicles(s) on the street or highway. No person shall leave any partially
dismantled, inoperative, wrecked or junked vehicle on any street or highway
in the town.



      (9)   Impoundment of vehicles left on any right-of-way, road
or highway. The Public Safety Director shall have full power and authority to
remove, or have removed, any vehicle left on any right-of-way, road or
highway within the town, which reasonably appears to be in violation of this
section or is lost, stolen and unclaimed. Such a vehicle shall be impounded
until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with S.C. Code §§
56-5-5610 and 56-5-5680.



(Ord. 4152014-B, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 96.07  LITTERING.



   (A)   Littering prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
dump, throw upon, deposit or leave trash, refuse, garbage, cans, bottles,
wrecked cars or any other litter on any property belonging to another without
permission from the owner thereof or on or along or upon any public property
within the town.



   (B)   Litter from vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to
drive and operate upon the public streets of the town any truck, trailer or
wagon which has been recently used for the purpose of hauling pine logs, hay,
straw, paper or other like material which tends to litter the streets, and
upon which there remains any bark, straw, hay, paper, resulting from the
hauling until the vehicle has been thoroughly cleaned of trash or litter and
rendered reasonably free therefrom, the trash or litter is covered or
otherwise prevented from falling from the vehicle.



   (C)   Disposal of ashes.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful to empty ashes in a way that they
may be blown or scattered upon adjoining property or persons in the community.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful to dispose of coals, embers or
clinkers except when they have been thoroughly cooled or extinguished, or
when they have been buried or otherwise been rendered harmless to persons or
property.



(Ord. 4152014-B, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 96.08  SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS OR ORDERS.



   Complaints, orders, notices and any and all other papers issued by the
public officer provided for under this chapter shall be served upon parties
in interest either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested,
but if the whereabouts of such person or persons is unknown and cannot be
ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence and
the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving
of such complaint or order upon such person may be made by publishing it once
a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality in which the real property is located.



(Ord. 4152014-B, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 96.09  POWER OF MUNICIPALITY TO DECLARE NUISANCES NOT IMPAIRED.



   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to impair or limit in any
way the power of a municipality to define and declare nuisances and to cause
their removal or abatement by summary proceedings, or otherwise.



(Ord. 4152014-B, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 96.10  SALE OF MATERIALS REMOVED OR DEMOLISHED.



   If a dwelling is removed or demolished by a public officer, he or she
shall sell such material from such dwelling as are marketable and shall
credit the proceeds of such sale against the costs of the removal or
demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the municipal
court by the public officer which shall be secured in such a manner as may be
directed by such court and shall be disbursed by such court to the persons
found to be entitled thereto by final order of decree of such a court.



(Ord. 4152014-B, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 96.11  FUNDS FOR ENFORCEMENT.



   Upon the passage of this chapter, the Town Council shall prepare an
estimate of the annual expense necessary to carry out the provisions of this
chapter. The town may make such appropriations from the revenues as it may
deem necessary for the purposes set forth herein and in addition may accept
and apply grants or donations to assist in the carrying out of the provision
of this chapter.



(Ord. 4152014-B, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 96.12  ADJUDICATION.



   Unless otherwise specified, all public nuisance violations shall be
adjudicated by the Winnsboro Municipal Court.



(Ord. 4152014-B, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 96.13  PROVISIONS HEREOF ARE CUMULATIVE.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the
powers of the courts or any department of this municipality to enforce any
provisions of its charter or its ordinances or regulations, or to prevent or
punish violations thereof and the powers conferred by this chapter shall be
in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law.



(Ord. 4152014-B, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 96.14  EXCLUSIVE REMEDIES.



   The remedies herein provided shall be exclusive remedies and no person
affected by an order of the public officer shall be entitled to recover any
damages for action taken pursuant to any order of the public officer or
because of compliance by such person with any order of the public officer.



(Ord. 4152014-B, passed 5-20-2014)



§ 96.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Unless otherwise specified, violation of any provision of this chapter
shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $300 or by imprisonment not
exceeding 30 days. Each day any violation of any provision of this chapter
shall continue constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 4152014-B, passed 5-20-2014)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   BUSINESS LICENSES



      111.   ADVERTISING



      112.   TA`XICABS



      113.   MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 110:  BUSINESS LICENSES



Section



   110.01   License required



   110.02   Definitions



   110.03   Purpose and duration



   110.04   License tax



   110.05   Registration required



   110.06   Deductions, exemptions and charitable organizations



   110.07   False application unlawful



   110.08   Display and transfer



   110.09   Administration of chapter



   110.10   Inspection and audits



   110.11   Assessments, payment under protest, appeal



   110.12   Delinquent license taxes, partial payment



   110.13   Notices



   110.14   Denial of license



   110.15   Suspension or vocation of license



   110.16   Appeals to Council



   110.17   Consent franchise or license required for use of streets



   110.18   Confidentiality



   110.19   Classification and rates



   110.99   Penalty



§ 110.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Every person engaged or intending to engage in any calling, business,
occupation or profession, in whole or in part, within the limits of the town,
is required to pay an annual license tax for the privilege of doing business
and obtain a business license.



(Ord. 031913, passed 3-5-2013)



§ 110.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS.  A calling, occupation, profession or activity engaged in
with the object of gain, benefit or advantage, either directly or indirectly.



   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.  An organization that is determined by the
Internal Revenue Service to be exempt from federal income taxes under 26 USC
§ 501 (c) (3), (4), (6), (7), (8), (10) or (19).



   CHARITABLE PURPOSE.  A benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic or
eleemosynary purpose which does not result in personal gain to a sponsor,
organizer, officer, director, trustee or person with ultimate control of the
organization.



   CLASSIFICATION.  That division of businesses by major groups subject
to the same license rate as determined by a calculated index of ability to
pay based on national averages, benefits, equalization of tax burden,
relationships of services or other basis deemed appropriate by the Council.



   GROSS INCOME.  The total income of a business, received or accrued,
for one calendar year collected or to be collected from business done within
the town, excepting therefrom income earned outside of the town on which a
license tax is paid to some other town or a county and fully reported to the
town. GROSS INCOME for brokers or agents means gross commissions received or
retained, unless otherwise specified. GROSS INCOME for insurance companies
means gross premiums collected. GROSS INCOME for business license tax
purposes shall not include taxes collected for a governmental entity, escrow
funds, or funds which are the property of a third party. The value of
bartered goods or trade-in merchandise shall be included in GROSS INCOME. The
GROSS INCOME for business license purposes may be verified by inspection of
returns and reports filed with the Internal Revenue Service, the South
Carolina Department of Revenue, the South Carolina Insurance Commission or
other government agency.



   LICENSE OFFICIAL.  A person designated to administer this chapter.



   LICENSEE.  The business, the person applying for the license on behalf
of the business, an agent or legal representative of the business, a person
who receives any part of the net profit of the business, or a person who owns
or exercises control of the business.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, partnership, LLP, LLC, cooperative
non-profit membership, corporation, joint venture, association, estate,
trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, holding company or other group or
combination acting as a unit, in the singular or plural, and the agent or
employee having charge or control of a business in the absence of the
principal.



(Ord. 031913, passed 3-5-2013)



§ 110.03  PURPOSE AND DURATION.



   The business license levied by this chapter is for the purpose of
providing such regulation as may be required for the business subject thereto
and for the purpose of raising revenue for the general fund through a
privilege tax. Each license shall be issued for one calendar year ending
December 31. The provisions of this chapter and the rates shall remain in
effect from year to year as amended by the Council.



(Ord. 031913, passed 3-5-2013)



§ 110.04  LICENSE TAX.



   (A)   The required license tax shall be paid for each business
subject hereto according to the applicable rate classification on or before
July 31 in each year, except for those businesses in Rate Class 8 for which a
different due date is specified.



   (B)   A separate license shall be required for each place of
business and for each classification or business conducted at one place. If
gross income cannot be separated for classifications at one location, the
license tax shall be computed on the combined gross income for the
classification requiring the highest rate. A license tax based on gross
income shall be computed on the gross income for the preceding calendar or
fiscal year, and on a twelve-month projected income based on the monthly
average for a business in operation for less than one year. The tax for a new
business shall be computed on the estimated probable gross income stated in
the license application for the balance of the license year. The initial tax
for an annexed business shall be prorated for the number of months remaining
in the license year. No refund shall be made for a business that is
discontinued.



(Ord. 031913, passed 3-5-2013)



§ 110.05  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   The owner, agent or legal representative of every business
subject to this chapter, whether listed in the classification index or not,
shall register the business and make application for a business license on or
before the due date of each year; provided, a new business shall be required
to have a business license prior to operation within the town. A license for
a bar (NAICS 722410) must be issued in the name of the individual who has
been issued a state alcohol, beer or wine permit or license and will have
actual control and management of the business.



   (B)   Application shall be on a form provided by the License
Official which shall contain the social security number and/or the federal
employer’s identification number, the business name as reported on the
state income tax return, and all information about the applicant and the
licensee and the business deemed appropriate to carry out the purpose of this
chapter by the License Official. Applicants may be required to submit copies
of portions of state and federal income tax returns reflecting gross income
figures.



   (C)   The applicant shall certify under oath that the information
given in the application is true, that the gross income is accurately
reported, or estimated for a new business, without any unauthorized
deductions, and that all assessments, personal property taxes on business
property and other monies due and payable to the town have been paid.



   (D)   Insurance agents and brokers shall report the name of each
insurance company for which a policy was issued and the total premiums
collected for each company for each type of insurance coverage on a form
approved by the License Official. An insurance agent not employed by a
company shall be licensed as a broker.



(Ord. 031913, passed 3-5-2013)



§ 110.06  DEDUCTIONS, EXEMPTIONS AND CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.



   (A)   No deductions from gross income shall be made except income
earned outside of the town on which a license tax is paid to some other
municipality or a county and fully reported to the town, taxes collected for
a governmental entity, or income which cannot be included for computation of
the tax pursuant to state or federal law. The applicant shall have the burden
to establish the right to exempt income by satisfactory records and proof.



   (B)   No person shall be exempt from the requirements of the chapter
by reason of the lack of an established place of business within the town,
unless exempted by state or federal law. The License Official shall determine
the appropriate classification for each business in accordance with the
latest issue of the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) for
the United States published by the Office of Management and Budget. No person
shall be exempt from this chapter by reason of the payment of any other tax,
unless exempted by state law, and no person shall be relieved of liability
for payment of any other tax or fee by reason of application of this chapter.



   (C)   (1)   A charitable organization shall be exempt from the
business license tax on its gross income unless it is deemed a business
subject to a business license tax on all or part of its gross income as
provided in this section. A charitable organization or any for-profit
affiliate of a charitable organization, that reports income from for-profit
activities, or unrelated business income, for federal income tax purposes to
the Internal Revenue Service shall be deemed a business subject to a business
license tax on the part of its gross income from such for-profit activities
or unrelated business income.



      (2)   A charitable organization shall be deemed a business
subject to a business license tax on its total gross income if any net
proceeds of operation, after necessary expenses of operation, inure to the
benefit of any individual or any entity that is not itself a charitable
organization as defined in this chapter, or any net proceeds of operation,
after necessary expenses of operation, are used for a purpose other than a
charitable purpose as defined in this chapter. Excess benefits or
compensation in any form beyond fair market value to a sponsor, organizer,
officer, director, trustee or person with ultimate control of the
organization shall not be deemed a necessary expense of operation.



(Ord. 031913, passed 3-5-2013)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.07  FALSE APPLICATION UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the provisions of this
chapter to make a false application for a business license, or to give or
file, or direct the giving or filing of, any false information with respect
to the license or tax required by this chapter.



(Ord. 031913, passed 3-5-2013)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.08  DISPLAY AND TRANSFER.



   (A)   All persons shall display the license issued to them on the
original form provided by the License Official in a conspicuous place in the
business establishment at the address shown on the license. A transient or
non-resident shall carry the license upon his person or in a vehicle used in
the business readily available for inspection by any authorized agent of the
town.



   (B)   A change of address must be reported to the License Official
within ten days after removal of the business to a new location and the
license will be valid at the new address upon written notification by the
License Official and compliance with zoning and building codes. Failure to
obtain the approval of the License Official for a change of address shall
invalidate the license and subject the licensee to prosecution for doing
business without a license. A business license shall not be transferable and
a transfer of controlling interest shall be considered a termination of the
old business and the establishment of a new business requiring a new business
license, based on old business income.



(Ord. 031913, passed 3-5-2013)



§ 110.09  ADMINISTRATION OF CHAPTER.



   The License Official shall administer the provisions of this chapter,
collect license taxes, issue licenses, make or initiate investigations and
audits to insure compliance, initiate denial or suspension and revocation
procedures, report violations to the Town Attorney, assist in prosecution of
violators, produce forms, make reasonable regulations relating to the
administration of this chapter, and perform such other duties as may be duly
assigned.



(Ord. 031913, passed 3-5-2013)



§ 110.10  INSPECTION AND AUDITS.



   (A)   For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter,
the License Official or other authorized agent of the town is empowered to
enter upon the premises of any person subject to this chapter to make
inspections, examine and audit books and records. It shall be unlawful for
any person to fail or refuse to make available the necessary books and
records. In the event an audit or inspection reveals that the licensee has
filed false information, the costs of the audit shall be added to the correct
license tax and late penalties in addition to other penalties provided
herein. Each day of failure to pay the proper amount of license tax shall
constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   The License Official shall make systematic inspections and
random audits of all businesses within the town to insure compliance with the
ordinance. Financial information obtained by inspections and audits shall not
be deemed public records, and the License Official shall not release the
amount of license taxes paid or the reported gross income of any person by
name without written permission of the licensee, except as authorized by this
chapter, state or federal law, or proper judicial order. Statistics compiled
by classifications are public records.



(Ord. 031913, passed 3-5-2013)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.11  ASSESSMENTS, PAYMENT UNDER PROTEST, APPEAL.



   (A)   If a person fails to obtain a business license or to furnish
the information required by this chapter or the License Official, the License
Official shall examine such records of the business or any other available
records as may be appropriate, and conduct such investigations and
statistical surveys as the License Official may deem appropriate to assess a
license tax and penalties as provided herein.



   (B)   A notice of assessment shall be served by certified mail or
personal service. An application for adjustment of the assessment may be made
to the License Official within five days after the notice is mailed or
personally served or the assessment will become final. The License Official
shall establish a uniform procedure for hearing an application for adjustment
of assessment and issuing a notice of final assessment.



   (C)   A final assessment may be appealed to the Council only by
payment in full of the assessment under protest within five days and the
filing of written notice of appeal within ten days after payment pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter relating to appeals to Council.



(Ord. 031913, passed 3-5-2013)



§ 110.12  DELINQUENT LICENSE TAXES, PARTIAL PAYMENT.



   (A)   For non-payment of all or any part of the correct license tax,
the License Official shall levy and collect a late penalty of 5% of the
unpaid tax for each month or portion thereof after the due date until paid.
Penalties shall not be waived. If any license tax remains unpaid for 60 days
after its due date, the License Official shall report it to the Town Attorney
for appropriate legal action.



   (B)   Partial payment may be accepted by the License Official to
toll imposition of penalties on the portion paid: provided, however, no
business license shall be issued or renewed until the full amount of the tax
due, with penalties, has been paid.



(Ord. 031913, passed 3-5-2013)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.13  NOTICES.



   The License Official may, but shall not be required to, mail written
notices that license taxes are due. If notices are not mailed, there shall be
published a notice of the due date in a newspaper of general circulation
within the town three times prior to the due date in each year. Failure to
receive notice shall not constitute a defense to prosecution for failure to
pay the tax due or grounds for waiver of penalties.



(Ord. 031913, passed 3-5-2013)



§ 110.14  DENIAL OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The License Official shall deny a license to an applicant when
the License Official determines:



      (1)   The application is incomplete, contains a
misrepresentation, false or misleading statement, evasion or suppression of a
material fact;



      (2)   The activity for which a license is sought is unlawful
or constitutes a public nuisance per se or per accidens;



      (3)   The applicant, licensee or prior licensee or the person
in control of the business has been convicted of an offense under a law or
ordinance regulating business, a crime involving dishonest conduct or moral
turpitude, or an unlawful sale of merchandise or prohibited goods;



      (4)   The applicant, licensee or prior licensee or the person
in control of the business has engaged in an unlawful activity or nuisance
related to the business or to a similar business in the town or in another
jurisdiction;



      (5)   The applicant, licensee or prior licensee or the person
in control of the business is delinquent in the payment to the town of any
tax or fee; or



      (6)   The license for the business or for a similar business
of the licensee in the town or another jurisdiction has been denied,
suspended or revoked in the previous license year.



   (B)   A decision of the License Official shall be subject to appeal
to Council as herein provided. Denial shall be written with reasons stated.



(Ord. 031913, passed 3-5-2013)



§ 110.15  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   When the License Official determines:



      (1)   A license has been mistakenly or improperly issued or
issued contrary to law;



      (2)   A licensee has breached any condition upon which the
license was issued or has failed to comply with the provisions of this
chapter;



      (3)   A licensee has obtained a license through a fraud,
misrepresentation, a false or misleading statement, evasion or suppression of
a material fact in the license application;



      (4)   A licensee has been convicted of an offense under a law
or ordinance regulating business, a crime involving dishonest conduct or
moral turpitude, or an unlawful sale of merchandise or prohibited goods;



      (5)   A licensee has engaged in an unlawful activity or
nuisance related to the business; or



      (6)   A licensee is delinquent in the payment to the town of
any tax or fee.



   (B)   The License Official shall give written notice to the licensee
or the person in control of the business within the town by personal service
or certified mail that the license is suspended pending a hearing before
Council for the purpose of determining whether the license should be revoked.



   (C)   The notice shall state the time and place at which the hearing
is to be held, which shall be at a regular or special Council meeting within
30 days from the date of service of the notice, unless continued by
agreement. The notice shall contain a brief statement of the reasons for
suspension and proposed revocation and a copy of the applicable provisions of
this chapter.



(Ord. 031913, passed 3-5-2013)



§ 110.16  APPEALS TO COUNCIL.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision, final assessment, proposed
revocation, suspension or a denial of a business license by the License
Official may appeal the decision to the Council by written request stating
the reasons therefore, filed with the License Official within ten days after
service by certified mail or personal service of the notice of decision,
final assessment, proposed revocation, suspension or denial.



   (B)   An appeal or a hearing on proposed revocation shall be held by
the Council within 30 days after receipt of a request for appeal or service
of notice of suspension at a regular or special meeting of which the
applicant or licensee has been given written notice, unless continued by
agreement. At the hearing, all parties shall have the right to be represented
by counsel, to present testimony and evidence and to cross-examine witnesses.
The proceedings shall be recorded and transcribed at the expense of the party
so requesting. The rules of evidence and procedure prescribed by Council
shall govern the hearing. Council shall by majority vote of members present
render a written decision based on findings of fact and application of the
standards herein which shall be served upon all parties or their
representatives and shall be the final decision of the town.



(Ord. 031913, passed 3-5-2013)



§ 110.17  CONSENT FRANCHISE OR LICENSE REQUIRED FOR USE OF STREETS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install,
maintain or operate in, on, above or under any street or public place under
control of the town any line, pipe, cable, pole, structure or facility for
utilities, communications, cablevision or other purposes without a consent
agreement or franchise agreement issued by the Council by ordinance that
prescribes the term, fees and conditions for use.



   (B)   The annual fee for use of streets or public places authorized
by a consent agreement or franchise agreement shall be set by the ordinance
approving the agreement and shall be consistent with limits set by state law.
Existing franchise agreements shall continue in effect until expiration dates
in the agreements. Franchise and consent fees shall not be in lieu of or be
credited against business license fees unless specifically provided by the
franchise or consent agreement.



(Ord. 031913, passed 3-5-2013)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.18  CONFIDENTIALITY.



   Except in accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise
provided by law, it shall be unlawful for any official or employee to divulge
or make known in any manner the amount of income or any particulars set forth
or disclosed in any report or return required under this chapter. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to prohibit the publication of statistics so
classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns.
Any license data may be shared with other public officials or employees in
the performance of their duties, whether or not those duties relate to
enforcement of the license ordinance.



(Ord. 031913, passed 3-5-2013)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.19  CLASSIFICATION AND RATES.



   (A)   The class structure model by the North American Industry
Classification System code, designated as Appendix B to Ordinance 031913, and
the class structure model by rate class, designated as Appendix C to
Ordinance 031913, may be amended by the Council from time to time, and
current copies shall be filed in the office of the Clerk to Council.
Appendices B and C of Ordinance 031913 are tools for classification and not a
limitation on businesses subject to a license tax. The License Official shall
determine the proper class for a business according to the applicable NAICS
code.



   (B)   The license tax for each class of businesses subject to this
chapter shall be computed in accordance with the rate schedule, designated as
Appendix A to Ordinance 031913, which may be amended by the Council from time
to time and a current copy filed in the office of the Clerk to Council.



(Ord. 082013, passed 8-20-2013; Ord. 031913, passed 3-5-2013; Ord. 110612C,
passed 11-5-2012)



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of an offense and shall be subject to a fine of up to $500 or
imprisonment for not more than 30 days or both, upon conviction. Each day of
violation shall be considered a separate offense. Punishment for violation
shall not relieve the offender of liability for delinquent taxes, penalties
and costs provided for in this chapter.



(Ord. 031913, passed 3-5-2013)



CHAPTER 111:  ADVERTISING



Section



   111.01   Loudspeakers



   111.02   Posting on public property or public easement



   111.03   Posting property in which town has interest or regulatory
power



   111.04   Posting on private property or public easement



§ 111.01  LOUDSPEAKERS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or play any public
address system or sound amplification equipment upon the streets of the town
for the purpose of advertising, making announcements, playing music,
amplifying political speeches or announcements or for any other purpose
whatsoever, unless and until the person has obtained from the Town Manager a
written permit to operate or use the system or equipment. The permit issued
by the Manager may be unlimited or limited as to the date, time and area
during which the equipment may be used. Application for permission to use any
sound equipment must be in writing and set forth the name of applicant, for
what purpose the equipment will be used, the time and date when the equipment
will be used, whether the equipment will be mobile or stationary and where it
will be operated within the town.



(1995 Code, § 7-2001)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1947)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.02  POSTING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY OR PUBLIC EASEMENT.



   It shall be unlawful to place any advertisement, business, political or
otherwise, or any notice or sign of any nature on public property or public
easement within the town, by the use of a placard, picture, paper, circular,
printing or by any means or device whatsoever.



(1995 Code, § 7-2002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.03  POSTING PROPERTY IN WHICH TOWN HAS INTEREST OR REGULATORY POWER.



   It shall be unlawful to place any advertisement, notice or sign of any
nature on property in which the town has an interest or the right to
regulate, such as telephone poles, internet/cable TV, electric poles or
towers.



(1995 Code, § 7-2003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 111.04  POSTING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY OR PUBLIC EASEMENT.



   It shall be unlawful to place any advertisement, notice or sign of any
nature on private property or public easement, without written consent of the
owner or lessee of the property.



(1995 Code, § 7-2004)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 112:  TAXICABS



Section



   112.01   Town license required



   112.02   Liability insurance required



   112.03   License number to be displayed on vehicle



   112.04   Application for license; suspension



   112.05   Name of driver to be recorded



§ 112.01  TOWN LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate
upon the streets or public ways of the town and taxicab or automobile for the
conveyance of passengers for hire unless the vehicle has been duly licensed
by the town as herein provided and the provisions of this and any other
applicable provisions of this code have been complied with fully.



(1995 Code, § 7-4001)  (Ord. passed 12-28-1959)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.02  LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every taxicab or automobile operated for the conveyance of
passengers for hire within the town shall have thereon and be covered by a
minimum amount per state law for property damage liability insurance and a
minimum amount per state law for public liability insurance because of bodily
injury to or death of one person in any one accident and an amount per state
law because of bodily injury to or death of two or more persons in any one
accident, which insurance shall cover the persons riding in the taxicab or
automobile used for conveyance of persons for hire, as well as all other
persons for hire, as well as all other persons and which shall be kept fully
in force during the entire time the taxicab or automobile is licensed to
operate by the town. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter to
operate any taxicab at any time whatsoever for conveyance of passengers
unless it is fully covered by the above mentioned liability insurance. No
license for the operation of a taxicab shall be issued to any person, nor any
taxicab shall be issued to any person, nor any taxicab licensed by any town
official, until an insurance policy covering the taxicab in the above set
forth amounts and paid up for not less than six months, or other satisfactory
proof of paid up insurance coverage has been filed with the Finance Director
or the Public Safety Director.



   (B)   If, for any reason, the insurance coverage, or any part of it,
on any vehicle should be cancelled, or if it should not be renewed so as to
provide continuous coverage at the end of the six months’ paid-up period,
the town license for the operation of the vehicle as a taxicab shall
automatically be suspended at the same time as the cancellation or lapse of
the insurance, and it shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter to
operate the vehicle as a taxicab for the transportation of passengers for
hire until insurance in the required amount has been reinstated thereon.
Notice of cancellation, lapse or reinstatement of any insurance policy on any
taxicab must be given to the Finance Director or Public Safety Director by
the owner of the taxicab or by the insurance company or agency handling the
insurance coverage.



   (C)   Each day of operation of a taxicab without insurance or a town
license shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as
provided in § 10.99.



(1995 Code, § 7-4002)  (Ord. passed 12-28-1959)



§ 112.03  LICENSE NUMBER TO BE DISPLAYED ON VEHICLE.



   (A)   Every taxicab licensed by the town shall be assigned a license
number and this number shall be painted on the two front doors of the taxicab
after the words “Winnsboro License No.                 .” The
words and numerals shall be painted in letters at least three inches high and
with waterproof paint of a bright color contrasting with the color of the
vehicle. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the owner of any taxicab from
placing on any vehicle, in addition to the above, the name of the owner or
firm or corporation operating the taxicab. Whenever any taxicab is sold, or
ceases to be used as a taxicab, the person selling it or owning it at the
time it so ceases to be used as a taxicab shall erase the above required
words and numerals and shall turn his or her license in to the Finance
Director or Public Safety Director.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle upon the streets
of the town after it has ceased to be used as a taxicab unless the words and
numerals mentioned above have been erased or removed.



(1995 Code, § 7-4003)  (Ord. passed 12-28-1959)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.04  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; SUSPENSION.



   No person shall operate a taxicab or automobile for the conveyance of
passengers for hire within the town limits unless the person is duly licensed
to operate motor vehicles under the state laws and until he or she shall have
been duly licensed to operate a taxicab by the town. In order to obtain this
town taxicab operator’s license, the person desiring a license shall apply
for it in writing under oath, on a form to be supplied by the town, giving
his or her name, age, place of residence, name of owner of the taxicab,
number of his or her state driver’s license and information as to previous
convictions for violation of motor vehicle laws or town ordinances relating
to traffic regulation. The Public Safety Director, after receipt of an
application for the license, may require the applicant to undergo a driving
test if he or she deems this necessary to determine the applicant’s ability
to drive a motor vehicle. The Town Manager, with or without the
recommendation of the Public Safety Director, may suspend any taxicab
driver’s license for reckless driving of the taxicab, or for any violation
of any provision of this code or state law, which suspension may either be
vacated or approved by the Council at the next regular meeting after the date
of the suspension. The license holder shall have the right to appear at this
meeting of the Council and be heard by Council.



(1995 Code, § 7-4001)  (Ord. passed 12-28-1959)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.05  NAME OF DRIVER TO BE RECORDED.



   Every person owning a taxicab by the town shall notify the Finance
Director or Public Safety Director in writing, the name of the operator or
driver of his or her vehicle or vehicles, stating the number of each vehicle
to be operated by each driver. Only one licensed driver is authorized to
drive a particular taxicab and any change of operators must be given to the
above named officials in writing before a change of drivers can be made.



(1995 Code, § 7-4005)  (Ord. passed 12-28-1959)



CHAPTER 113:  MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS



Section



   113.01   Beer and wine consumption regulated



   113.02   Curb service prohibited



   113.03   Music machines regulated



   113.04   Performance bond required



§ 113.01  BEER AND WINE CONSUMPTION REGULATED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to display or consume any beer or
wine in or from any unsealed or open container on any public street,
sidewalk, parking area, public park or at any public gathering or any other
public place or public area within the town, except upon or within premises
specifically licensed for the public consumption of beer or wine thereon or
therein; provided, however, that no charge shall be made hereunder when an
arrest is made within the town on any other charge relating to any alcoholic
beverage.



(1995 Code, § 7-5001)  (Ord. 12-4-1972)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.02  CURB SERVICE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in the town to
carry on the type of business known as curb service; that is, to make sales
and deliveries from business establishments to customers while the customers
remain in vehicles parked in the streets of the town.



(1995 Code, § 7-5002)  (Ord. passed 1-26-1948)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.03  MUSIC MACHINES REGULATED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, to
place or to allow to be placed on his, her or its premises or place of
business in the town limits, for purposes of operation or for any use by the
public or any person, whomsoever, any automatic record-playing machine,
commonly called nickelodeons or piccolos, without first applying to the Town
Manager and obtaining from the Manager special permission to so place or
install the machines.



   (B)   In considering and passing upon the question of granting
permission to place upon premises or to install thereon any of the machines
or other similar instruments, regard shall be had by the Town Manager to the
proximity of place where the machine or machines are proposed to be installed
to neighboring houses, churches and schools; to the length of time that the
machine will usually be operated at night; the type of business carried on in
the place where the machine is proposed to be placed, whether dance hall,
restaurant, café, store, drug store, so-called beer gardens or night clubs;
to the location of the place where the machine is proposed to be placed
within the town limits, whether in the business section or residential
sections; and whether the machines will be so near to neighboring houses as
to cause annoyance to the occupants thereof and to interfere with the peace
and quiet of the neighborhood.



   (C)   No automatic record-playing machine hereinabove referred to
shall be played after the hour of 11:00 p.m. unless the Manager shall grant
special permission to the owner of the place of business where the machine is
located to play or allow it to be played before this hour for special events
or special functions.



(1995 Code, § 7-5004)  (Ord. passed 10-5-1948)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.04  PERFORMANCE BOND REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any person or firm not operating a regular established
business duly licensed by the town to do business within the town will be
required to provide proof of a performance bond in the minimum amount of
$2,500.



   (B)   Proof of bonding will be submitted to the Finance Director
showing the amount of bond, the writer of the bond, and the dates in force,
with the business license application.



(1995 Code, § 7-5005)  (Ord. passed 2-19-1985)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   GENERAL OFFENSES



      131.   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA



      132.   FIREWORKS



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



   130.01   Misdemeanors under state law



   130.02   Loitering or loafing



   130.03   Disturbance of the peace; disorderly conduct



   130.04   Trespass



   130.05   Prostitution



   130.06   Peeping Tom



   130.07   Interference with police or health officials



   130.08   Firearms and air rifles



   130.09   Destruction, interference or theft of coaxial cable
television property or service



   130.10   Public intoxication



   130.11   Wearing of certain attire



 



   130.99   Penalty



§ 130.01  MISDEMEANORS UNDER STATE LAW.



   Any act, the commission of which constitutes a misdemeanor under the
laws of the state, is prohibited within the town, and any prohibited act, if
committed within the town, shall constitute a violation of this code;
provided, however, that the penalty for the offense committed shall not
exceed the penalty prescribed in § 10.99.



(1995 Code, § 9-1001)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Crimes and offenses, see S.C. Code Title 16



§ 130.02  LOITERING OR LOAFING.



   (A)   Definition.  As used in this section, LOITERING shall mean
remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concepts of
spending time idly, loafing or walking around aimlessly.



   (B)   Certain types of loitering prohibited.  No person shall
loiter in a public place in such a manner as to:



      (1)   Create or cause to be created any disturbance or
annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person;



      (2)   Create or cause to be created a danger of the breach of
the peace;



      (3)   Obstruct or hinder the free passage of vehicles or
pedestrians;



      (4)   Obstruct or interfere with any person lawfully in any
public place;



      (5)   Engage in panhandling;



      (6)   Engage in gambling;



      (7)   Engage in prostitution;



      (8)   Solicit or engage in any business, trade or commercial
transaction unless specifically authorized or licensed to do so;



      (9)   Unlawfully use or possess an unlawful drug; or



      (10)   Unlawfully use or possess alcoholic beverages, beer or
wine.



   (C)   Request to leave. Whenever the presence of any person in any
public place is causing or is likely to cause any of the conditions
enumerated in division (B) of this section, any public safety officer may
order that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave
after being ordered to do so by a public safety officer shall be guilty of a
violation of this section. Nothing in this section shall be construed or
enforced in such a manner as to restrict freedom of speech, religion or
association.



   (D)   Effective date. The effective date of this section is
September 16, 1986.



(1995 Code, § 9-1002)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.03  DISTURBANCE OF THE PEACE; DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person within the town to do any of the
following:



   (A)   To create, bring about, or assist in creating or bringing
about, any breach of the peace;



   (B)   To engage in any conduct or perform any act creating a breach
of the peace;



   (C)   To engage in any conduct tending to incite or bring about
fighting, rioting, assaults or breaches of the peace;



   (D)   To engage in any conduct which interferes with, impedes or
stops the orderly and free movement of pedestrian and automotive traffic upon
and along the public sidewalks, streets and ways of the town;



   (E)   To engage in any conduct or perform any act upon the public
streets, sidewalks or public ways of the town which creates a disturbance or
loud noise;



   (F)   To intentionally engage in any conduct or perform any act of
the public streets, sidewalks or public ways of the town which endangers any
person, or the property of the town which endangers any person, or the
property of any person, firm or corporation in the town;



   (G)   To engage in any conduct which threatens or disturbs the peace
and tranquility of the community or which interferes with or obstructs any
peace officer within the town in carrying out his or her duties; or



   (H)   To refuse to obey or follow the proper orders or directions of
any peace officer issued in the performance of his or her duties in
preserving the peace and tranquility of the town and in preserving the
orderly and free movement of pedestrian and automotive traffic upon and along
the public streets, sidewalks and ways of the town, or in the enforcement of
this code or other regulations of the town of the laws of this state.



(1995 Code, § 9-1003)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.04  TRESPASS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate
limits unlawfully, willfully or maliciously to cut, shoot, maim or otherwise
injure or damage any animal, any vehicle or any other article of personal
property, or any chattel belonging to another; or to unlawfully, willfully or
maliciously cut, mutilate, deface or otherwise injure or damage real estate
belonging to another, including any tree, fence, outhouse, structure or
fixture growing or located upon or attached to the real property; or to
commit any act of trespass upon real estate belonging to another or in the
possession of another.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate
limits to enter upon the premises of another after notice, either in written
or oral form, from the owner of the premises, or from the agent or servant of
the owner thereof, or from the person in actual possession, management and/or
control of the premises, prohibiting or forbidding the entry, and each entry
after the notice shall constitute a separate offense.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remain upon or refuse
to quit, vacate or leave the premises of another after notice, either in
written or oral form, from the owner of the premises, or from the agent or
servant of the owner, or the person in actual possession, management and/or
control thereof, requesting the person to leave or quit the premises; and
each refusal to quit, or leave the premises upon each separate notice or
request, shall constitute a separate offense.



(1995 Code, § 9-1004)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.05  PROSTITUTION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons within the town limits
to engage in prostitution or to aid or abet prostitution or to procure or
solicit for the purpose of prostitution or to keep or set up a house of ill
fame, brothel or bawdy house, or to receive any person into any structure or
building, or to permit any person to remain for the purpose of lewdness,
assignation or prostitution in any vehicle, conveyance, place, structure or
building or to lease or rent, or contract to lease or rent any vehicle,
conveyance, place, structure or building or part thereof, knowing or with
good reason to know that it is intended to be used for any of the purposes
herein prohibited.



(1995 Code, § 9-1005)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.06  PEEPING TOM.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, within the
town limits, to be an eavesdropper or a “Peeping Tom” on or about the
premises of another, or to go about or upon the premises of another for the
purpose of becoming an eavesdropper or a Peeping Tom. The term PEEPING TOM as
used in this section shall be defined to be one who peeps through windows or
doors, or other like places, on or about the premises of another, for the
purpose of spying upon or invading the privacy of the person or persons spied
upon, and the doing of any other acts of a similar nature, tending to invade
the privacy of the person or persons.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prevent duly constituted
officers of the law from performing their official duties in ferreting out
offenders or suspected offenders against the law, or secretly watching a
person suspected of violating the laws of the state of the town, for the
purpose of apprehending the suspected violator; provided, however, the
provisions of this section shall not be construed as giving the officers any
additional rights and powers upon private property, but shall be construed as
preserving only the powers as they had before passage of this section.



(1995 Code, § 9-1006)



§ 130.07  INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE OR HEALTH OFFICIALS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to interfere
with or in any way hinder or obstruct any police officer or health officer of
the town while the officer is engaged in the performance of his or her duties.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons of the town to
strike, assault, fight or resist any police officer or health officer of the
town when the officer is engaged in the performance of his or her duties.



(1995 Code, § 9-1007)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.08  FIREARMS AND AIR RIFLES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or fire or shoot any
air rifle, air gun or air pistol, BB gun or BB pistol or any firearms of any
kind or nature in, upon or across any street, sidewalk or public way or in
any public place in the town.



(1995 Code, § 9-1008)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.09  DESTRUCTION, INTERFERENCE OR THEFT OF COAXIAL CABLE TELEVISION
PROPERTY OR SERVICE.



   Any person who shall do any of the following shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of § 130.99:



   (A)   Willfully or maliciously damage or destroy any of the posts,
wires, towers or other fixtures or materials used or owned by any coaxial
cable television company;



   (B)   Willfully or maliciously interfere with any structure or
materials used or owned by any coaxial cable television company; or



   (C)   In any way receive, transmit, acquire, appropriate or
otherwise make use of signal or any portion thereof belonging to or
transmitted by a coaxial cable television company without that company’s
permission.



(1995 Code, § 9-1009)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.10  PUBLIC INTOXICATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in any public building, public
street, sidewalk, parking area, public park or any other public place within
the town limits to be found in an intoxicated condition, except in his or her
own premises. If so found in this condition, the subject shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of § 130.99.



(1995 Code, § 9-1010)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.11  WEARING OF CERTAIN ATTIRE.



   (A)   Definitions. Unless the context shall clearly indicate some
other meaning, the terms defined in this section shall, for purposes of this
section, have the meanings herein specified. Definitions shall be equally
applicable to both the singular and the plural forms of any of the terms
herein defined.



      ADULT.  A person, who has reached full legal age as defined by
the laws of the State of South Carolina.



      CREST OF THE ILIUM.  The upper portion of the dorsal, upper and
largest area of the three  bones composing either lateral half of the pelvis
that is broad and expanded above the greater sciatic notch.



      CUSTODIAL PARENT.  A person as defined by the laws of the State
of South Carolina.



      GUARDIAN.  A person as defined by the laws of the State of South
Carolina.



      INTIMATE CLOTHING.  Men and women's underwear, men and women's
underpants, panties, boxers, slips, girdles, athletic supporters, thongs or
other similar garments ordinarily worn beneath pants.



      MINOR.  A person, who has not reached full legal age as defined
by the laws of the State of South Carolina.



      PANTS.  Any garment ordinarily worn to cover a person's lower
body and legs. This shall include, but not be limited to, trousers, long
pants, short pants, cutoffs, shorts or skirts.



      PERSON.  An individual or entity possessing legal rights and
duties.



      PUBLIC PLACE.  An area to which the public is invited or to
which the public is admitted or has access, including, but not limited to,
public and private educational facilities, including, but not limited to,
schools, administration buildings and other school owned or controlled
property, licensed child care and adult day care facilities, healthcare
facilities, hospitals, doctor offices, hotel and motel lobbies, public
transportation facilities, restaurants, retail food production and marketing
establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls,
theaters, galleries, libraries, museums, convention facilities, conference
centers, exhibition halls, cultural arts centers, stadiums, ball parks,
government controlled parks or recreation areas, other places of meeting or
assembly, inclusive of lobbies and audience seating areas, roadways,
pathways, sidewalks, yards of residential, commercial and governmental
buildings or facilities when visible from roadways, common areas in apartment
buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, mobile home parks, camp grounds,
retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple residential
facilities, restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other common
use areas, rooms, chambers and private clubs when being used for a function
to which the general public is invited. A private residence is not a public
place, unless it is used as a child care, adult daycare, or healthcare
facility.



   (B)   Prohibition of certain attire; duties of parents and guardians.



      (1)   It shall be prohibited for any person to appear in a
public place wearing his or her pants more than three inches below his or her
hips (crest of the ilium) and thereby exposing his or her skin or intimate
clothing.



      (2)   It shall be prohibited for any custodial parent or
guardian to willfully allow their minor to appear in a public place wearing
his or her pants more than three inches below his or her hips (crest of the
ilium) and thereby exposing his or her skin or intimate clothing.



   (C)   Enforcement.



      (1)   This section shall be enforced by the Town's Public
Safety Department and by the Town Manager and his or her authorized designees
within the incorporated areas of the town.



      (2)   Any citizen of Winnsboro, who desires to register a
complaint under this section, may initiate enforcement with the Town's Public
Safety Department.



      (3)   Not withstanding any other provision of this section,
only the Town Manager, his or her authorized designees, or the Public Safety
Department may bring legal action against any person(s) to enforce the
provisions of this section.



   (D)   Violations and penalties.



      (1)   Any person who violates a provision of division (B) of
this section shall be guilty of a civil infraction and subject to a fine of
$25. Any civil infraction issued to a minor under this chapter shall be
enforced in the Fairfield County Family Court, pursuant to S.C. Code §
63-5-510, as amended. All civil infractions issued to adults under this
section, where the infraction occurred within the incorporated area of
Winnsboro, shall be enforced in Winnsboro's Municipal Court.



      (2)   Beginning July 30, 2014 and ending September 30, 2014,
any person found to be in violation of division (B) of this section, shall be
issued a civil infraction warning. The fine, as set forth in division (D)(1)
of this section, shall be waived during this time. Beginning October 1,2014,
the fine shall be re-instituted for violations of division (B) of this
section.



      (3)   Violation of this section is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance, which may be abated by the town by restraining order,
preliminary and permanent injunction or other means provided for by law, and
the town may take action to recover all attorney fees and costs of the
nuisance abatement.



      (4)   A violation of this section is a singular event
violation. The passage of a 24-hour period without correction will not be
deemed a continuing violation provided, however, a person may be ticketed if
he or she is seen the next day attired in a manner which violates this
section.



      (5)   All civil infractions, issued by an agent of the town
within the incorporated areas of the town, shall be issued on a Town Summons
Ticket. Further, all civil infraction fines collected as a result of a civil
infraction written by the town within the incorporated areas of the town
shall go to the general fund of the town.



(Ord. 080514, passed 8-5-2014)



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person upon conviction of a violation of § 130.09 shall
be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more
than one year, or both, in the discretion of the court.



(1995 Code, § 9-1009)



   (C)   Any person upon conviction of a violation of § 130.10 shall
be fined not more than $200, or be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.



(1995 Code, § 9-1010)



CHAPTER 131:  DRUG PARAPHERNALIA



Section



   131.01   Drug paraphernalia regulations; effect



   131.02   Definitions



   131.03   Possession of drug paraphernalia



   131.04   Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia



   131.05   Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor



   131.06   Advertisement of drug paraphernalia



   131.07   Civil forfeiture



 



   131.99   Penalty



§ 131.01  DRUG PARAPHERNALIA REGULATIONS; EFFECT.



   The town drug paraphernalia ordinance and sections thereof will
coincide with existing federal laws and the State Controlled Substance Act.



(1995 Code, § 9-2001)



Statutory reference:



   Controlled substances, see S.C. Code Title 44, Ch. 53



   Sale, manufacture or possession of paraphernalia, see S.C. Code §
44-53-391



§ 131.02  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.  All equipment, products and materials of
any kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, purchasing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting,
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of this Act (meaning the Controlled Substance Act of
this state). It includes but is not limited to:



         (a)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance
can be derived;



         (b)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances;



         (c)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or
designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a
controlled substance;



         (d)   Testing equipment used, intended for use or
designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness
or purity of controlled substances;



         (e)   Scales and balances used, intended for use or
designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances;



         (f)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine
hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for
use or designed for use in cutting controlled substances;



         (g)   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use
or designed for use in removing twigs, stems and seeds from or in otherwise
cleaning or refining marijuana;



         (h)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing
devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances;



         (i)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers
used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;



         (j)   Containers or other objects used, intended for use
or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;



         (k)   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects
used, intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting
controlled substances into the human body; and



         (l)   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use
in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish
oil into the human body, such as:



            1.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic
or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or
punctual metal bowls;



            2.   Water pipes;



            3.   Carburetion tubes and devices;



            4.   Smoking and carburetion masks;



            5.   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold
burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or
too short to be held in the hand;



            6.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;



            7.   Chamber pipes;



            8.   Carburetor pipes;



            9.   Electric pipes;



            10.   Air-driven pipes;



            11.   Chillums;



            12.   Bongs; and



            13.   Ice pipes or chillers.



   (B)   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a
court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:



      (1)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the
object concerning its use;



      (2)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in
control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any
controlled substance;



      (3)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a
direct violation of this chapter;



      (4)   The proximity of the object to the controlled substances;



      (5)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on
the object;



      (6)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an
owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver to persons whom he
or she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to
facilitate a violation of this chapter; the innocence of an owner, or of
anyone in control of this object, as to a direct violation of this chapter
should not present a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed
for use as drug paraphernalia;



      (7)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use;



      (8)   National and local advertising concerning its use;



      (9)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which
explain or depict its use;



      (10)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;



      (11)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object,
is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;



      (12)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales
of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;



      (13)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object(s) in the community; and



      (14)   Expert testimony concerning its use.



(1995 Code, § 9-2002)



§ 131.03  POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use,
drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze,
pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise
introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this
chapter.



(1995 Code, § 9-2003)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.04  MANUFACTURE OR DELIVERY OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   It is unlawful for any person to deliver or possess with intent to
deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under circumstances where one
reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate,
grow, harvest, manufacture, test analyze, pack, repack, store, contain,
conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of this chapter.



(1995 Code, § 9-2004)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.05  DELIVERY OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA TO A MINOR.



   Any person 18 years of age or over who violates § 131.04 by delivering
drug paraphernalia to a person under the age of 18 years of age who is at
least three years his or her junior is guilty of a special offense and shall
be subject to the provisions of § 131.99.



(1995 Code, § 9-2005)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.06  ADVERTISEMENT OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill or other publication any advertisement, knowing or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the
advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects
designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.



(1995 Code, § 9-2006)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.07  CIVIL FORFEITURE.



   (A)   Any of the items of personal property listed in this chapter
and which are legally confiscated by the town will be forfeited. The property
will be secured by the Public Safety Department for a period of ten days and
at any time thereafter the town will either destroy the property or advertise
notice of public sale of the property and sell any thereof as may be used for
legitimate purpose.



   (B)   Property subject to be forfeited under this chapter may be
seized by the Public Safety Department upon process issued by the Municipal
Judge. Seizure without process may be made if seizure is incident to arrest
or a search under a search warrant.



(1995 Code, § 9-2007)



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person who violates §§ 131.01, 131.03, 131.04 and 131.06
is guilty of violating an ordinance of the town and upon conviction may be
imprisoned for not more than 30 days, fined not more than $200, or both.



(1995 Code, §§ 9-2003, 9-2004, 9-2006)



   (C)   Any person 18 years of age or over who violates § 131.05 is
guilty of a special offense and upon conviction may be imprisoned for not
more than 30 days, fined not more than $200, or both.



(1995 Code, § 9-2005)



CHAPTER 132:  FIREWORKS



Section



   132.01   Limitations of state law to apply



   132.02   License required; storage and display regulated



   132.03   Discharge of fireworks within town prohibited



   132.04   Impermissible fireworks are contraband



   132.05   Public displays; other exceptions



§ 132.01  LIMITATIONS OF STATE LAW TO APPLY.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to possess,
sell, offer for sale, store, transport or use within the limits of the town,
any fireworks other than the permissible fireworks as defined by state law.



(1995 Code, § 7-3001)  (Ord. passed 12-12-1961)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Permissible fireworks enumerated, see S.C. Code § 40-56-20(3)



§ 132.02  LICENSE REQUIRED; STORAGE AND DISPLAY REGULATED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, offer
for sale, store or transport within the town any fireworks without having
first secured the permit or license required by the state laws, and it shall
be unlawful to keep or store for sale, in a place of business where paint,
oils, varnishes, turpentine or gasoline or other inflammable substances are
kept in unbroken containers, any fireworks unless they are kept or stored in
a separate and distinct section or department of the store or place of
business; and no retailer of fireworks within the town shall expose them
where the sun shines through glass on the displayed merchandise, except when
the display fireworks are in the original packages. Fireworks kept for sale
on front counters must remain in the original packages except where an
attendant is on constant duty at all times at counter or counters where they
are displayed, but all fireworks in open stock may be kept in show cases or
counters out of the reach of the public without an attendant on constant
duty. Wherever fireworks are displayed, a sign or signs reading “Fireworks
for Sale – No Smoking Allowed” shall be erected or displayed in that
section of the store or place of business set aside for the sale of fireworks.



(1995 Code, § 7-3002)  (Ord. passed 12-12-1961)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.03  DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS WITHIN TOWN PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to discharge, fire or
explode, or cause to be fired, discharged or exploded within the town limits
any fireworks, under the state laws.



(1995 Code, § 7-3003)  (Ord. passed 12-12-1961)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.04  IMPERMISSIBLE FIREWORKS ARE CONTRABAND.



   All fireworks other than those classified as permissible fireworks
under the state laws are hereby declared to be contraband and may be seized
and destroyed by the police officers of the town.



(1995 Code, § 7-3004)  (Ord. passed 12-12-1961)



§ 132.05  PUBLIC DISPLAYS; OTHER EXCEPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to toy cap pistols or to
paper caps for use therein when these items contain less than 0.25 grains of
explosive compounds, nor shall it apply to other toys using paper caps; and
it shall not apply to the shipping, sale, possession and use of fireworks for
public displays where these have been duly authorized and approved by the
governing authorities of the town.



(1995 Code, § 7-3005)  (Ord. passed 12-12-1961)



Statutory reference:



   Fireworks, generally, see S.C. Code §§ 40-56-1 et seq. and 23-35-45
et seq.



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   BUILDING REGULATION AND CODE ENFORCEMENT



      151.   [RESERVED]



      152.   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL



      153.   TRAILERS AND TRAILER PARKS



      154.   PLANNING AND ZONING



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING REGULATION AND CODE ENFORCEMENT



Section




Adoption of Codes




   150.001   International Building Codes adopted



   150.002   Applicability



   150.003   Department of Building Safety established



   150.004   Existing situations unaffected




Building




   150.015   Fire districts



   150.016   Building Code adopted; purpose



   150.017   Definitions; fee schedule




Electrical




   150.030   Electrical Code adopted; purpose



   150.031   Administration, enforcement of provisions



   150.032   Applicability of provisions to homeowners



   150.033   Permits



   150.034   Permit fees



   150.035   Inspections




Plumbing




   150.050   Plumbing Code adopted; purpose



   150.051   Additions, insertions, deletions and changes




Gas




   150.065   Gas Code adopted; purpose



   150.066   Administration, enforcement of provisions



   150.067   Scope, effect of provisions



   150.068   Applicability of provisions to homeowners



   150.069   Permits



   150.070   Permit fees



   150.071   Inspections




Housing




   150.085   Housing Code adopted; purpose



   150.086   Administration, enforcement of provisions



ADOPTION OF CODES



§ 150.001  INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODES ADOPTED.



   (A)   The town code is amended to adopt and incorporate by
reference, as if fully set out in this ordinance, the documents stipulated in
division (B) below, for use and enforcement within the jurisdiction of the
town. Those documents shall be known and referred to collectively as the
Building Codes.



   (B)   (1)   The International Building Code, 2006 Edition, as
published by the International Code Council, Inc. including Appendices A, B,
C, D, E, F, G, H, I and J effective as of July 1, 2003;



      (2)   The International Residential Code for One and Two
Family Dwellings, 2006 Edition, as published by the International Code
Council, Inc, including Appendices A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K and L
effective as of July 1, 2003;



      (3)   The International Plumbing Code, 2006 Edition, as
published by The International Code Council, Inc, including Appendices A and
B effective as of July 1, 2003;



      (4)   The International Mechanical Code, 2006 Edition, as
published by The International Code Council, Inc., including Appendices A and
B effective as of July 1, 2003;



      (5)   The International Fuel Code, 2006 Edition, as published
by The International Code Council, Inc., including Appendices A, B and D
effective as of July 1, 2003;



      (6)   The International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, as published
by The International Code Council, including Appendices A, B, C, D, E and G
effective as of July 1, 2003;



      (7)   The International Energy Conservation Code, 2006
Edition, as published by The International Code Council, including the
Appendix effective as of July 1, 2003; and



      (8)   The National Electrical Code, 2006 Edition as published
by the National Fire Protection Association to be implemented by local
jurisdictions by July 1, 2003.



(Ord. 06-17-03C, passed 6-17-2003)



§ 150.002  APPLICABILITY.



   This subchapter shall apply to all areas within the town, excluding any
parcels of land owned by the state or the federal government and any
buildings or structures located thereon.



(Ord. 06-17-03C, passed 6-17-2003)



§ 150.003  DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING SAFETY ESTABLISHED.



   The Department of Building Safety is hereby established and the
official in charge thereof shall be known as the Building Official.



(Ord. 06-17-03C, passed 6-17-2003)



§ 150.004  EXISTING SITUATIONS UNAFFECTED.



   Nothing in this subchapter or in the codes hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or any
rights acquired, liability incurred or any cause or course of action acquired
or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed; nor shall any just
or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, unpaid or affected by this
subchapter.



(Ord. 06-17-03C, passed 6-17-2003)



BUILDING



§ 150.015  FIRE DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The following area within the town is hereby declared to be
the first fire district: all that portion of the town bounded on the north by
Fairfield Street, a line running generally east and west coincident with the
centerline of Fairfield Street on the east a line running generally north and
south coincident with the centerline of Zion Street on the south a line
running generally east and west coincident with the centerline of Palmer
Street and on the west a line running generally north and south coincident
with the centerline of Vanderhorst Street.



   (B)   All the remaining portions of the town not included in the
first fire district as set forth in division (A) above are hereby declared to
be and constitute the second fire district of the town.



(1995 Code, § 5-1001)  (Ord. passed 10-28-1958)



§ 150.016  BUILDING CODE ADOPTED; PURPOSE.



   For the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the
construction, alteration, use, demolition and removal of buildings or other
structures, or any appurtenances connected or attached thereto, there is
hereby adopted the Building Code adopted in § 150.001, a copy of which has
been and is now filed in the office of the Building Inspector, and which is
hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as fully as if set out at length
herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling as to all subjects
therein contained, within the corporate limits, except that in the event that
any of the provisions are in conflict with other provisions of this code,
state law or ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this code,
state law or ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be
controlling.



(1995 Code, § 5-1002)



§ 150.017  DEFINITIONS; FEE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   In interpretation of the Building Code the following
definitions shall apply.



      BUILDING OFFICIAL.  The Building Inspector.



      DEPARTMENT OF LAW.  The Town Attorney.



      TOWN. The Town of Winnsboro.



   (B)   Rates, charges and fees for issuance of building permits and
other permits required by the town for construction, alteration, removal or
improvement of buildings and structures within the town and as heretofore
required by the town under the provisions of the Building Code shall be as
follows:



 

Schedule of Permit Fees
(Permit good for one year from date of issue)




(1) Permit fees.
 
   Schedule Fee



Total valuation $100 and less

 
$10.00 base fee up to $1,000 valuation. Random inspections may be conducted
on all construction project



$1,001 to $2,000

 
$4.00 per thousand or fraction thereof



$2,001 to $15,000

 
$8.00 for the first $2,000 plus $3.00 for each additional thousand or
fraction thereof, to and including $15,000



$15,001 to $50,000

 
$47.00 for the first $15,000 plus $2.25 for each additional thousand or
fraction thereof, to and including $50,000



$50,001 to $100,000

 
$124.75 for the first $50,000 plus $2.00 for each additional thousand or
fraction thereof, to and including $100,000



$100,000 to $500,000

 
$224.75 for the first $100,000 plus $1.00 for each additional thousand or
fraction thereof, to and including $500,000



$500,000 and up

 
$624.75 for the first $500,000 plus $0.50 for each additional thousand or
fraction thereof



(2)   Moving of building or structure.  For the moving of any building or
structure, the fee shall be $50. Trailer fee shall be $25.




(3)   Demolition of building or structure.  For the demolition of any
building or structure, the fee shall be $25.




(4)   Double fee payment. Where work for which a permit is required by
this code is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining the permit, the
fees herein specified shall be doubled but the payment of the double fee
shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of
this code in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties
prescribed herein.




(5)   Plan-checking fees.  When the valuation of the proposed
construction exceeds $1,000 and a plan is required to be submitted, a
plan-checking fee shall be paid to the building official at the time of
submitting plans and specifications for checking. The plan-checking fee shall
be equal to one-half of the building permit fee.





 



(1995 Code, § 5-1003)  (Ord. passed 10-20-1970; Ord. passed 2-19-1974)



ELECTRICAL



§ 150.030  ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED; PURPOSE.



   The latest edition of the National Electrical Code, as adopted in §
150.001, is hereby adopted as the minimum standard for the installation of
all electrical wiring, devices and equipment in the town, except as otherwise
specifically provided in this subchapter, and is hereby made a part of this
subchapter as fully and to the same extent as if copied herein in full. A
copy of the Code is on file in the office of the Electric Utility Department.
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the Electrical Code
and the provisions of this code, state law or ordinances, rules or
regulations, the provisions of this code shall prevail and be controlling.



(1995 Code, § 5-1011)



§ 150.031  ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall be administered and enforced by
the Building Inspector.



(1995 Code, § 5-1012)



§ 150.032  APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS TO HOMEOWNERS.



   Nothing contained within this subchapter shall prevent any homeowner
from installing or maintaining electrical wiring within his or her own
property boundaries; provided the electrical work is done by himself or
herself and is used exclusively by him or her or his or her family. This
privilege does not convey the right to violate any of the provisions of this
subchapter, neither is it to be construed as exempting any property owner
from obtaining a permit and having the work inspected nor from paying the
required fees therefor.



(1995 Code, § 5-1013)



§ 150.033  PERMITS.



   Before any electrical wiring, devices or equipment are installed,
repaired or altered in any building or structure within the town, the person
making the installation, repair or alteration shall obtain a permit therefor
from the Building Inspector.



(1995 Code, § 5-1014)



§ 150.034  PERMIT FEES.



   Before any permit for electrical work shall be issued under the
provisions of this subchapter, the applicant therefor shall pay the permit
fees as shall be determined by Council from time to time.



(1995 Code, § 5-1015)



§ 150.035  INSPECTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person controlling any electrical wiring
in or of houses or buildings within the town to allow any electrical current
to be turned on or consumed in any building without having first had an
inspection made.



(1995 Code, § 5-1016)  Penalty, see § 10.99



PLUMBING



§ 150.050  PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED; PURPOSE.



   The International Plumbing Code as adopted in § 150.001 is hereby
adopted as the Code of the town relating to the installation of all plumbing,
including the pipes for distributing the water supply, the fixtures for using
water and the drainage pipe for removing waste water and the sewage, together
with fittings and appurtenances of various kinds, all within or adjacent to
the buildings within the town or where connected to the town’s water or
sewerage system, and the whole thereof, except the portions as are hereafter
deleted, altered or amended, is incorporated herein as fully as if set out at
length, and all plumbers shall be required to make installations in
conformity with the Code and the regulations contained therein, a copy of
which Code is on file in the office of the Building Inspector. In the event
of any conflict with the provisions of the Plumbing Code and the provisions
of this code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions
of this code, state law or ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and
be controlling.



(1995 Code, § 5-1031)



§ 150.051  ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS AND CHANGES.



   In interpretation of the Plumbing Code the following definitions shall
apply.



   ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY, LOCAL GOVERNING BODY.  The Council.



   DEPARTMENT OF LAW.  The Town Attorney.



   PLUMBING INSPECTION DEPARTMENT.  The Building Inspector.



   PLUMBING OFFICIAL.  The Building Inspector.



(1995 Code, § 5-1032)



GAS



§ 150.065  GAS CODE ADOPTED; PURPOSE.



   There is hereby adopted by and for the town the 2006 International Fuel
Gas Code as adopted in § 150.001, and which is referred to, incorporated
herein and made a part hereof for all purposes, a copy of which Code is on
file in the office of the Building Inspector. In the event of any conflict
between the provisions of the 2006 International Fuel Gas Code adopted by
this section and any provision of this code, state law or ordinance, rule or
regulation, the provisions of this code, state law or ordinance, rule or
regulation shall prevail and be controlling.



(1995 Code, § 5-1041)



§ 150.066  ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall be administered and enforced by
the Building Inspector and/or Gas Department.



(1995 Code, § 5-1042)



§ 150.067  SCOPE, EFFECT OF PROVISIONS.



   This subchapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any
gas piping of gas appliances from damages to anyone injured thereby, nor
shall the town be held as assuming any liability by reason of inspection
authorized herein, or certificate issued.



(1995 Code, § 5-1043)



§ 150.068  APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS TO HOMEOWNERS.



   Nothing contained within this subchapter shall prevent any homeowner
from installing or maintaining gas piping or gas appliances within his or her
own property boundaries; provided the gas work is done by himself or herself
and is used exclusively by him or her or his or her family. The privilege
shall not convey the right to violate any of the provisions of this
subchapter, neither shall it be construed as exempting any property owner
from obtaining a permit and having the work inspected nor from paying the
required fees therefor.



(1995 Code, § 5-1044)



§ 150.069  PERMITS.



   Before any gas piping or gas appliances are installed, repaired or
altered in any building or structure within the town, the person making the
installation, repair or alteration shall obtain a permit therefor from the
Building Inspector.



(1995 Code, § 5-1045)



§ 150.070  PERMIT FEES.



   Before any permit for gas fitting work shall be issued under the
provisions of this subchapter, the applicant therefor shall pay the permit
fees as shall be determined by the Council.



(1995 Code, § 5-1046)



§ 150.071  INSPECTIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person controlling any gas piping or gas
appliances in or of houses or buildings within the town to allow any gas to
be turned on or consumed in any building without first having had an
inspection thereof made and a certificate of approval thereof being issued.



(1995 Code, § 5-1047)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Adoption of standard codes, see S.C. Code §§ 5-7-280, 6-9-10 and
6-9-60



HOUSING



§ 150.085  HOUSING CODE ADOPTED; PURPOSE.



   There is hereby adopted by and for the town, the Standard Housing Code,
2006 edition, with latest amendments which code is published in book form and
recommended by the Building Code Congress International, Inc., and which is
referred to, incorporated herein, and made a part hereof for all purposes, a
copy of which code is on file in the office of the Building Inspector.



(1995 Code, § 5-1061)



§ 150.086  ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall be administered and enforced by
the Building Inspector.



(1995 Code, § 5-1062)



CHAPTER 151:  [RESERVED]



CHAPTER 152:  EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL



Section




General Provisions




   152.01   Purpose



   152.02   Authority



   152.03   Jurisdiction



   152.04   Rules of language and interpretation



   152.05   Definitions




Plan Required; Application; Compliance




   152.20   Approved plan and grading permit required for land
disturbance



   152.21   Exemptions



   152.22   Application for plan approval and permit



   152.23   Approval or disapproval of application



   152.24   Variances and exceptions



   152.25   Appeals



   152.26   Extension of time to complete work



   152.27   Responsibility of applicant



   152.28   Guidelines for preparation of erosion and sediment control
plans



   152.29   Contents of plan and application



   152.30   Notification



   152.31   Inspection



   152.32   Relationship with other laws and regulations



   152.33   Enforcement



   152.34   Stormwater management



   152.35   Discrepancies



 



   152.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.01  PURPOSE.



   In order to protect the general health, safety and welfare of the
people of the town, and to protect the natural assets and resources of the
town for posterity, this chapter is enacted to protect the lands and waters
from the effects of excessive soil erosion and sedimentation, to prevent
siltation of streams and lakes, to prevent clogging of drainage channels, and
to prevent damages to the property of adjacent landowners.



(1995 Code, § 5-1071)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1986)



§ 152.02  AUTHORITY.



   This chapter is adopted under the authorities and powers conferred to
local governments by the General Assembly of South Carolina.



(1995 Code, § 5-1072)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1986)



§ 152.03  JURISDICTION.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the town
limits of the town.



(1995 Code, § 5-1073)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1986)



§ 152.04  RULES OF LANGUAGE AND INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   The word “shall” is mandatory and not merely
discretionary; the word “may” is permissive.



   (B)   The particular shall control the general.



   (C)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future.



   (D)   Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the
plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.



   (E)   All public officials, bodies and agencies referred to herein
are those of this town, unless otherwise indicated.



(1995 Code, § 5-1074)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1986)



§ 152.05  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONSTRUCTION.  Any building or erection of a structure or any
preparation for same.



   DEVELOPER. Any person acting in his or her own behalf as a property
owner, who makes application for plan approval and a grading permit under the
provisions of this chapter.



   DRAINAGE.  A general term applied to the removal of surface or
subsurface water from a given area either by gravity via natural means or by
systems constructed to so remove water, commonly applied herein to surface
water.



   DRAINAGE SYSTEM.  The surface and subsurface system for removal of
water from the land, including both the natural elements of stream, marshes,
swales and ponds, whether of an intermittent or continuous nature; and the
humanmade elements such as improved open channels, culverts, retention
facilities and enclosed storm sewers.



   EMBANKMENT OF FILL.  A deposit of soil, rock or other material placed
by humans.



   EROSION.  The general process by which soil and rock fragments are
detached and moved by the action of wind, water, ice and gravity, either
naturally or induced.



   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN. A plan which adequately describes
necessary land management practices and control measures, including a
timetable or schedule for their installation, which will effectively minimize
soil erosion and sedimentation; repaired and approved as provided herein for
application to a particular land area.



   GRADING.  Any displacement of soil by stripping, excavating, filling,
stockpiling or any combination thereof; and shall include the land in its
excavated or filled state.



   GRADING PERMIT.  A certificate issued to perform work pursuant to an
approved erosion and sediment control plan prepared under the provisions of
this chapter.



   LAND.  Any ground, soil or earth, including marshes, swamps,
drainageways and areas not permanently covered by water.



   LAND DISTURBANCE.  Any activity involving the clearing, grading,
transporting, filling and any other activity which causes the land to be
exposed to the danger of erosion.



   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture,
trust, estate, commission, board, utility, cooperative interstate body,
public or private corporation, public or private institution or other legal
body.



   PROFESSIONAL SOIL CONSERVATIONIST.  Successful completion of a
four-year course of study in an accredited college or university leading to a
bachelor’s degree with major study in soil conservation or a closely
related natural resource or agricultural education or agricultural field such
as agronomy, wildlife biology, agricultural engineering (since there is no
board or other authority to review the various curricula, it is suggested
that the course of study include 30 semester hours in natural resources or
agricultural fields including the equivalent of three semester hours in
soils); and three years of experience of erosion and sediment control
practices. This experience should have been obtained under the supervision of
another PROFESSIONAL SOIL CONSERVATIONIST.



   REGISTERED LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT. A person who is registered by this
state pursuant to S.C. Code Title 40, Chapter 28.



   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A person who is registered in this
state pursuant to S.C. Code Title 40, Chapter 22.



   RUNOFF. The portion of the precipitation on the land which reaches the
drainage system.



   SEDIMENTATION. The process which operates at or near the surface of the
ground, to deposit soil, debris and other materials either on other ground
surfaces or in water channels.



   SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION DISTRICT BOARD. The Soil and Water
Conservation District Board for the town, as established by the state statute.



   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a
location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the
ground, including but not limited to tennis courts, swimming pools, fences
and buildings.



   VEGETATION. All plant growth, including trees, shrubs, grasses and
mosses.



(1995 Code, § 5-1075)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1986)



PLAN REQUIRED; APPLICATION; COMPLIANCE



§ 152.20  APPROVED PLAN AND GRADING PERMIT REQUIRED FOR LAND DISTURBANCE.



   Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the surface of land in the
town shall not be disturbed or changed for any purposes whatsoever, but not
including those exemptions outlined in § 152.21, except in accordance with a
plan for control of erosion and sedimentation approved by and a grading
permit issued by the town (indicating approval) prior to any grading,
construction or land disturbances of any nature.



(1995 Code, § 5-1076)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1986)



§ 152.21  EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:



   (A)   Agricultural or silvicultural land management and cultural
practices, or to the construction of non-farm buildings and structures used
in a farming operation;



   (B)   Construction or land improvement of single-family residences
or other accessory buildings. A single-family residence property owner may
make land improvements on his or her single lot without an approved erosion
and sediment control plan and without obtaining a grading permit;



   (C)   Mining and mineral resource extraction operations conducted in
accordance with a valid mining permit issued by the Mining and Reclamation
Division of the State Land Resources Commission;



   (D)   Emergency repairs or maintenance of existing structures and
facilities which require ground to be broken. The responsible person shall
notify the town in writing within five working days of the emergency repairs
and maintenance actions;



   (E)   Construction or land improvement by a state or federal agency
conducted in accordance with a state or federal land management program;



   (F)   Construction of transmission lines for electricity, water,
telephone, gas, sanitary sewers and storm sewers and other utility
construction which will require disturbing the natural ground surface of less
than one acre. The width of the right-of-way shall be considered as the area
to be disturbed; and



   (G)   Any site, not otherwise exempted, being one acre or less.



(1995 Code, § 5-1077)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1986)



§ 152.22  APPLICATION FOR PLAN APPROVAL AND PERMIT.



   (A)   The developer shall apply in writing to the town for a grading
permit to disturb or change land in the town limits. The application shall be
accompanied by two copies of an erosion and sediment control plan prepared in
accordance with §§ 152.28 and 152.29. The plan shall be certified by the
applicant and by a registered professional engineer, professional soil
conservationist or a registered landscape architect.



   (B)   A landowner may develop and certify his or her sediment and
erosion control plan for a tract of land containing two acres or less,
provided: the area to be disturbed will not allow water in any one direction
for over 200 feet without a reduction in velocity; the cuts and fills
established will not exceed a height or depth of over five feet; and there
will be no concentrated off-site water to be controlled on the site. The plan
so developed must meet the objective of § 152.28 and be submitted to the
town.



(1995 Code, § 5-1078)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1986)



§ 152.23  APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL OF APPLICATION.



   (A)   If the plan conforms with the requirements of this chapter,
the town shall approve the plan and issue a grading permit to the applicant
with a copy of the approved plan.



   (B)   If the erosion and sediment control plan does not conform with
the requirements of this chapter, the plan shall be disapproved, and written
notification indicating the reason or reasons for plan disapproval shall be
forwarded to the applicant by the town.



   (C)   Review of erosion and sediment control plan shall require 30
days or less from the date of submittal until the time a decision is
rendered, either approving or disapproving the plan. If, at the end of the
30-day period, a decision has not been reached, the plan shall be deemed
approved and a grading permit issued on demand.



   (D)   If an erosion and sediment control plan is disapproved, the
applicant may elect to correct the indicated deficiencies in conformance with
the provisions of this chapter and resubmit the plan to the town.



(1995 Code, § 5-1079)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1986)



§ 152.24  VARIANCES AND EXCEPTIONS.



   The town may, upon application to it and showing undue hardship, grant
variances and exceptions to any of the provisions of this chapter, provided
the variance or exception is, in the judgment of the Board, in harmony with
the general purpose and intent of this chapter.



(1995 Code, § 5-1080)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1986)



§ 152.25  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the town may appeal to
the Town Council in writing within 15 working days. The Council shall notify
the applicant within 30 days as to the affirmation or denial of the appeal.



   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the decision on an appeal to the town
may appeal to the court of competent jurisdiction. The appeal shall be filed
within 30 days after the decision of the Council.



(1995 Code, § 5-1081)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1986)



§ 152.26  EXTENSION OF TIME TO COMPLETE WORK.



   If the applicant is unable to complete the work within the time
specified in the approved plan and grading permit, he or she may, prior to
the expiration of that time, present in writing a request to the town for an
extension of time, setting forth the reasons for the requested extension. The
town shall approve or deny the request for an extension of time, subject to
any additional erosion and sediment control measures as may be reasonably
required.



(1995 Code, § 5-1082)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1986)



§ 152.27  RESPONSIBILITY OF APPLICANT.



   The applicant shall be responsible for carrying out the proposed work
in accordance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan and
grading, and in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.



(1995 Code, § 5-1083)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1986)



§ 152.28  GUIDELINES FOR PREPARATION OF EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLANS.



   (A)   Erosion and sediment control plans shall be prepared according
to the following guidelines, as applicable, prior to submission.



   (B)   Plans shall include appropriate measures and practices for
erosion and sediment control, installed in a timely sequence during the
development process, and maintained to ensure their proper functioning.



      (1)   Select land where the drainage pattern, topography and
soils are favorable for the intended use. Tracts of land vary in suitability
for different uses. Consider the major characteristics of the land area and
the kinds of soil in identifying and evaluating potential erosion and
sediment problems, and in selecting appropriate control measures and
practices.



      (2)   Expose the smallest practical area of land for the least
possible time during development.



      (3)   When feasible, retain and protect natural vegetation.
Save topsoil, where practical, for replacing on graded areas.



      (4)   Use temporary plant cover, mulching and/or structures to
control runoff and protect areas subject to erosion during construction.



      (5)   Provide for handling the increased runoff caused by
changes in topography, soil and surface conditions. Emphasis should be placed
on conservation of existing on-site soil. Effective means include the use of
diversion ditches, grassed or surfaced waterways and outlets, enlarged and
protected drainage channels, grade control structures and effective use of
street gutters and storm sewers.



      (6)   Use sediment basins or other forms of silt traps, where
practical, to remove heavy sediment loads from runoff waters leaving the
disturbed area.



      (7)   Install the permanent vegetative cover and the long-term
erosion protection measures or structures as soon as practical in the
development process.



(1995 Code, § 5-1084)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1986)



§ 152.29  CONTENTS OF PLAN AND APPLICATION.



   The erosion and sediment control plan and application for grading
permit shall include but not be limited to the following data as applicable:



   (A)   A vicinity map sufficient to locate the site and to show the
relationship of the site to its general surroundings at a scale of not less
than one mile to one inch;



   (B)   A site plan, drawn to a scale of not less than 200 feet to one
inch, and supporting specifications and schedules showing:



      (1)   The banner lines of the site on which the work is to be
performed, including the approximate acreage of the site;



      (2)   Existing contours with intervals of not more than five
feet;



      (3)   Proposed physical improvement on the site, including
present development and future utilization, if known;



      (4)   All drainage provisions, flood protection provisions,
erosion and sediment control measures, vegetative practices or other
protective devices to be utilized in connection with, or as a part of, the
proposed work;



      (5)   Provisions for erosion control during construction
(temporary) and during the life of the facility (permanent). These provisions
shall include a timing schedule and sequence of operations indicating the
anticipated starting and completion dates of the particular development
sequence, and the estimated time of control measures. Specifications
accompanying the plan shall include, as appropriate, seeding mixes and
application rates, type of sod, seedbed preparation, lime and fertilizer
application, mulching and other related data;



      (6)   A complete and adequate grading plan for borrow pits and
material processing facilities, where applicable, including provisions for
adequate drainage in the areas;



      (7)   A general description of the predominant soil types of
the site;



      (8)   The name and address of the owner, developer and
petitioner, and the individual responsible for satisfactory completion of the
work described in the plan, if different from the above;



      (9)   Title, scale, north arrow, data and name of the
individual or organization preparing the plan, with seal when applicable; and



      (10)   The plan and application shall be supported by
supplemental reports, specifications, data and additional reports,
specifications, data and additional information as the town may reasonably
require, including but not limited to finished contours, elevations,
dimensions, locations, slopes, storm drainage computations and field
investigation reports on soil, drainage and flooding.



   (C)   Applicant’s certification statement:



   “I (We) hereby certify that all clearing, grading, construction
and/or development will be done pursuant to this plan.



                                                  
                                                 
                               



   Date
                                 Permit
Applicant”



   (D)   Design certification statement:



   “I hereby certify that this plan is designed to contain sediment on
the property concerned to the maximum extent feasible. Provisions for erosion
and sediment control are in accordance with the Sediment and Erosion Control
Ordinance (Chapter 152 of the city code).



                                           
                                              
                    Date



      Registered Professional Engineer, Professional Soil
Conservationist, or Registered Landscape Architect”



(1995 Code, § 5-1085)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1986)



§ 152.30  NOTIFICATION.



   The Town Utility Director and/or the Building Inspector shall provide
proper notification of the erosion and sediment control ordinance to those
persons applying for a building and/or grading permit and shall provide the
necessary forms required for application for securing approval of the erosion
and sediment control plan by the town. A copy of this chapter may also be
made available upon request.



(1995 Code, § 5-1086)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1986)



§ 152.31  INSPECTION.



   The town or its authorized representative shall periodically inspect
the work done under the approved plan and grading permit, as deemed
advisable. Upon completion of the work, the town shall make a final
inspection and, if the work has been completed in accordance with the plan
and permit, the town shall issue to the applicant a letter of satisfactory
completion.



(1995 Code, § 5-1087)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1986)



§ 152.32  RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER LAWS AND REGULATIONS.



   Whenever the provisions of this chapter impose more restrictive
standards than are required in or under any other law, regulation or
ordinance, the requirements herein contained shall prevail. Whenever the
provisions of any other law, regulation or ordinance require more restrictive
standards than are required herein, the requirements of the law, regulation
or ordinance shall prevail.



(1995 Code, § 5-1088)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1986)



§ 152.33  ENFORCEMENT.



   Any person who engages in any grading operation subject to the
provisions of this Act without first obtaining a permit as required by §
152.20 or who willfully violates the provisions of a grading plan submitted
to obtain a grading permit shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be subject to the provisions of § 152.99.



(1995 Code, § 5-1089)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1986)  Penalty, see § 152.99



§ 152.34  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.



   (A)   The 1991 Stormwater Management Act, being S.C. Code §§
48-14-10 et seq., which creates a uniform statewide program to manage
stormwater runoff and reduce sedimentation from land disturbing activities,
became effective June 26. Enforcement for land disturbing areas on five or
more acres started on October 1, 1992.



   (B)   Land Resources Commission will operate the program for the
town and the county. On acreage of less than five acres, enforcement for land
disturbing areas will be in accordance with this chapter.



(1995 Code, § 5-1091)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1986)



§ 152.35  DISCREPANCIES.



   When discrepancies exist between requirements of this code and the
State Stormwater Management Act, being S.C. Code §§ 48-14-10 et seq., the
legislation imposing the greater restrictions shall apply.



(1995 Code, § 5-1092)  (Ord. passed 7-1-1986)



§ 152.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Unless otherwise specified, any person who willfully violates
the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days or fined not
more than $200, or both.



   (B)   Any person who violates the provisions of § 152.33, upon
conviction shall be imprisoned for not more than six months or fined not more
than $1,000, or both.



(1995 Code, § 5-1089)



   (C)   If deemed necessary, the Town Utility Department may recommend
to the Town Council that the permit be revoked and obtain injunctive relief
to enjoin violations of the provisions of this chapter, and any person
damaged as a result of the violations may, upon proper showing of the
damages, obtain payment therefor by a civil action.



(1995 Code, § 5-1090) 



(Ord. passed 7-1-1986)



CHAPTER 153:  TRAILERS AND TRAILER PARKS



Section



   153.01   Definitions



   153.02   Prohibited in first fire district



   153.03   License required for trailer park



   153.04   Sanitation requirements



   153.05   Space requirements



   153.06   Permit required for additions to trailers



   153.07   Records of occupancy



   153.08   Exception for private use



§ 153.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   TRAILER COACH.  Any portable structure or vehicle so constructed and
designed as to permit occupancy thereof for temporary or permanent dwelling,
sleeping or storage purposes, regardless of whether equipped with wheels or
resting on any type of temporary or permanent foundation.



   TRAILER COACH PARK.  Any site, lot, field or tract of ground upon
which one or more trailer coaches are placed regardless of whether or not a
charge is made for the accommodations, and shall include any building,
structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of
the equipment of the park.



(1995 Code, § 5-3001)  (Ord. passed 6-13-1960)



§ 153.02  PROHIBITED IN FIRST FIRE DISTRICT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park, for
use or occupancy, any trailer coach of any kind overnight on any street,
highway or other public place within the town and no trailer coach shall be
parked for use or occupancy within the limits of the first fire district as
described in § 150.015(A), or as may be hereinafter established by the town.



(1995 Code, § 5-3002)  (Ord. passed 6-13-1960)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.03  LICENSE REQUIRED FOR TRAILER PARK.



   Prior to the opening, operation or maintaining of a trailer park, the
owner(s) shall first apply to the town for a license or permit to open,
operate, or maintain the park.  Application shall be in writing to the
Finance Director and shall state the proposed location, the size of the lot,
the number of trailer accommodations, water and sewer services available and
the name and address of the owner and operator, and any other pertinent
information which may be desired by the town pertaining to the proposed
operation. The cost of the license shall be determined by the town’s
business license ordinance.  The license will be determined by the total
gross income.



(1995 Code, § 5-3003)  (Ord. passed 6-13-1960)



§ 153.04  SANITATION REQUIREMENTS.



   Each trailer coach park shall provide sanitary facilities, water
supply, sewer connections and provisions for storage or containing of
garbage, all of which shall meet the regulations of the town pertaining to
utility and sewer services and shall also meet the requirements of the Town
and County Health Departments. No license, as above required, shall be issued
by the town until the proposed owner or operator has received from the Town
or County Health Officer a certification that the site meets the health
regulations. The license shall be valid only during the period the trailer
coach park continues to meet the Health Department requirements.



(1995 Code, § 5-3004)  (Ord. passed 6-13-1960)



§ 153.05  SPACE REQUIREMENTS.



   No trailer shall be placed within 25 feet of the street line abutting
each trailer coach park, nor shall any trailer be placed closer than ten feet
to any adjoining property line, nor within ten feet of any other trailer.



(1995 Code, § 5-3005)  (Ord. passed 6-13-1960)



§ 153.06  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ADDITIONS TO TRAILERS.



   No additions shall be made to any trailer coach without first obtaining
a building permit as required by the town and all additions shall be subject
to the Building Code.



(1995 Code, § 5-3006)  (Ord. passed 6-13-1960)



§ 153.07  RECORDS OF OCCUPANCY.



   The owner or operator of each trailer park shall keep permanent records
showing the names and addresses of each owner and each occupant of each
trailer coach, the date of arrival and date of leaving the trailer coach
park, and the model, make, year and license of each trailer coach and motor
vehicle used in connection therewith. The records shall be available to
inspection by the officials of the Town and County Health Departments and law
enforcement officers.



(1995 Code, § 5-3007)  (Ord. passed 6-13-1960)



§ 153.08  EXCEPTION FOR PRIVATE USE.



   This chapter shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation who
places a trailer on his, her or their private property for any purpose other
than commercial use.



(1995 Code, § 5-3008)  (Ord. passed 6-13-1960)



CHAPTER 154:  PLANNING AND ZONING



Section




General Provisions




   154.01   Compliance with road specifications required for annexation



   154.02   Vested rights to develop property




Planning Commission




   154.15   Planning Commission established



   154.16   Membership



   154.17   Organization, meetings, rules, staff and finances



   154.18   Bylaws



   154.19   General powers and duties




Zoning Regulation




   154.30   Zoning ordinance adopted




Subdivision Regulation




   154.45   Development design standards adopted



Cross-reference:



   Development impact fees for water and wastewater disposal facilities,
see § 50.06



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 154.01  COMPLIANCE WITH ROAD SPECIFICATIONS REQUIRED FOR ANNEXATION.



   (A)   No parcel or tract of land shall be annexed into the town
unless the same fronts on an existing paved public road which is part of the
State Department of Highway and Public Transportation system of roadways.



   (B)   No parcel or tract of land presently within the town limits
shall be subdivided unless and until the owner or owners thereof first
construct thereon a road or roads which are connected to and accepted into
the state highway system by the State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation and which provide access (usable by automobiles and other
vehicles) to all lots within the subdivision.



   (C)   SUBDIVIDED as used herein shall be deemed to be the division
of a parcel of real estate into two or more parcels by any means whatsoever
including but not limited to sale or lease.



(Ord. 02-20-01, passed - -)



§ 154.02  VESTED RIGHTS TO DEVELOP PROPERTY.



   Pursuant to the State Vested Rights Act, being S.C. Code, Title 6,
Chapter 29, Article 11:



   (A)   Scope and title.  All applicable ordinances, municipal code
sections and regulations relating to zoning, planning and land development
within the municipality are subject to this section, which shall be known as
the Vested Rights to Develop Property Ordinance;



   (B)   Definition.  Except as hereinafter set forth, the words,
terms and phrases when used in this section shall have the meaning as set
forth in S.C. Code § 6-29-1520, as enacted by Act 287 of 2004.



      SITE SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN.  In addition and as a supplement
to the definition set forth in S.C. Code § 6-29-1520, as enacted by Act 287
of 2004, further defined to mean those documents that comprise a complete
application for a zoning permit, certificate of zoning compliance, variance,
special exception, planned unit development, sketch plat or sketch plan, or
other similar approval that authorizes the landowner to proceed with
investment in grading, installation of utilities, streets, and other
infrastructure, and to undertake other significant expenditures necessary to
prepare for application for a building permit.



   (C)   Establishment and conditions of vested rights.



      (1)   A vested right to develop property in accord with a site
specific development plan is triggered upon the final approval of the site
specific development plan by the final official or body of the municipality
authorized to approve a site specific development plan and the payment to the
municipality of all applicable established fees.



      (2)   Except as hereinafter set forth, a vested right
established by this section is subject to the conditions and limitations as
set out in S.C. Code §§ 6-29-1540 and 6-29-1550, as enacted by Act 287 of
2004.



      (3)   A vested right for an approved site specific development
plan expires two years after the date of final approval by the final official
or body authorized to approve a site specific development plan.



      (4)   No vested rights are established for phased development
plans, including approved or conditionally approved phased development plans
and including phased development plans applicable to property proposed for
annexation. An approved or conditionally approved site specific development
plan is required prior to approval with respect to each phase of a phased
development plan.



      (5)   A vested site specific development plan may be amended
if the amendment conforms to, or does not cause greater nonconformity with,
the then current provisions of the municipal zoning, planning and land
development ordinances, municipal code sections or regulations. Approval or
conditional approval of an amendment does not re-set or restart the
expiration period of a vested right.



      (6)   No sooner than three months, and no later than 45 days
prior to the expiration of the two-year vested right period for an approved
site specific development plan, the landowner of property with a vested right
in a site specific development plan may apply to the authorized official or
body for an annual extension of the vested right. The authorized official or
body must approve an application for an annual extension of the vested right
unless an amendment to the land development ordinances or regulations has
been adopted that prohibits approval. No more than five annual extensions of
the vested right may be approved.



(Ord. 062105C, passed 6-21-2005)



PLANNING COMMISSION



§ 154.15  PLANNING COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.



   In order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and harmonious
development of the area which will, in accordance with existing and future
needs, best promote the welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the
process of development, the Town Planning Commission, hereinafter referred to
as the Planning Commission, is hereby established as authorized by Act 487,
South Carolina Acts of 1967, as amended, being S.C. Code 6-29-310 through
6-29-380; all previous ordinances pertaining to the creation, powers and
organization are hereby dissolved; and the Planning Commission shall
forthwith be organized, empowered and governed by the following provisions
set out in this subchapter.



(1995 Code, § 5-2001)  (Ord. passed 3-17-1987)



§ 154.16  MEMBERSHIP.



   The Planning Commission shall consist of five members to be appointed
by the Town Council. The terms of office of the members shall be for four
years, except that of the five members first appointed, one member shall be
appointed for a term of one year, town members for two years, one member for
three years, and one member for four years. Any vacancy in membership shall
be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor, who shall also have the
authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public
hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed
for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties.



(1995 Code, § 5-2002)  (Ord. passed 3-17-1987)



§ 154.17  ORGANIZATION, MEETINGS, RULES, STAFF AND FINANCES.



   The Planning Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson
from among its members. The term of the Chairperson and other officers shall
be one year with eligibility for reelection. It shall appoint a Secretary who
may be an officer or an employee of the governing authority or of the
Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall adopt rules for the
transaction of business and shall keep a record of its recommendations; and
shall meet at the call of the Planning Commission at which official action is
taken shall be open to the public and all records of the Commission shall be
a public record. The Commission may appoint any employees and staff as it may
deem necessary for its work and may make expenditures for salaries of any
employees and staff, contracts with consultants, and for the purchase of
required equipment and supplies. The expenditures of the Commission,
exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for that purpose
by the Town Council.



(1995 Code, § 5-2003)  (Ord. passed 3-17-1987)



§ 154.18  BYLAWS.



   (A)   Name of Commission. The official name of the Commission shall
be the Town Planning Commission.



   (B)   Officers.



      (1)   Election of officers.  Annually, at the regular meeting
of the Planning Commission held in the month of July, the Commission shall
elect a Chairperson, a Vice Chairperson and a Secretary. The officers may
succeed themselves once.



      (2)   Chairperson.  The Chairperson shall preside at all
meetings of the Planning Commission and at other meetings and public hearings
called by the Commission. He or she shall call special meetings of the
Planning Commission when required and shall transmit reports, plans and
recommendations of the Planning Commission to the appropriate governing
authority, and in general shall act as spokesperson for the Commission.



      (3)   Vice Chairperson.  The Vice Chairperson shall serve as
Chairperson in the absence or the disability of the Chairperson. In the event
of the death or resignation of the Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson shall
perform the latter’s duties until a time as the Commission shall elect a
new Chairperson.



      (4)   Secretary. The Secretary shall assist the Chairperson in
the preparation of agenda for Planning Commission meetings, shall prepare and
send out notices for regular and special meetings, shall establish and
maintain the Commission’s files and its books of account, and shall have
the custody of all funds coming into the possession of the Commission and
shall deposit the same in the name of the Commission in a bank or banks as
the Commission may select. Under the Commission’s direction and upon its
authorization, the Secretary shall sign all orders and checks for the payment
of money and shall pay out and disburse Commission funds.



      (5)   Additional duties.  The Chairperson, Vice Chairperson
and Secretary shall undertake any other duties and functions as may from time
to time be required by the Commission or by its bylaws.



   (C)   Meetings.



      (1)   Regular meetings.  The regular meetings of the Planning
Commission shall be held on the third Thursday of each month, at 7:00 p.m. at
the call of the Chairperson. There will be no regular meeting in December.



      (2)   Special meetings.  Special meetings shall be called by
the Chairperson, provided that reasonable advance notice is given each member.



      (3)   Quorum.  A quorum shall consist of three members.



      (4)   Order of business. The order of business at all regular
meetings shall be as follows:



         (a)   Roll call;



         (b)   Approval of minutes of previous meeting;



         (c)   Unfinished business;



         (d)   New business; and



         (e)   Adjournment.



      (5)   Meetings and records open.  All meetings of the
Planning Commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the
public and all records of the Commission shall be a public record.



      (6)   Voting.  All members must vote, unless there is a
conflict of interest, which must be so stated. The Chairperson has the option
of voting; Chairperson must vote to break any tie vote.



   (D)   Amendments to bylaws.  Changes may be made to the bylaws of
the Planning Commission by the affirmative vote of the majority of the entire
membership of the Commission.



(1995 Code, § 5-2004)  (Ord. passed 11-2-1989)



§ 154.19  GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   From and after the time when the Planning Commission shall
have organized and selected its officers and shall have adopted its rules of
procedure, the Commission shall have all the powers, duties and
responsibilities set forth in Act 487, South Carolina Acts of 1967, as
amended, being S.C. Code 6-29-310 through 6-29-380.



   (B)   In general the Planning Commission shall have the power and
duties to:



      (1)   Prepare and revise periodically a comprehensive plan and
program for the development of its jurisdiction;



      (2)   Prepare and recommend for adoption to the Town Council
as a means for implementing the plan and program:



         (a)   Zoning ordinances or resolutions, and maps and
appropriate revisions thereof for its jurisdiction;



         (b)   Regulations for the subdivision of land and
appropriate revisions thereof within its jurisdictions, and to administer the
regulations that may be adopted;



         (c)   An official map and appropriate revision thereof
showing the exact location of existing or proposed public street, highway and
utility rights-of-way and public building site, together with regulations to
control the erection of buildings or other structures or changes in land use
within the rights-of-way, building sites or open spaces within its political
jurisdiction or a specified portion thereof; and



         (d)   A capital program for its jurisdiction based on
the comprehensive plan and the capital improvements necessary to implement
the plan. Such a capital program shall include an annual capital budget, to
the Town Council as directed.



      (3)   Recommend principles and policies for guiding action in
the development of the area;



      (4)   Prepare and recommend to the Town Council for adoption
ordinances promoting orderly development in accordance with the comprehensive
plan;



      (5)   Determine whether specific proposed developments conform
to the principles and requirements of the comprehensive plan for the growth
and improvement of the area;



      (6)   Review and recommend to the Town Council any needed
changes in the zoning ordinance and the official map of the town; as well as
the subdivision regulations, official map and other codes, ordinances and
controls related to the town’s development; and



      (7)   Keep the Town Council and the general public informed
and advised as to these matters.



(1995 Code, § 5-2005)  (Ord. passed 3-17-1987)



ZONING REGULATION



§ 154.30  ZONING ORDINANCE ADOPTED.



   There is hereby adopted by reference the document cited as the zoning
ordinance of the town, adopted November, 2102, as amended, which is
incorporated herein as if set forth in full, a copy of which is on file in
the office of the Building Inspector.



(1995 Code, § 5-2011)  (Ord. 091713, passed 9-17-2013; Ord. 110612A, passed
11- -2012)



SUBDIVISION REGULATION



§ 154.45  DEVELOPMENT DESIGN STANDARDS ADOPTED.



   The subdivision regulations for the town, as set forth in Ord. 110612A,
as amended, are hereby adopted by reference as if set out in full herein.
Copies are available through town offices.



(Ord. 110612A, passed 11- -2012)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   AGREEMENTS



      II.   BONDS



      III.   FRANCHISES



      IV.   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS



      V.   REZONING



TABLE I:  AGREEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




081799
 
8-17-1999
 
Agreement with Municipal Association of South Carolina for collection of
business license taxes from telecommunications companies


01-22-08
 
1-22-2008
 
Authorizing wholesale water contract with the Town of Ridgeway


090208
 
11-11-2008
 
Amendment to Ridgeway water purchase contract


122011
 
12-20-2011
 
Agreement with Myers Timber Company to manage selective harvesting of timber
on town land adjacent to reservoir


Res. 030717
 
3-7-2017
 
Approving a loan assistance agreement and the South Carolina Water Quality
Revolving Fund Authority


112117
 
11-21-2017
 
Approving an agreement to make and to accept a loan agreement between the
town and Water Quality Revolving Fund Authority


Res. 2018-101618A
 
10-16-2018
 
Entering an agreement with the Municipal Association of South Carolina to act
as a claimant agency for the collection of debt on behalf of the town in
accordance with the Setoff Debt Collection Act


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II:  BONDS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


990405
 
4-5-1999
 
Authorizing the issuance of combined utility system revenue refunding bonds
(second supplemental amendatory ordinance)


-
 
11-17-2009
 
Authorizing the issuance of combined utility revenue bonds (third
supplemental amendatory ordinance)


2016A
 
9-6-2016
 
Providing for the issuance and sale of combined utility system improvement
revenue bonds


090616A
 
9-6-2016
 
Providing for the issuance and sale of combined utility system revenue bonds,
amended and restated master bond ordinance


120417B
 
12-19-2017
 
Amending Ord. passed 11-17-2009, to amend the Debt Service Reserve Fund
Requirement, approving changes to the loan agreement between the town and the
South Carolina Water Quality Revolving Fund Authority; approving the
amendment and restatement of the Debt Service Fund and approving the release
of Debt Service Reserve Fund moneys


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE III:  FRANCHISES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


Appendix I -
 
- -
 
Granting to Carolina Pipeline Company the right, power and authority to lay,
maintain and operate natural gas mains, pipes and services on, along, across
and under the streets, alleys, bridges and other public places and to do a
local natural gas business of the town, for a period of 30 years


Appendix I -
 
- -
 
Granting the right, privilege and franchise to General Telephone Company of
the Southeast, its successors and assigns, to construct, erect, build, equip,
own, maintain and operate in, along, under, over and across the streets,
avenues, alleys, bridges, viaducts and public grounds of the town any and all
appliances, structures and fixtures necessary or convenient for rendition of
telephone and other communication service and for conducting a general local
and long distance telephone business; providing for the assignment of
franchise, for consideration, for repeal of conflicting ordinances and/or
partial invalidity


Appendix I -
 
- -
 
A cable television franchise ordinance for the town is listed here by
reference as if it were incorporated fully in this code


--
 
5-21-2002
 
Approving the sale or transfer of Winnsboro/Ridgeway Cablevision, Inc. to
Chester Telephone Company per franchise agreement dated 11-16-1999


--
 
5-21-2002
 
Amending the existing Cablevision franchise (11-16-1999) with
Winnsboro/Ridgeway Cablevision Inc. to extend the time for system upgrade


 
 



 



TABLE IV:  REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


02-04-03B
 
2-4-2003
 
Approving the conveyance of Lot C on a plat dated 11-20-2002, containing
0.085 acre, more or less, to Lang-Mekra North America, LLC


010714
 
1-7-2014
 
Authorizing the town to lease a portion of the water tank located on Cook
Road to Fairfield County for the purposes of locating two radio antennas on
the tank, and the placement of an auxiliary radio equipment building adjacent
to the tank for the county’s EMS Department


012114
 
3-4-2014
 
Authorizing the town to sell Mt. Zion Institute, located on a parcel
consisting of 3.27 acres at 250 North Walnut Street, to Friends of Mt. Zion
Institute, a not-for-profit corporation, for the rehabilitation of the
historic structures of Mt. Zion Institute


120417A
 
12-4-2017
 
Declaring surplus property consisting of 3.27 acres, for stimulating
commercial enterprises within the town for a proposed government complex
designed and financed according to a memorandum of understanding between
Fairfield County and First and Main Development, LLC, as may be amended to
add MZI Holdings, LLC under the terms and conditions described in the deed
and to authorize the Mayor to sign the deed of 3.27 acres to MZI Holdings, LLC


 
 
 
 
 



 



TABLE V:  REZONING



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


072010
 
7-20-2010
 
Rezoning a 3.15 acre lot, owned by Mount Zion Institute, LLC and identified
as Tax Map No. 126-01-11-028, from R-1 to PDD-C, Planned Development
District—Commercial


 
 
 
 
 



 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to South Carolina Code





References to 1995 Code





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO SOUTH CAROLINA CODE



 

S.C. Code Section
 
Code Section




4-9-90
 
11.04


5-7-110
 
32.06


5-7-220
 
31.23


5-7-230
 
35.13


5-7-250 through 5-7-280
 
30.056


5-7-260
 
31.50


5-7-280
 
150.071


5-9-40
 
30.018


5-13-10 through 5-13-100
 
11.02


5-13-90
 
31.09


5-15-10 et seq.
 
30.001


5-15-61
 
30.073


5-15-130
 
30.075


5-15-150
 
30.018


5-31-2510
 
52.12


5-31-2520
 
52.12


5-31-2530
 
52.12


5-31-2540
 
52.12


5-31-2550
 
52.12


6-9-10
 
150.071


6-9-60
 
150.071


6-17-20
 
50.05


6-29-310 through 6-29-380
 
154.15, 154.19


Title 6, Ch. 29, Art. 11
 
154.02


6-29-1520
 
154.02


6-29-1540
 
154.02


6-29-1550
 
154.02


12-56-10 et seq.
 
33.44


Title 16
 
130.01


23-35-45 et seq.
 
132.05


30-4-10 et seq.
 
30.031


Title 40, Ch. 22
 
152.05


Title 40, Ch. 28
 
152.05


40-56-1 et seq.
 
132.05


40-56-20(3)
 
132.01


Title 44, Ch. 53
 
131.01


44-53-391
 
131.01


Title 46, Ch. 7
 
70.01


48-14-10 et seq.
 
152.34, 152.35


49-23-10 et seq.
 
53.40, 53.41, 53.43


56-5-30
 
70.01


56-5-710
 
70.01


56-5-5610
 
96.06


56-5-5680
 
96.06


56-5-720
 
70.10, Ch. 73 Sched. II


63-5-510
 
130.11




 



REFERENCES TO 1995 CODE



 

1995 Code Section
 
2013 Code Section




Preface
 
11.02


Historical Sketch Supplementary Facts,
 
11.03


New Charter
 
Charter


1-1001
 
30.001


1-2001
 
30.015


1-2002
 
30.016


1-2003
 
30.017


1-2004
 
30.018


1-3001
 
30.030


1-3002
 
30.031


1-3003
 
30.032


1-3004
 
30.033


1-3005
 
30.034


1-3006
 
30.035


1-3007
 
30.036


1-3008
 
30.037


1-3021
 
30.050


1-3022
 
30.051


1-3023
 
30.052


1-3024
 
30.053


1-3025
 
30.054


1-3026
 
30.055


1-3027
 
30.056


1-3041
 
10.01


1-3042
 
10.03, 10.04


1-3043
 
10.05


1-3044
 
10.06


1-3045
 
10.07


1-3046
 
10.08


1-3047
 
10.09


1-3048
 
10.99


1-3049
 
11.01


1-4001
 
31.01


1-4002
 
31.02


1-4003
 
31.03


1-4004
 
31.04


1-4005
 
31.05


1-4006
 
31.06


1-4007
 
31.07


1-4008
 
31.08


1-4009
 
31.09


1-4021
 
31.20


1-4022
 
31.21


1-4023
 
31.22


1-4024
 
31.23


1-4031
 
31.35


1-4041
 
31.50


1-5001
 
33.01


1-5002
 
33.02


1-5003
 
33.03


1-5004
 
33.04


1-5005
 
33.05


1-5006
 
33.06


1-5007
 
33.07


1-5008
 
33.08


1-5009
 
33.09


1-5021
 
33.25


1-5022
 
33.26


1-5023
 
33.27


1-5024
 
33.28


1-5025
 
33.29


1-5026
 
33.30


1-5027
 
33.31


1-5028
 
33.32


1-5029
 
33.33


1-5030
 
33.34


1-5031
 
33.35


1-5032
 
33.36


1-5033
 
33.37


1-5034
 
33.38


1-5035
 
33.39


1-5036
 
33.40


1-5037
 
33.41


1-5038
 
33.42


1-5039
 
33.43


1-5051
 
34.01


1-5052
 
34.02


1-5053
 
34.03


1-5054
 
34.04


1-5055
 
34.05


1-5056
 
34.06


1-5057
 
34.07


1-5058
 
34.08


1-5059
 
34.09


1-5060
 
34.10


1-5061
 
34.11


1-5062
 
34.12


1-5063
 
34.13


1-5064
 
34.14


1-6045
 
36.15


1-7001
 
35.01


1-7002
 
35.02


1-7003
 
35.03


1-7004
 
35.04


1-7005
 
35.05


1-7006
 
35.06


1-7007
 
35.07


1-7008
 
35.08


1-7009
 
35.09


1-7010
 
35.10


1-7011
 
35.11


1-7012
 
35.12


1-7013
 
35.13


1-8001
 
30.070


1-8002
 
30.071


1-8003
 
30.072


1-8004
 
30.073


1-8005
 
30.074


1-8006
 
30.075


2-1001
 
32.01


2-1002
 
32.02


2-1003
 
32.03


2-1004
 
32.04


2-1005
 
32.05


2-1006
 
32.06


2-2001
 
92.01


2-2002
 
92.02


2-2003
 
92.03


2-2004
 
92.04


2-2005
 
92.05


2-2006
 
92.06


2-2007
 
92.07


2-2021
 
92.20


2-2022
 
92.21


2-2023
 
92.22


2-2024
 
92.23


2-3001
 
32.20


2-3002
 
32.21


2-3003
 
32.22


2-3004
 
32.23


2-3005
 
32.24


3-1001
 
94.01


3-1002
 
94.02


3-1003
 
94.03


3-1004
 
94.04


3-1005
 
94.05


3-1006
 
94.06


3-1007
 
94.07


3-1009
 
94.08


3-1021
 
94.20


3-1022
 
94.21


3-1023
 
94.22


3-1031
 
72.01


3-1032
 
72.02


3-1033
 
72.03


3-1034
 
72.04


3-1035
 
72.05


3-1036
 
72.06


3-1037
 
72.07


3-1038
 
72.08


3-1039
 
72.09


3-1040
 
72.10


3-1041
 
72.11


3-1042
 
72.12


3-1043
 
72.13


3-1044
 
72.14


3-1051
 
91.01


3-1052
 
91.02


3-1053
 
91.03


3-1054
 
91.04


3-1055
 
91.05


3-1056
 
91.06


3-1057
 
91.07


3-1058
 
91.08


3-1059
 
91.09


3-1060
 
91.10


3-1061
 
91.11


3-1062
 
91.12


3-1063
 
91.13


3-1064
 
91.14


3-1065
 
91.15


3-1066
 
91.16


3-1067
 
91.17


3-1068
 
91.18


3-1069
 
91.19


3-1070
 
91.99


3-2001
 
95.01


3-3001
 
36.30


3-3002
 
36.31


3-3003
 
36.32


3-3004
 
36.33


3-3005
 
36.34


3-3006
 
36.35


4-1001
 
50.01


4-1002
 
50.02


4-1003
 
50.03


4-1004
 
50.04


4-1005
 
50.05


4-2001
 
53.01


4-2002
 
53.02


4-2003
 
53.03


4-2004
 
53.04


4-2005
 
53.05


4-2006
 
53.06


4-2007
 
53.07


4-2008
 
53.08


4-2009
 
53.09


4-2010
 
53.10


4-2011
 
53.11


4-2012
 
53.12


4-2013
 
53.13


4-2021
 
53.25


4-2022
 
53.26


4-2023
 
53.27


4-2031
 
54.01


4-2032
 
54.02


4-2033
 
54.03


4-2034
 
54.04


4-2035
 
54.05


4-2036
 
54.06


4-2036.1
 
54.07


4-2037
 
54.08


4-2038
 
54.09


4-2039
 
54.10


4-2051
 
54.25


4-2052
 
54.26


4-2053
 
54.27


4-2054
 
54.28


4-2071
 
53.99, 54.99


4-2072
 
53.65


4-2073
 
53.66, 54.60


4-3001
 
54.40


4-3002
 
54.41


4-3003
 
54.42


4-3004
 
54.43


4-3005
 
54.44


4-3006
 
54.45


4-3007
 
54.46


4-3008
 
54.47, 54.99


4-3009
 
54.48


4-3010
 
54.50


4-4001
 
52.01


4-4002
 
52.02


4-4003
 
52.03


4-4004
 
52.04


4-4005
 
52.05


4-4006
 
52.06


4-4007
 
52.07


4-4008
 
52.08


4-4009
 
52.09


4-4010
 
52.10


4-4011
 
52.11


5-1001
 
150.015


5-1002
 
150.016


5-1003
 
150.017


5-1011
 
150.030


5-1012
 
150.031


5-1013
 
150.032


5-1014
 
150.033


5-1015
 
150.034


5-1016
 
150.035


5-1031
 
150.050


5-1032
 
150.051


5-1041
 
150.065


5-1042
 
150.066


5-1043
 
150.067


5-1044
 
150.068


5-1045
 
150.069


5-1046
 
150.070


5-1047
 
150.071


5-1061
 
150.085


5-1062
 
150.086


5-1071
 
152.01


5-1072
 
152.02


5-1073
 
152.03


5-1074
 
152.04


5-1075
 
152.05


5-1076
 
152.20


5-1077
 
152.21


5-1078
 
152.22


5-1079
 
152.23


5-1080
 
152.24


5-1081
 
152.25


5-1082
 
152.26


5-1083
 
152.27


5-1084
 
152.28


5-1085
 
152.29


5-1086
 
152.30


5-1087
 
152.31


5-1088
 
152.32


5-1089
 
152.33


5-1090
 
152.99


5-1091
 
152.34


5-1092
 
152.35


5-2001
 
154.15


5-2002
 
154.16


5-2003
 
154.17


5-2004
 
154.18


5-2005
 
154.19


5-2011
 
154.30


5-3001
 
153.01


5-3002
 
153.02


5-3003
 
153.03


5-3004
 
153.04


5-3005
 
153.05


5-3006
 
153.06


5-3007
 
153.07


5-3008
 
153.08


Ch. 6
 
36.01


6-1001
 
51.01


6-1002
 
51.02


6-1003
 
51.03


6-4001
 
90.01


6-4002
 
90.02


6-4003
 
90.03


6-4004
 
90.04


6-4011
 
90.15


6-4012
 
90.16


6-4014
 
90.18


6-4015
 
90.19


6-4016
 
90.20


6-4017
 
90.21


6-4018
 
90.22


6-4019
 
90.23


6-4020
 
90.24


6-4021
 
90.25


6-4022
 
90.26


6-4023
 
90.27


6-4024
 
90.28


6-4025
 
90.99


7-2001
 
111.01


7-2002
 
111.02


7-2003
 
111.03


7-2004
 
111.04


7-3001
 
132.01


7-3002
 
132.02


7-3003
 
132.03


7-3004
 
132.04


7-3005
 
132.05


7-4001
 
112.01


7-4002
 
112.02


7-4003
 
112.03


7-4004
 
112.04


7-4005
 
112.05


7-5001
 
113.01


7-5002
 
113.02


7-5004
 
113.03


7-5005
 
113.04


8-1001
 
70.01


8-1002
 
70.02


8-1003
 
70.03


8-1004
 
70.04


8-1005
 
70.05


8-1006
 
70.06


8-1007
 
70.07


8-1008
 
70.08, Ch. 73 Sched. I


8-2002(a)
 
Ch. 73 Sched. III


8-2002(b)
 
71.01


8-2003
 
71.02


8-2004
 
71.03


8-2005
 
71.04


8-2007
 
71.07, Ch. 74 Sched. I


9-1001
 
130.01


9-1002
 
130.02


9-1003
 
130.03


9-1004
 
130.04


9-1005
 
130.05


9-1006
 
130.06


9-1007
 
130.07


9-1008
 
130.08


9-1009
 
130.09, 130.99


9-1010
 
130.10, 130.99


9-2001
 
131.01


9-2002
 
131.02


9-2003
 
131.03, 131.99


9-2004
 
131.04, 131.99


9-2005
 
131.05, 131.99


9-2006
 
131.06, 131.99


9-2007
 
131.07


Appendix I
 
TSO III


 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section


-
 
1-23-1979
 
36.30 – 36.34, 50.04


-
 
2-4-2003
 
Ch. 73 Sched. II


030717
 
3-7-2017
 
TSO I


04172018-A
 
4-17-2018
 
36.04


2018-101618A
 
10-16-2018
 
TSO I


 
 
 
 
 



 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




-
 
- -
 
Ch. 74 Sched. I


-
 
- -
 
Ch. 73 Sched. III


-
 
4-16-2002
 
94.99


-
 
- -
 
TSO III


-
 
- -
 
TSO III


-
 
- -
 
TSO III


02-20-01
 
- -
 
154.01


-
 
5-7-1946
 
70.07


-
 
7-1-1947
 
111.01


-
 
1-26-1948
 
32.24


-
 
1-26-1948
 
50.02


-
 
1-26-1948
 
70.07


-
 
1-26-1948
 
92.03 – 92.07


-
 
1-26-1948
 
94.07


-
 
1-26-1948
 
95.01


-
 
1-26-1948
 
113.02


-
 
10-5-1948
 
113.03


-
 
9-20-1955
 
31.01 – 31.09


-
 
2-12-1957
 
35.01, 35.08


-
 
2-19-1957
 
35.10, 35.12


-
 
3-11-1958
 
51.01 – 51.03


-
 
9-23-1958
 
90.01 – 90.04


-
 
10-28-1958
 
150.015


-
 
12-28-1959
 
112.01 – 112.05


-
 
6-13-1960
 
153.01 – 153.08


-
 
12-12-1961
 
132.01 – 132.05


-
 
11-25-1963
 
35.13


-
 
4-7-1970
 
50.03


-
 
4-7-1970
 
94.08


-
 
4-21-1970
 
52.01 – 52.11


-
 
7-7-1970
 
33.01


-
 
7-21-1970
 
32.20 – 32.23


-
 
10-20-1970
 
150.001


-
 
9-5-1972
 
70.05


-
 
12-4-1972
 
113.01


-
 
2-19-1974
 
150.001


-
 
1-20-1976
 
30.001


-
 
6-15-1976
 
33.07


-
 
2-7-1978
 
90.15, 90.16, 90.19-90.23, 90.26-90.28, 90.99


-
 
6-6-1978
 
90.15, 90.16, 90.19-90.24, 90.26-90.28, 90.99


-
 
9-5-1978
 
70.06


-
 
8-21-1979
 
90.19, 90.23


-
 
2-16-1982
 
54.40 – 54.48, 54.50, 54.99


-
 
3-2-1982
 
53.01 – 53.13, 53.25-53.27, 53.65, 53.66, 53.99, 54.01 – 54.06, 54.09,
54.10, 54.25, 54.27, 54.60, 54.99


-
 
6-7-1983
 
34.02 – 34.14


-
 
6-21-1983
 
33.04


-
 
10-2-1984
 
53.04


-
 
11-5-1984
 
36.35


-
 
2-19-1985
 
113.04


-
 
1-7-1986
 
54.07


-
 
6-3-1986
 
54.41 – 54.43, 54.47, 54.99


-
 
6-3-1986
 
91.01 – 91.19, 91.99


-
 
7-1-1986
 
152.01 – 152.05, 152.20-152.35, 152.99


-
 
2-10-1987
 
50.05


-
 
3-17-1987
 
154.15 – 154.17, 154.19


-
 
9-6-1988
 
70.08, Ch. 73 Sched. I


01-17-89B
 
2-7-1989
 
30.070, 30.071


05-16-89
 
6-6-1989
 
72.01 – 72.14


-
 
11-2-1989
 
154.18


990202B
 
2-2-1999
 
90.15 – 90.29, 90.99


990405
 
4-5-1999
 
TSO II


081799
 
8-17-1999
 
TSO I


051600A
 
5-16-2000
 
70.09


02-19-02B
 
2-19-2002
 
36.03


-
 
5-21-2002
 
TSO III


-
 
5-21-2002
 
TSO III


02-04-03A
 
2-4-2003
 
70.10


02-04-03B
 
2-4-2003
 
TSO IV


06-03-03
 
6-3-2003
 
53.40 – 53.50


06-17-03C
 
6-17-2003
 
150.001 – 150.004


01-06-04
 
1-6-2004
 
36.02


06-15-04
 
6-15-2004
 
36.03


062105C
 
6-21-2005
 
154.02


12-6-05
 
12-6-2005
 
71.08


071806
 
7-18-2006
 
30.035


09-05-06
 
9-5-2006
 
33.44


11-20-06-A
 
11-20-2006
 
52.12, 52.28, Ch. 52 Appx A


112006B
 
12-5-2006
 
52.25 – 52.28


011607H
 
1-16-2007
 
30.050


01-22-08
 
1-22-2008
 
TSO I


09-16-08
 
9-16-2008
 
53.27


090208
 
11-11-2008
 
TSO I


08-18-09-A
 
8-18-2009
 
51.02, 51.03, 51.04


08-18-09-C
 
8-18-2009
 
90.02, 90.03


-
 
11-17-2009
 
TSO II


03-16-10
 
3-16-2010
 
91.03, 91.18


06-15-10-C
 
6-15-2010
 
30.072


072010
 
7-20-2010
 
TSO V


040511
 
4-5-2011
 
52.12


120611
 
- -2011
 
52.25 – 52.28


122011
 
12-20-2011
 
TSO I


071712
 
7-17-2012
 
11.04


110612A
 
11- -2012
 
154.30, 154.45


110612B
 
11-5-2012
 
54.49


110612C
 
11-5-2012
 
110.19


031913
 
3-5-2013
 
110.01 - 110.19, 110.99


082013
 
8-20-2013
 
110.19


091713
 
9-17-2013
 
154.30


010714
 
1-7-2014
 
TSO IV


012114
 
3-4-2014
 
TSO IV


041514A
 
4-15-2014
 
90.05


4152014-B
 
5-20-2014
 
96.01 – 96.14, 96.99


080514
 
8-5-2014
 
130.11


102114
 
10-21-2014
 
54.02


050515
 
5-19-2015
 
50.06


2016A
 
9-6-2016
 
TSO II


090616A
 
9-6-2016
 
TSO II


112117   
 
11-21-2017
 
TSO I


120417A
 
12-4-2017
 
TSO IV


120417B
 
12-19-2017
 
TSO II


2018-101618B
 
11-6-2018
 
33.44


101618C
 
11-6-2018
 
TSO IV


ARTICLES
GENERAL REGULATIONS
5-1 Nonconformities 20
5-2 Continuance of Nonconforming Uses, Structures, or Characteristics of Use 20
5-3 Repair or Maintenance of Nonconforming Structures 21
5-4 Nonconforming Lots of Record 21
5-5 Temporary Nonconforming Uses 22
5-6 Annexation 22
5-7 Visibility at Intersections 22
5-8 Accessory Buildings 23
5-9 Measurement of Height 23
5-10 Buildings and Lots to Have Access 23
5-11 Structures in Required Yards 24
5-12 Orientation of Required Yards 24
5-13 Special Exceptions 25
5-14 Prohibited Uses 26
ARTICLE6
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
6-lA Purpose of Dividing the Town into Districts
6-1 R-1 Single Family Residential District
6-1.1 Intent
6-1.2 Permitted Principal Uses and Structures
6-1.3 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
6-1.4 Special Exceptions Permissible by the Board of Zoning Appeals
6-1.5 Minimum Area, Yard, Lot Coverage, and Height Requirements
6-2 R-2 Duplex Residential District.
6-2.1 Intent
6-2.2 Permitted Principal Uses and Structures
6-2.3 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
6-2.4 Special Exceptions Permissible by the Board of Zoning Appeals
6-2.5 Minimum Area, Yard, Lot Coverage, and Height Requirements
6-3 R-3 Multi-Family Residential District
6-3.1 Intent l
6-3.2 Permitted Principal Uses and Strucfures
6-3.3 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
6-3.4 Special Exceptions Permissible by the Board of Zoning Appeals
6-3.5 Minimum Area, Yard, Lot Coverage, and Height Requirements
27
30
30
30
30
31
32
33
33
33
33
33
34
35
35
35
35
35
36


8.1 Intent
8.2 Definitions
8-2.1 Advertising Sign
8-2.2 Animated Sign
8-2.3 Banner
8-2.4 Beacon
8-2.5 Building Marker
8-2.6 Building Sign
8-2. 7 Business Sign
8-2.8 Canopy Sign
ARTICLES
REGULATION OF SIGNS
8-2.9 Changeable Copy Sign
8-2.10 Commercial Copy
8-2.11 Commercial Center
8-2.12 Copy Extension
8-2.13 Digital Sign
8-2.14 Director
8-2.15 Directory Sign
8-2.16 Electrical Sign
8-2.17 Freestanding Sign
8-2.18 Flag
8-2.19 Ground or Monument-type Sign
8-2.20 Incidental Sign
8-2.21 Information Sign
8-2.22 Lot
8-2.23 Marquee
8-2.24 Marquee Sign
8-2.25 Mobile Sign
8-2.26 Nonconforming Sign
8-2.27 Off-premises Sign
8-2.28 Pennant
8-2.29 Person
8-2.30 Portable Sign
8-2.31 Principal Building
8-2.32 Product Sign
8-2.33 Projecting Sign
8-2.34 Residential Sign
8-2.35 Roof Sign
8-2.36 Roof Sign, Integral
8-2.37 Setback
8-2.38 Sign
8-2.39 Street
8-2.40 Windblown Sign
8-2.41 Window Sign
102
102
102
103
103
103
103
103
103
103
103
103
104
104
104
104
104
104
104
104
104
104
105
105
105
105
105
105
105
105
105
105
106
1-06
106
106
106
106
106
106
106
106
106


ARTICLE 11
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
11.1 Procedures of the Board of Zoning Appeals
11-1.1 Establishment and Membership
11-1.2 Organization and Structure
11-1.3 Freedom of Information Act
11-2 Powers of the Board of Zoning Appeals
11-2.1 Administrative Review
11-2.2 Variances
11-2.3 Special Exceptions
11-3 Appeals to the Board
11-3.1 Time Limits for Appeals
11-3.2 Procedure for Appeals to Board
11-4 Appeal to Circuit Court
11-5 Exhaustion of Administrative Remedies
12-1
ARTICLE 12
BOARD OF ARCHTECTURAL REVIEW
12-1.1 Membership
12-1.2 Organization and Operation
12-1.3 Freedom of Information Act
12-1.4 Appeals
ARTICLE 13
LEGAL STATUS
13-1 Interpretation and Validity
13-2 Repeal or Previous Zoning Ordinance
13-3 Effective Date
131
131
131
131
132
132
133
134
136
136
136
137
138
139
139
139
139
140
142
142
142
1
BE IT ORDERED AND ORDAINED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF
WINNSBORO, SOUTH CAROLINA IN COUNCIL ASSEMBLED AND BY THE
AUTHORITY THEREOF that:
SECTION 1: The Town of Winnsboro Zoning Ordinance, adopted April
1999, shall be, and hereby is, repealed in its entirety.
ARTICLE 1
ENACTMENT AND JURISDICTION
1-1 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE
Pursuant to authority conferred by the 1994 “South Carolina Local Government
Comprehensive Planning Enabling Act”, S.C. Code Sections 6-29-310 through 6-29-
1200, this ordinance shall, where applicable, provide for adequate light, air and open
space, prevent land overcrowding, avoid undue concentration of population and lessen
street congestion, help create a convenient, attractive and harmonious community, protect
and preserve scenic historic or ecologically sensitive areas, regulate population density
and distribution, regulate building, structure and land uses, help provide adequate
transportation, police and fire protection, water, sewage, schools, recreational facilities,
affordable housing, and disaster evacuation, secure safety from fire, flood, and other
dangers, further the public welfare in any other way as in accordance with the Town of
Winnsboro Comprehensive Plan, the Town Council does ordain and enact into law the
following regulations: (1) authority and jurisdiction; (2) defining certain terms used
herein; (3) dividing the Town of Winnsboro into districts and establishing the boundaries
thereof; (4) regulating and restricting the height, number of stories and size of buildings
and other structures, and regulating and restricting the size of yards, courts, and other
open spaces; (5) regulating and restricting the percentage of lot area that may be occupied
and regulating and restricting the density of population; (6) regulating and restricting the
location and use of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence and other
purposes; (7) supplementary regulations for parking, group developments, landscaping,
and other districts; (8) regulations of signs; (9) providing for the method of
administration and amendment; (10) providing penalties for violations of these
regulations; (11) defining powers and duties of the Board of Zoning Appeals with respect
2
to these regulations; (12) repealing the previous zoning ordinance; and for other
purposes.
1-2 JURISDICTION
The regulations set forth herein shall apply to all land and improvements thereon within
The Town Limits of the Town of Winnsboro, South Carolina, areas annexed thereto, and
such adjacent unincorporated areas of Fairfield County as the Town may assume
planning and zoning responsibilities for under right of extraterritoriality.
1-3 INTERPRETATION AND VALIDITY
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance or application of a provision under this
Ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration
shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof, other than the
part of application so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
1-4 REPEAL OF PREVIOUS ZONING ORDINANCE
The Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Winnsboro, South Carolina adopted April 1999
together with all subsequent amendments thereto, is hereby repealed as of the effective
date of this Ordinance.
3
1-5 Effective Date
4
ARTICLE 2
DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS
OF WORDS AND PHRASES USED IN THIS
ORDINANCE
2-1 INTERPRETATION OF CERTAIN WORDS AND PHRASES
2-1.1 Words to have customary meanings; the words and phrases used in this
Ordinance shall have their customary meanings, or as defined in a
standard dictionary, except for the specific words and phrases defined as
below.
2-1.2 Tense: The present tense includes the future tense.
2-1.3 Number: The singular number includes the plural number and the plural
number includes the singular number.
2-1.4 Person: The word “person” includes a firm, association, partnership,
trust, company, corporation, or any other entity usually defined in legal
usage as a person.
2-1.5 Shall and May: The word “shall” is mandatory; the word “may” is
permissive.
2-1.6 Used or Occupied: The words “used” or “occupied” include the words
“intended, designed or arranged” includes any part thereof.
2-1.7 Lot: The word “lot” includes the words “plat” or “parcel”.
2-1.8 Structure: The word “structure” includes the word “building” and the
words “buildings” or “structure” includes any part thereof.
2-1.9 Interpretation of types of districts or zones: Types of districts or zones,
when used as descriptive term for purposes of identifying certain
circumstances in which particular regulations are applied (as for example
“…when such parking lot is contiguous to a residential district) are
defined as follows:
(1) Residential districts include:
a. R-1 Single Family Residential District
b. R-2 Duplex Residential District
c. R-3 Multi-Family Residential District
d. R-O Residential Office District
e. PD-R Planned Development-Residential
(2) Commercial districts include:
5
a. C-1 Principal Commercial District
b. C-2 General Commercial District
c. PD-C Planned Development—Commercial
d. PD-M Planned Development—Mixed
(3) Industrial districts include:
a. I-1 General Industrial District
2-1.10 Interpretation of “contiguous” as applied to lots or districts: The word
“contiguous” as applied to lots or districts shall be interpreted as meaning
“sharing a common boundary of ten or more feet in length”.
2-1.11 Interpretation of “on the premises of”: The phrase “on the premises of”, as
applied to accessory uses or structures shall be interpreted to mean “on the
same lot or on a contiguous lot in the same ownership”.
2-1.12 Map or Zoning Map: The words “Map” of “Zoning Map” means the
“Official Zoning Map of the Town of Winnsboro”.
2-2 DEFINITIONS
2-2.1 Accessory: As applied to a use or structure, means customarily incidental
and subordinate to the principal use or structure, and on the same premises
of such use or structure.
2-2.2 Adult Day Care: A facility that provides supervision, therapy, and social
development activities for impaired adults, licensed according to
regulations by DHEC.
2-2.3 Alley: A minor way twenty (20) feet or less in width which has been
dedicated or deeded for public use which is used or intended for use
primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties
otherwise abutting a street.
2-2.4 Alteration of Buildings: Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as load bearing walls, beams, columns, or girders, except
for its safety; any addition to a building; any change in use from that of
one district classification to another; or of building from one location to
another.
2-2.5 Assisted Living Facility: A facility that provides a special combination of
housing, supportive services, personalized assistance and health care
designed to respond to the individual needs of those persons who need
help in activities of daily living.
6
2-2.6 Bed and Breakfast Inn: A single dwelling unit other than a Hotel or
Motel, in which three or more persons who are not members of the
owner’s or operator’s family are housed or lodged in rooms used or
intended to be used for living or sleeping for compensation. One or more
meals may be furnished by the management in a kitchen/dining room
environment. Any dwelling in which such accommodations are offered in
10 or more rooms shall be considered a hotel or motel. The major
difference between a Bed and Breakfast operation and a Rooming and
Boarding House establishment is that while both house transient lodgers,
the Bed and Breakfast lodger is seldom a permanent resident even though
in neither case does this ordinance restrict the operation to only transient
customers.
2-2.7 Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA): The Town of Winnsboro Board of
Zoning Appeals.
2-2.8 Building: Any structure, except a mobile home, having a roof supported
by columns or walls and which is designed for shelter, support, or
enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind.
2-2.9 Building, Accessory: A detached building subordinate to the main
building on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to that of
the main or principal building and located on the same lot therewith. Uses
customarily accessory to dwellings are:
(a) Private garage not to exceed the following storage capacities:
One or two family dwelling ---- 4 automobiles
Multiple-family dwelling ---- 2 automobiles per dwelling unit
Group dwelling ---- 1.5 automobiles per sleeping room
(b) Shed or tool room for the storage of equipment used in grounds or
building maintenance.
(c) Private kennel for no more than three (3) dogs or three (3) cats, or any
combination thereof four (4) months of age or older.
(d) Private swimming pool and bath house or cabana.
(e) Structures designed and used for purposes of shelter in the event of
man-made or natural catastrophes.
(f) Noncommercial flower, ornamental shrub or vegetable garden,
greenhouse or smokehouse not over twelve (12) feet in height.
7
2-2.10 Building, Height of: The vertical distance from the mean elevation of the
finished grade adjoining all exterior walls of the building to the highest
part of the coping of a flat room, or to the highest point of a gable, pitch or
hip roof. (See Section 5-9 for exclusions from height limits)
2-2.11 Building, Principal: A building or buildings in which is conducted the
principal use of the lot on which said building is located.
2-2.12 Building Site: The land area occupied or to be occupied by a building and
its accessory buildings and including such open spaces, yards, minimum
area off-street parking facilities, as are required by this Ordinance.
2-2.13 Centerline of Streets: A line surveyed and monumented as such, or if a
centerline has not been surveyed and monumented, it shall be that line
running midway between the outside lines of right-of-way of the street.
2-2.14 Child Daycare Facility: Any agency, institution, center, home, nursery,
nursery school, kindergarten, play school, or other place, however styled
and whether operated under public auspices, as a private business, or by an
established religious denomination, in which are received for temporary
custodial care apart from their parents, part of the day or all of the day or
night, and upon any number of successive days, one or more children not
related to the person providing such temporary custodial care.
2-2.15 Church: A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where
persons regularly assemble for religious worship, and which building,
together with its accessory buildings and uses, is maintained and
controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship.
2-2.16 Civic Organization: See “Club, lodge…”
2-2.17 Clinic, Health: A building in which one or more physician, dentists, and
allied professional assistants are engaged in carrying on their profession.
The clinic may include a dental or medical laboratory, but it shall not
include inpatient care or operating rooms for major surgery.
2-2.18 Club, Lodge, Civic or Fraternal Organizations: An incorporated or
unincorporated association for civic, social, cultural, religious, literary,
political, recreational, or like activities, but not including shooting clubs,
operated for the benefit of its members and not open to the general public.
2-2.19 Completely Enclosed Structure: A building enclosed by a permanent
roof and by solid exterior walls pierced only by windows and customary
entrance and exit doors.
2-2.20 Coverage: That percentage of the lot area covered by the building area.
8
2-2.21 District: One of any number of continuous and contiguous geographic
areas within which the provisions and regulations of this Ordinance apply
uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land.
2-2.22 Drinking Establishment: Any establishment engaged in the retail sale of
drinks, such as beer, ale, wine, liquor or other alcoholic beverages for
consumption on premises, and where the sale of food amounts to less than
fifty (50) percent of the total receipts for such establishment.
2-2.23 Drive-in Eating Establishment: Any dining establishment which by its
structural design, site characteristics, or manner of food service
encourages consumption of food and/or beverages in automobiles on the
premises or upon public street adjacent thereto.
2-2.24 Dwelling, Dwelling Unit, or Unit: One room or rooms connected
together constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment
physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be
in the same structure, and containing independent cooking and sleeping
facilities.
2-2.25 Dwelling, Multiple Family: A building containing three or more dwelling
units.
2-2.26 Dwelling, Single Family: A building containing no more nor no less than
one dwelling unit, not physically attached to any other principal structure,
and specifically excluding mobile homes.
2-2.27 Dwelling, Duplex: A building containing no more nor no less than two
dwelling units, not physically attached to any other principal structure, and
specifically excluding mobile homes.
2-2.28 Family: One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided
that unless all members are related by blood or marriage, no such unit
shall contain over four persons, but further provided that no more than
three domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed within
the single dwelling unit without being counted as family or families.
2-2.29 Fraternal Organization, Fraternity: See “Club, Lodge…”
2-2.30 Garage Sale: See “Yard Sale, Garage Sale…”
2-2.31 Grandfathered: To allow certain situations to exist or continue based on
an older rule even though a new rule is now in place. The continued use
of property as it was when restrictions or zoning ordinances were adopted.
9
2-2.32 Gross Floor Area: The total horizontal area of all floors of a building
including interior balconies and mezzanines, measured from the exterior
faces of the exterior walls of a building including the walls of roofed
porches having more than one wall. The gross floor area of a building
shall include the floor area of accessory buildings on the same building
site measured in the same way.
2-2.33 Group Commercial or Industrial Development: A single lot containing
more than one building used for commercial or industrial purposes and all
the structures thereon.
Group development shall include single buildings containing more than
one commercial or industrial use, structure or business. A single building
of 20,000 square feet shall be considered a group development and must
be reviewed for off-street parking requirements (design, ingress, egress,
etc.).
2-2.34 Group Housing Development: A single lot of record upon which is
erected more than one building containing dwelling units, and all the
structures thereon; or a single lot upon which is erected a single structure
designed to contain more than four dwelling units on the first floor thereof
or designed to contain more than eight dwelling units throughout.
2-2.35 Home Occupation: An occupation, profession, or trade customarily, and
commonly, carried out by an occupant in a dwelling unit as a secondary
use which is clearly incidental and subordinate to the residential character
of the dwelling unit, and which, for purposes of this Ordinance, shall in all
cases comply with the provisions of Section 7-7.
2-2.36 Hospital: An institution providing health services, primarily for
inpatients, and medical and surgical care of the sick or injured, which may
include as an integral part of the institution such related facilities as
laboratories, outpatient department, training facilities, central service
facilities, and staff offices.
2-2.37 Hotel: A residential structure containing ten or more rental lodgings
available to the public for accommodations of transient guests in which
meals may or may not be provided, but in which no provision is made for
cooking in any rental lodging room or suit. Also refers to “Motel”.
2-2.38 Junk, Salvage, Scrap, or Wrecking Yards: Any use involving storage,
abandonment or processing of inoperable, unused, dismantled, or wrecked
metal, waste paper, rags, food processing wastes, construction wastes,
industrial wastes, secondhand building materials or other scrap, salvage,
waste, or junk material. A junked vehicle is hereby defined as any vehicle
which does not have the current year’s state license and registration. Such
10
uses shall be considered junk yards whether or not all or part of such
operations are conducted inside a building or in conjunction with, in
addition to, or accessory to, other uses of the premises.
2-2.39 Lot: An area of land clearly defined by plat or by metes and bounds
description.
2-2.40 Lot of Record: A lot defined by plat or described by metes and bounds
which has been duly recorded with the Clerk of Court of the County of
Fairfield, South Carolina.
2-2.41 Lot Lines: The lines bounding a lot.
2-2.42 Lot Measurements:
(a) Depth of a Lot: The distance between the mid-points of straight lines
connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the
rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.
(b) Width of a Lot: The distance between straight lines connecting front
and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the
required front yard, provided however, that width between side lot
lines at their foremost points (where they intersect with the street line)
shall not be less than 80% of the required lot width; in the case of lots
fronting on a cul-de-sac, the width between side lot lines at their
foremost points shall not be less than 20 feet.
(c) Lot frontage: The front of an interior lot shall be constructed to be the
portion nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard
requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent
to streets shall be considered frontage and yards shall be provided
upon that basis. The phrase “street frontage” shall be interpreted to
have the same meaning as the phrase “lot frontage”.
2-2.43 Lot Types: The following describes the terminology used in this chapter
with reference to corner lots:
(a) Corner Lot: The lot located at the intersection of two or more streets.
For the purposes of this chapter, a lot abutting upon a curved street or
streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the
foremost point of the side lot lines to the foremost point of the lot (or
an extension of the lot where it has been rounded by a street radius)
meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
(b) Interior Lot: A lot other than a corner lot, with only one frontage on a
street other than an alley.
11
(c) Through Lot: A lot other than a corner lot, with frontage on more
than one street other than an alley.
2-2.44 Major Recreational Equipment: Major Recreational Equipment is
defined as including boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, pickup campers
or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive/vehicles), motorized
dwellings, tent trailers and the like, and cases or boxes used for
transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment
or not.
2-2.45 Manufactured Home: Factory built, single-family structures that meet
the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act
(42 U.S.C. Sec. 5401) of 1974, and the acceptable similarity standards of
this ordinance.
2-2.46 Mobile Home: A movable or portable dwelling, constructed to be towed
on its own chassis and designed without a permanent foundation for longterm
occupancy, which includes a double wide or expandable mobile
home as defined below, as well as a portable dwelling composed of a
single unit. The term “mobile home” as used in this Ordinance shall not
include prefabricated, manufactured, modular or unitized dwellings placed
on permanent foundations, nor shall it refer to travel trailers, campers or
similar units designed for recreation or other short term uses. A Mobile
Home may or may not be permanently attached to the ground, and its
transport features may or may not be removed. Mobile Home activity
shall be permitted only in a Mobile Home Park. A Mobile Home Park
must meet the requirements of the Mobile Home Park regulations in
Section 7-6.
(a) Double-wide Mobile Home: A double-wide mobile home is a mobile
home with two or more units separately towable but designed to be
joined into one integral unit at the site.
(b) Expandable Mobile Home: An expandable mobile home is a mobile
home with one or more sections that fold, collapse or telescope into
the principal unit when being transported and which can be expanded
at the site to provide additional living area.
2-2.47 Mobile Home Park: A lot used, designed, or intended to be used for the
purposes of supplying parking space for two (2) or more mobile homes for
non-transient occupation, and includes any buildings, structures, vehicles,
or enclosures used or intended to be used as part of such mobile home
park. Sales or storage lots for unoccupied mobile homes are not
considered to be mobile home parks.
2-2.48 Modular Building Unit: A building including the necessary electrical,
plumbing, heating, ventilating, and other service systems, manufactured
12
off-site and transported to the point of use for installation or erection, with
or without other specified components, as a finished building and not
designed for ready removal to another site. This term is not to be limited
to residential buildings. The definition of modular building unit does not
include mobile or manufactured homes.
2-2.49 Modular Home: A structure intended for residential use and
manufactured off-site in accord with the Southern Building Code and
BOCA Basic Building Code, as defined within the South Carolina
Modular Buildings Construction Act of 1976. Modular residential
construction shall be included in the Residential Detached or Residential
Attached activity types, as appropriate.
2-2.50 Motel: Same as “hotel” (see hotel definition).
2-2.51 Nonconforming: A term applied to lots, structures, uses of land or
structures, and characteristics of use of land or structures which were
lawful before the passage or amendment of this Ordinance, but which are
prohibited by this Ordinance or which are not in compliance with the
requirements of this Ordinance.
2-2.52 Park: An area or facility intended to be used for recreation, exercise,
sports, or similar activities, or an area intended to enhance the enjoyment
of natural features or natural beauty, but specifically excluding
commercially operated amusement parks.
2-2.53 Parking Space, Off-Street: An area adequate for parking an automobile
with room for opening doors on both sides, which is not located in the
right-of-way of any street.
2-2.54 Parking Space, Loading Space: A space at least ten (10) feet in width
and twenty-five (25) feet in length, with fourteen (14) feet minimum
vertical clearance, accessible from a street or alley.
2-2.55 Permitted Structure: A structure meeting all of the requirements
established by this Ordinance for the district in which the structure is
located.
2-2.56 Planning Commission: Town of Winnsboro Planning Commission.
2-2.57 Principal Structure: Same as principal building (see building, principal
definition).
2-2.58 Principal Use: The significant or primary activity carried out within a
structure or upon land (such as retail sales within a store or occupancy of a
dwelling unit as a residence) as contrasted to accessory uses which are
13
incidental or subordinate to primary uses (such as sale of soft drinks at an
automobile service station). Certain uses may be either principal or
accessory depending upon their relationship with other uses (as for
example a newsstand as an accessory use within a hotel lobby or as a
principal use within a separate structure).
2-2.59 Residence: Same as dwelling (see dwelling definition).
2-2.60 Restaurant: Any eating or drinking establishment where foods and
beverages are served and consumed inside the enclosed structure only.
This does not include drive-in restaurants (see drive-in restaurant
definition).
2-2.61 Rooming and Boarding House: Any dwelling, other than a hotel or
motel, in which three or more persons who are not members of the
owner’s or operator’s family are housed or lodged in rooms used or
intended to be used for living and sleeping but not for cooking or eating
purposes, for compensation, with or without meals being provided. Any
dwelling in which such accommodations are offered in ten or more rooms
shall be considered a hotel or motel.
2-2.62 Salvage Yard: Same as junk yard (see junk yard definition).
2-2.63 Scrap Yard: Same as junk yard (see junk yard definition).
2-2.64 Setback Line: The setback line is the same as the depth or width of any
required yard.
2-2.65 Sidewalk Café: The business of providing food and beverage services
with chairs, tables, and other vestiges of restaurant service on sidewalks
and plazas adjacent to, and operated exclusively by, a business licensed to
operate as an eating establishment where food and/or other refreshments
are served.
2-2.66 Sign: Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not
on the premises on which the device is located, with certain exceptions as
enumerated in Article 8.
2-2.67 Signs, Other Terms Related Thereto: Additional terms related to signs
and the regulations thereof are defined in Section 8, including:
Display Surface Area
Marque
Sign Copy
Freestanding Sign
Mobile Sign
Portable Sign
14
Projecting Sign
Wall Sign
Digital Sign
Electrical Sign
2-2.68 Sorority: See “Clubs, lodges…”
2-2.69 Special Exceptions: A use that would not be appropriate generally or
without restriction throughout the zoning district but which if controlled as
to number, area, location, or relation to surrounding uses, would promote
the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, convenience,
appearance, prosperity, or general welfare. Such uses may be permitted in
such zoning districts as special exceptions, if specific provision for such
special exceptions is made in this Zoning Ordinance.
2-2.70 Street: A public thoroughfare designed to provide the principal means of
access to abutting property, or designed to serve as a roadway for
vehicular travel, or both, but excluding alleys.
2-2.71 Street Line: The right-of-way line of a street.
2-2.72 Structural Alterations: Any change in the supporting members of a
structure such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or
any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
2-2.73 Structure: Anything, excluding paving, constructed or erected, the use of
which requires location on the ground, or attachment to something having
location on the ground including for the purposes of this Ordinance
buildings, mobile homes, walls, screened enclosures, fences, advertising
signs, billboards, poster panels, swimming pools, travel trailers, and
exterior mechanical equipment such as air conditioning compressors, fans,
and pumps, but excluding from definitions as structures minor landscaping
features such as ornamental pools, planting boxes, bird baths, walkways,
driveways, recreational equipment, flagpoles, mailboxes, and utility
poles/lines/transformer.
2-2.74 Tattoo Parlor/Body Piercing Studio: An establishment whose principle
business activity, either in terms of operation or as held out to the public is
the practice of one or more of the following: (1) placing of designs, letters,
figures, symbols, or other marks upon or under the skin of any person,
using ink or other substances that result in the permanent coloration of the
skin by means of the use of needles or other instruments designed to
contact or puncture the skin; (2) creation of any opening in the body of a
person for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration.
2-2.75 Town Manager: The Manager for the Town of Winnsboro, or other
person duly designated to act in his behalf.
15
2-2.76 Travel Trailer or Camping Vehicle: A vehicular, portable structure built
on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel or
recreation use, not exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in length and having a
body width not exceeding eight (8) feet.
2-2.77 Travel Trailer Park: Any site, tract of land, or lot upon which not less
than two overnight sites and/or overnight camping trailers are situated and
occupied for temporary shelter, dwelling, recreation or vacation uses
regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such services.
2-2.78 Unit: same as “Dwelling Unit”.
2-2.79 Wrecking Yard: same as “Junk Yard”.
2-2.80 Yard: A required open space unoccupied and unobstructed by any
structure or portion thereof from a height of 30 inches above the finished
grade level of the ground. For purposes of interpretation and regulation,
certain exceptions are set forth in Section 5-11.
2-2.81 Yard, Front: A yard extending between side lot lines across the front of a
lot, and measured at right angles to a straight line joining the foremost
points of the side lot lines. The foremost point of the side lot line, in case
of rounded property corners at street intersections, shall be assumed to be
the point at which the side and front lot lines would have met without such
rounding. Front and rear lines of required front yard shall be parallel.
2-2.82 Yard, Rear: A yard extending across the rear of the lot between the inner
side yard lines, measured at right angles to a straight line joining the
rearmost points of the side lot lines. The forward rear yard line of a
required rear yard shall be parallel to the straight line so established. In
the case of corner lots or through lots, there will be no rear yard.
2-2.83 Yard, Side: A yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard
to the rear lot line, measured at right angles to a straight line joining the
ends of the front and rear lot lines on the same side of the lot. The inner
side yard line of a required side yard shall be parallel to the straight line so
established. In the case of through lots, side yards shall extend from the
rear lines of the required front yards remaining after full and half-depth
front yards have been established shall be considered to be side yards.
2-2.84 Yard Sale, Garage Sale, Rummage Sale: The retailing of merchandise
from the yard or garage or principal dwelling of a residence.
2-2.85 Zone: same as “District”.
16
ARTICLE 3
ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
3-1 DISTRICT BOUNDRIES ESTABLISHED BY ZONING MAP
The boundaries of the zoning districts established by Article 6 of this Ordinance are
hereby established on a map entitled “Zoning Map of the Town of Winnsboro, S.C.”,
which map is declared to be a part of this Ordinance.
3-2 MAINTENANCE OF OFFICIAL COPY OF ZONING MAP
At least one official copy of the Zoning Map shall be maintained in the Office of the
Zoning Administrator, upon which shall be recorded, after the passage thereof, every
amendment to this Ordinance which effects a change in any zoning district boundary.
Such official copy of the Zoning Map shall be attested by the Town Clerk, and shall be
available at all times for inspection by the general public.
3-3 ZONING MAPS OTHER THAN OFFICIAL COPY
The Zoning Administrator may distribute copies of the Zoning Map to the general public
for reference purposes. However, the official copy of the Zoning Map maintained in the
Office of the Zoning Administrator plus official records of the Town Clerk regarding
actions of the Town Council to amend district boundaries shall constitute the only official
description of the location of zoning district boundaries, and persons having recourse to
this Ordinance for any purpose are hereby so notified.
3-4 INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDRIES
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zoning district, the following general
rules of interpretation shall apply. It is the duty of the Zoning Administrator to interpret
the location of zoning district boundaries. An appeal from an interpretation or finding of
the Zoning Administrator may be taken to the Board of Zoning Appeals as specified in
Article 11-2.1.
3-4.1 Where Boundaries Approximately Follow Streets, Highways or Alleys:
District boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
3-4.2 Where Boundaries Approximately Follow Platted Lot Lines: District
boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be
construed as following such lot lines.
17
3-4.3 Where Boundaries Approximately Follow Town Limits: District
boundaries indicated as approximately following town limits shall be
construed as following such town limits.
3-4.4 Where Boundaries Follow Railroad Lines: District boundaries indicated as
following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main
tracks.
3-4.5 Where Boundaries Follow Stream Beds or Other Bodies of Water: District
boundaries indicated as following centerlines of stream beds or other
bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
3-4.6 Where Boundaries Approximately Parallel or are Extensions of Above
Features: District boundaries indicated as approximately parallel to or
extensions of features indicated in subsections above shall be so construed
and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the official copy of the
Zoning Map. Distances not specifically indicated on the official copy of
the Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
18
ARTICLE 4
APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS
4-1 REGULATIONS REGARDED AS MINIMUM
Within each district, the regulations set forth by this Ordinance shall apply uniformly to
each class or kind of structure or land.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be
minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals or
general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this Ordinance are at variance with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most
restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards shall govern. Unless deed restrictions,
covenants, or other contracts directly involve the Town as a party in interest, the Town
shall have no administrative responsibility for enforcing such deed restrictions or
covenants.
4-2 ZONING AFFECTS ALL LANDS, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building,
structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or
structurally altered unless in conformity to the regulations specified in this Ordinance for
the district in which it is located.
4-3 ZONING AFFECTS HEIGHT OF BUILDING AND/OR STRUCTURES,
POPULATION DENSITY, LOT COVERAGE, YARDS AND OPEN SPACES
No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered,
a. to exceed the height;
b. to accommodate or house a greater number of families;
c. to occupy a greater percentage of lot area;
d. to leave narrower or smaller front yards, rear yards, side yards, or other open spaces
than herein required, or in any manner contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance.
4-4 YARD OR OPEN SPACE, OFF-STREET PARKING OR LOADING SPACE
REQUIREMENTS FOR ONE BUILDING NOT TO BE INCLUDED AS SUCH
REQUIREMENTS FOR ANY OTHER BUILDING
No part of a yard, or other open space or off-street parking or loading space required
about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this
Ordinance shall be included as a part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or
loading space similarly required of any other building or use except as noted in Section 7-
1.4 (4).
19
4-5 REDUCTION OF LOT AREA PROHIBITED
No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of these regulations shall be reduced in
dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots
created after the effective date of these regulations shall meet at least the minimum
requirements established by these regulations.
20
ARTICLE 5
GENERAL REGULATIONS
5-1 NONCONFORMITIES
Within the districts established by this Ordinance, or by amendments which may later be
adopted, there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of uses
which were lawful before this Ordinance was passed or amended, but which would be
prohibited or regulated and restricted under the terms of this Ordinance or future
amendment. It is the intent of this Ordinance to permit these nonconformities to continue
until they are removed, except as noted in Section 5-2, but not to encourage their
survival. Nonconformities are declared by this Ordinance to be incompatible with
permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this Ordinance that
nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, reconstructed to
continue nonconformity after major damage, or used as grounds for adding other
structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
5-2 CONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES, OR
CHARACTERISTICS OF USE
5-2.1 Change to Another Nonconforming Use: A nonconforming use, structure,
or characteristic of use shall not be changed to any other nonconforming
use, structure, or characteristics of use unless the Board of Zoning Appeals
finds that the new use, structure, or characteristic of use is more in
character with the uses permitted in the district, in which case the Board of
Zoning Appeals may permit such change as a special exception. In
permitting such change, the Board of Zoning Appeals may require
appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the purpose of this
Ordinance.
5-2.2 Conversion of Use on Nonconforming Lots: The minimum yard
requirements of this Ordinance shall not be construed as prohibiting the
conversion of an existing building which does not meet the minimum yard
requirements to another permitted use, so long as no further encroachment
is made into the existing yards.
5-2.3 Reconstruction: A nonconforming structure shall not be demolished and
rebuilt as a nonconforming structure.
5-2.4 Extension or Enlargement: A nonconforming use, structure, or
characteristic of use shall not be extended, enlarged, or intensified except
in conformity with this Ordinance. A nonconforming use may be
extended throughout any parts of a building which were primarily
designed for such use at the time of the adoption or amendment of this
Ordinance. The number of dwelling units in a nonconforming dwelling
21
use shall not be increased over or exceed the number of dwelling units
existing in the nonconforming use on the effective date of this Ordinance.
No nonconforming use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such
a building.
5-2.5 Reestablishment: A nonconforming use, or characteristic of use, shall not
be reestablished after vacancy, abandonment, or discontinuance for any
period of twelve (12) consecutive months, except where Section 5-2.6
applies.
5-2.6 Reconstruction After Damage: A nonconforming structure shall not be
rebuilt, altered, or repaired except to conform with this Ordinance after
sustaining damage exceeding fifty (50) percent of the replacement cost of
the structure at the time of damage, provided that any permitted
reconstruction shall be complete within twelve (12) months from the time
of damage.
5-2.7 Nonconforming Uses of Open Land: A nonconforming use not enclosed in
a building or structure, or one in which the use of the land is a use
exercised principally out of doors and outside of a building or structure,
shall after three years from the date of notification, become a prohibited
and unlawful use and shall be discontinued.
5-3 REPAIR OR MAINTENANCE OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconformity, work may be done on
ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-load bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or
plumbing provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of
passage or amendment of this Ordinance shall not be increased. Nothing in this
Ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of
any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting
the public safety, upon order of such official.
5-4 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD
5-4.1 Single Lots: Notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of
this Ordinance, a single-family dwelling or single-family mobile home and
customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record
at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, so long
as a single-family detached dwelling or single-family mobile home is a
permitted use in that district. Such lot must be in separate ownership and
not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This
provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements
for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district,
provided that yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area,
width, or both, shall conform to the regulations for the district for which
such lot is located.
22
5-4.2 Adjoining Lots: If two or more adjoining lots with continuous lot frontage
are in single ownership at any time after the adoption or amendment of
this Ordinance and such lots individually are too small to meet the yard,
width, or area requirements of the district in which they are located, such
groups of lots shall be considered as a single lot or several lots of
minimum permitted size and the lot or lots in one ownership shall be
subject to the requirements of this Ordinance.
5-5 TEMPORARY NONCONFORMING USES
A temporary use permit may be issued by the Zoning Administrator for an appropriate
period of time not to exceed twelve (12) month increments for nonconforming buildings,
structures or uses incidental to building construction or land development or deemed to
be generally beneficial, provided that the owner of such temporary nonconforming use
agrees to remove the temporary nonconforming use upon expiration of the permit.
5-6 ANNEXATION
5-6.1 Designation of Zoning Classification: When annexation is accomplished,
by any lawful method, the annexed area shall be classified R-1, with such
zoning district classification effective upon the effective date of the
annexation.
5-6.2 Amendment Proceedings to be Initiated: Immediately after the effective
date of such annexation the Zoning Administrator shall initiate zoning
amendment proceedings as specified by Article 9 for purposes of
establishing or confirming appropriate zoning classifications for such
annexed area, and the public hearing therefore shall be scheduled to be
held not more than sixty (60) days after the effective date of annexation,
further provided that the proposal to be brought before such hearing may
either be to retain all such annexed area in the classification or
classifications originally designated to be effective upon annexation or to
change all or part of such annexed area to classifications other than those
originally designated.
5-7 VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS
5-7.1 Sight Clearance to be Maintained: At each corner of each street
intersection, except within those areas designated C-1 Principal
Commercial District, a sight area shall be maintained. Within the sight
area no fence, wall, sign, or other structure, no slope or embankment, no
parked vehicle, no hedge, foliage or other planting, and no other object or
structure shall be placed, erected or maintained which will obstruct
visibility within the sight area.
23
5-7.2 Dimensions of Sight Areas: The horizontal dimensions of sight areas are
defined as triangular areas formed by the intersecting street lines and a
straight line joining said street lines at points which are fifteen (15) feet
distant from the point of intersection of the street lines in commercial and
industrial districts and twenty-five (25) feet distant from the point of
intersection of the street lines in residential districts, measured along the
street lines. Such sight areas shall be established regardless of the angle of
intersection of the street lines. The vertical dimensions of sight areas are
defined as that vertical space between the heights of two and one-half (2
1/2) feet and ten (10) feet in elevation above the nearest edge of street
pavement of a paved street or above the nearest edge of riding surface of
an unpaved street.
5-8 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS
5-8.1 Accessory Building in Any Required Yard: No accessory building shall be
erected in any required yard except as herein provided, and no separate
accessory buildings shall be erected within five (5) feet of any principal
building.
5-8.2 Construction of and Occupancy of Accessory Buildings: Construction of
principal building and accessory buildings may be concurrent but no
accessory building shall be constructed or occupied prior to construction
or occupancy of the principal building.
5-8.3 Residential Use of Accessory Buildings: No accessory building may be
used for residential purposes.
5-9 MEASUREMENT OF HEIGHT
For purposes of this Ordinance, the height of a building shall be measured from the mean
finished ground elevation at the base of the structure to the highest point of the roof of the
structure, whereas the main finished ground elevation does not exceed the mean elevation
of the adjacent roadway measured between the property lines along the centerline of the
roadway, and provided that spires, belfries, cupolas, chimneys, antennas, water tanks,
ventilators, elevator housings, mechanical equipment or other such structures placed
above roof level and not intended for human occupancy shall not be subject to height
limitations.
5-10 BUILDINGS AND LOTS TO HAVE ACCESS
Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be on a lot adjacent to a
public street, or on a lot adjacent to a private street which meets all standards of the Land
Development Regulations of the Town of Winnsboro. However, no private street or
24
driveway shall be provided to commercial or industrial districts through any residential
district established by this Ordinance.
5-11 STRUCTURES IN REQUIRED YARDS
The general definition of “yards” as set forth in Section 2-2 states that yards are
unoccupied and unobstructed by a structure or portion of a structure from 30 inches
above the finished grade level of the ground upward. However, the general definition
shall be construed subject to the following exceptions and interpretations:
5-11.1 Those objects which are excluded from the definition of a “structure”
under Section 2-2 above shall not be subject to regulation under
interpretation of the definition of “yard”.
5-11.2 Steps and open porches or patios without roofs shall be allowed in any
required yard.
5-11.3 Screening walls and fences over 30 inches in height that substantially
impede vision may be permitted in a required yard as a special exception,
however, screening walls and fences not over eight (8) feet in height are
permitted outright in side and rear yards, provided no screening wall or
fence in excess of six (6) feet is permitted within six (6) feet of a
residential structure on adjacent property.
5-11.4 Eaves, cornices, gutters, and other minor architectural features projecting
less than 24 inches from the main portion of a building shall be allowed to
project into any yard. Open fire escapes may extend into any required
yard not more than three and one-half (3.5) feet.
5-11.5 Retaining walls in excess of 30 inches in height may be permitted as a
special exception in any yard.
5-11.6 Signs are permitted to encroach upon required yards in certain
circumstances as set forth in Article 8 “Regulation of Signs”.
5-11.7 Screening between commercial or industrial uses and lots zoned
residentially, as required by Section 7-16 of this Ordinance.
5-12 ORIENTATION OF REQUIRED YARDS
In interpretation of requirements related to establishment of required yards, the Zoning
Administrator shall apply the following interpretation to the orientation of such yards:
5-12.1 Through Lots: In the case of through lots, unless the prevailing front yard
pattern on adjoining lots indicates otherwise, front yards shall be provided
25
on all frontages. Where one of the front yards that would normally be
required on a through lot is not in keeping with the prevailing yard pattern,
the Zoning Administrator may waive the requirement for the normal front
yard and substitute therefore a special yard requirement which shall not
exceed the average of the yards existing on adjacent lots.
5-12.2 Corner Lots with Two Frontages: In the case of corner lots with two
frontages, a front yard of the required depth shall be provided on the
frontage of the street having the higher traffic volumes. Where the traffic
volumes on both streets are approximately equal, the required depth shall
be provided on the street frontage having the minimum lot width. Where
traffic volumes on both streets are approximately equal and the street
frontages are equal, the required depth shall be provided in keeping with
the prevailing yard pattern on adjoining lots. In all cases, a second front
yard of half the depth required generally for front yards in the district shall
be provided on the other frontage.
5-12.3 Corner Lots with More Than Two Frontages: In the case of corner lots
with more than two frontages, the Zoning Administrator shall determine
the front yard requirements, subject to the following limitations: (1) at
least one front yard shall be provided having full depth required generally
in the district; (2) no other front yard on such lot shall have less than half
the full depth required generally.
5-12.4 Appropriateness of Orientation: Notwithstanding the above, the Zoning
Administrator may determine that the most appropriate orientation for any
required yard is different from the orientation as set forth above in such
instance that it appears that such different orientation will further the
intent of this Ordinance. When a structure is to be built which will contain
more than one dwelling unit, the orientation of required yards shall be
based upon both the orientation of the lot and the orientation of the
structure. The Zoning Administrator may impose an orientation of yards
different from the orientation set forth in this Section and elsewhere in this
Ordinance subject only to appeal of such decision to the Board of Zoning
Appeals as an appeal from an administrative decision of the Zoning
Administrator.
5-13 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
Existing uses which by the terms of this Ordinance would be permissible only as special
exceptions are hereby declared existing, conforming uses requiring no further action.
Any use for which a special exception is required, or for which a special exception may
be granted as provided in this Ordinance, in any district in which such use is
provisionally permitted, shall be considered a conforming use once approval is granted
by the Board of Zoning Appeals (See also Section 11-2.2). The Board of Zoning Appeals
26
may not consider a special exception request unless the requested exception is listed as
permissible in the zoning district for which it is requested.
5-14 PROHIBITED USES
Any use which is not expressly permitted in a district shall be prohibited. The display of
merchandise for sale in required front yards is prohibited in all zones (excluding yard
sales).
27
ARTICLE 6
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
6-1A PURPOSE OF DIVIDING THE TOWN INTO DISTRICTS
For the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the Town
of Winnsboro, and for other purposes as enumerated in Article 1 hereof, the Town of
Winnsboro is hereby divided into districts as enumerated in this Article within which are
regulated and restricted the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or use
of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot that may be occupied, the size of
yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of population and the location and use of
buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other purposes.
Such regulations have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, to
the character of each district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses and with a
view to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the municipality.
The regulations of this Article shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or
land located within any of the following district classification respectively:
R-1 Single Family Residential District
R-2 Duplex Residential District
R-3 Multi-Family Residential District
RO Residential Office District
C-1 Principal Commercial District
C-2 General Commercial District
I-1 General Industrial District
PDD Planned Development District
ZONING DISTRICT
ACTIVITIES R-1 R-2 R-3 R-O C-1 C-2 I-1
Administrative Offices n n n p p p p
Adult Day Care n n s p p p n
Airports n n n n n n p
Assisted Living s s s p p p n
Automobile Sales n n n n n p p
Automotive Service Stations n n n s p p p
Automobile Wash n n n n n p p
Bed and Breakfast s s s c p p n
Boarding House s s p p p p n
28
ZONING DISTRICT
ACTIVITIES R-1 R-2 R-3 R-O C-1 C-2 I-1
Bus Terminals n n n n n p p
Business Services n n n c p p s
Cemeteries s s s s p p p
Child Day Care n n s p p s s
Churches, Temples, etc. s s s p p p s
Club, Lodge, Civic or s s s p p p s
Fraternal Organizations
Cluster House Developments n c p p n n n
Communication Towers s s s s s s c
Community Education s s s p p p s
Community Service Center n s s p p p p
Construction Services n n n n n s p
Convenience Stores n n n n c c p
Crop and Animal Raising s n n n n n s
Detention Centers n n n n n n c
Distribution Center n n n n n n p
Drinking Establishments n n n n c c n
Drugstore and Pharmacy n n n n c c n
Flee Market n n n n n n p
Funeral Home n n n p p p n
Group Commercial Developments n n n n c c n
Group Industrial Developments n n n n n n c
Group Housing Developments c p p p s n n
High Rise Structures n n n n n n s
Hospitals n n n n p p p
Hotel n n n n p p s
In-home Child Day Care s s s p p n n
Junkyard n n n n n n p
Kennel n n n n n p p
Landfills n n n n n n n
Liquor Stores n n n n p p n
Manufactured Home n s s n n n n
Manufacturing n n n n n n p
29
ZONING DISTRICT
ACTIVITIES R-1 R-2 R-3 R-O C-1 C-2 I-1
Medical Services n n s p p p s
Military Installations n n n n n n p
Mining and Quarrying n n n n n n s
Mini-Parks p p p p p p p
Mini-Warehouses n n n n n p p
Mobile Home Parks n n s n n n n
Mobile Homes n n n n n n n
Motel n n n n p p s
Natural Reserves p p p p p p p
Non-Assembly Cultural p p p p p p p
Nursing Homes s s s p p p n
Personal Convenience Services n n n c p p n
Plant Nurseries n n n n s s p
Power Plants n n n n n n p
Professional Services n n n p p p n
Radioactive Materials Handling n n n n n n p
Radio and Television n n n p p p p
Railroad Yard n n n n n n p
Recreation Facility s s s s p p p
Recreation Facility, Commercial n n n n p p p
Recreation Facility, Personal p p p p p p p
Recreation Facility, Private n n p p p p p
Recreation Facility, Public p p p p p p p
Recycling Collection Point n n n n s p p
Research Services n n n s p p p
Residential, Detached p p p p n n n
Residential, Attached (2 units) n p p p p n n
Residential, Attached n s p s p s n
(3 units or more)
Restaurant, Sit-down n n n n p p s
Restaurant, Drive-thru n n n n p p s
Retail Sales n n n n c p s
Retail Sales, Outdoor n n n n n p s
Schools, Public or Private s s s s p s n
30
ZONING DISTRICT
ACTIVITIES R-1 R-2 R-3 R-O C-1 C-2 I-1
Scrap Operations n n n n n n p
Sexually Oriented Businesses n n n n n n c
Shopping Center n n n n s p n
Shopping Mall n n n n n p n
Stud Farm s n n n n n p
Supermarket n n n n s p p
Tattoo Parlor/Body Piercing n n n n n s p
Transport Services n n n n s s p
Truck Terminals n n n n n n p
Truck Stop n n n n n s p
Veterinarian n n n n s p p
Video Game Establishments n n n n n c s
Video Stores n n n n p p n
Warehouse n n n n n n p
Zoos n n n n n s p
N= Not Permitted
P= Permitted
S= Permitted with Special Exception
C= Permitted Conditional Uses and Structures (Conditions set by the Planning Commission)
See specific district sections for permitted accessory uses and structures.
6-1 R-1 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
6-1.1 Intent: To establish a low density single family residential district and to
protect property in the district from the depreciating effects of
incompatible land uses therein.
6-1.2 Permitted Principal Uses and Structures:
(1) Group housing developments containing single family detached
dwellings only, subject to the provisions of Section 7-3.3.
(2) See Chart.
6-1.3 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures:
(1) Accessory structures and uses which are customarily accessory and
31
clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses
and structures.
(2) Home occupation, provided such uses meet the requirements
stipulated for home occupations in Section 7-7 and not more than
one occupation-related vehicle, which will have no more than two
axles, is permitted for any home occupation.
(3) Signs subject to the provisions of Article 8.
6-1.4 Special Exceptions Permissible by the Board of Zoning Appeals:
After public notice and hearing before the Board of Zoning Appeals, the
Board may permit as special exceptions subject to appropriate conditions
and safeguards:
(1) Public utilities, transformer stations, water tanks and towers,
electrical transmission lines and towers, telephone exchanges with
no vehicles or equipment stored on the premises, subject to the
height requirements of Section 5-9.
(2) Detached cluster developments subject to the provisions of Section
7-13.
(3) See chart.
For each of these special exceptions, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
consider:
(a) Existing zoning and characteristics of development in adjacent areas.
(b) Potential effect of such establishments on traffic flow characteristics of
adjacent streets.
(c) Ingress, egress, parking, circulation, and site design of the proposed
use.
(d) Potentially adverse characteristics of lighting and other characteristics
of operation and use of adjacent property.
and after so doing so shall impose such conditions and safeguards as
deemed appropriate to protect adjacent properties from potentially
incompatible characteristics of use, to preserve efficient traffic flow on
public streets, and otherwise fulfill the intent of this ordinance.
For Special Exception of a Bed and Breakfast, the Board of Zoning
Appeals, shall as a minimum, require the following considerations:
(a) The proposed use of the property will not adversely affect the
immediate neighborhood;
32
(b) The proposed use of the property will not create noise, light, or traffic
conditions detrimental to the neighboring residents or properties;
(c) No exterior alterations or additions other than those necessary to
assure safety of the structure (provided they would not damage the
National Register status) shall be made to any building for the purpose
of providing a bed and breakfast inn;
(d) Meals, if provided, may be served only to overnight guests;
(e) No more than five (5) bedrooms in a residence may be rented for this
purpose and the number of rooms must be specified in the request and
in the permit;
(f) The resident owner shall keep a current guest register to include
names, addresses, and dates of occupancy of all guests;
(g) The resident owner shall comply with all tax, business license and
revenue collection ordinances of the Town of Winnsboro and the State
of South Carolina, any necessary health certificates and applicable
DHEC regulations, and all applicable Fairfield County building codes;
(h) The principal use of any structure shall be residential;
(i) No on site advertising will be permitted other than one sign no larger
than six (6) square feet stating the name and/or number of the
residence (pursuant to Article 8);
(j) No walk-in guests shall be permitted; and
(k) Use must be specifically requested and may be granted by the BZA
after review of all facts and public hearing.
6-1.5 Minimum Area, Yard, Lot Coverage and Height Requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area for each residential unit: 10,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum area for other permitted principal uses and special
exceptions: 10,000 square feet.
(3) Maximum lot coverage by buildings: 25%.
(4) Minimum lot width: 75 feet.
(5) Minimum front yard: 30 feet.
(6) Minimum side yard: 5 feet for first story and 3 feet for each
additional story or part thereof.
(7) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(8) Maximum height of structures: 35 feet*
*See Sections 5-9 and 7-12 for exceptions to height limitations.
33
6-2 R-2 DUPLEX RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
6-2.1 Intent: To establish a medium density residential district and to protect
property in the district from the depreciating effects of incompatible land
uses herein.
6-2.2 Permitted Principal Uses and Structures:
(1) Detached cluster developments subject to the provisions of Section
7-13.
(2) See Chart.
6-2.3 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures:
All accessory uses and structures which are permitted in the R-1 District.
6-2.4 Special Exceptions Permissible by the Board of Zoning Appeals:
After public notice and hearing before the Board of Zoning Appeals, the
Board may permit as special exceptions subject to appropriate conditions
and safeguards:
(1) Attached cluster developments subject to the provisions of Section
7-13.
(2) Manufactured Homes subject to the provisions of Section 7-5.
(3) Public utilities, transformer stations, water tanks and towers,
electrical transmission lines and towers, telephone exchanges with
no vehicles or equipment stored on the premises, subject to the
height requirements of Section 5-9.
(4) See chart.
For each of these special exceptions, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
consider:
(a) Existing zoning and characteristics of development in adjacent areas.
(b) Potential effect of such establishments on traffic flow characteristics of
adjacent streets.
(c) Ingress, egress, parking, circulation, and site design of the proposed
use.
(d) Potentially adverse characteristics of lighting and other characteristics
of operation and use of adjacent property.
and after so doing so shall impose such conditions and safeguards as
deemed appropriate to protect adjacent properties from potentially
34
incompatible characteristics of use, to preserve efficient traffic flow on
public streets, and otherwise fulfill the intent of this ordinance.
For Special Exception of a Bed and Breakfast, the Board of Zoning
Appeals, shall as a minimum, require the following considerations:
(a) The proposed use of the property will not adversely affect the
immediate neighborhood;
(b) The proposed use of the property will not create noise, light, or traffic
conditions detrimental to the neighboring residents or properties;
(c) No exterior alterations or additions other than those necessary to
assure safety of the structure (provided they would not damage the
National Register status) shall be made to any building for the purpose
of providing a bed and breakfast inn;
(d) Meals, if provided, may be served only to overnight guests;
(e) No more than five (5) bedrooms in a residence may be rented for this
purpose and the number of rooms must be specified in the request and
in the permit;
(f) The resident owner shall keep a current guest register to include
names, addresses, and dates of occupancy of all guests;
(g) The resident owner shall comply with all tax, business license and
revenue collection ordinances of the Town of Winnsboro and the State
of South Carolina, any necessary health certificates and applicable
DHEC regulations, and all applicable Fairfield County building codes;
(h) The principal use of any structure shall be residential;
(i) No on site advertising will be permitted other than one sign no larger
than six (6) square feet stating the name and/or number of the
residence (pursuant to Article 8);
(j) No walk-in guests shall be permitted; and
(k) Use must be specifically requested and may be granted by the BZA
after review of all facts and public hearing.
6-2.5 Minimum Area, Yard, Lot Coverage, and Height Requirements:
(1) Minimum area for each residential unit: 6,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum area for other permitted principal uses and special
exceptions: 10,000 square feet.
(3) Maximum lot coverage by buildings: 30%.
(4) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(5) Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
(6) Minimum side yard: 5 feet for first story and 3 feet for each
additional story or part thereof.
35
(7) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(8) Maximum height of structures: 35 feet.*
*See Sections 5-9 and 7-12 for exceptions to height limitations.
6-3 R-3 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
6-3.1 Intent: To establish a high density residential district and to protect
property in the district from the depreciating effects of incompatible land
use herein.
6-3.2 Permitted Principal Uses and Structures:
(1) Attached cluster developments subject to the provisions of Section
7-13.
(2) See Chart.
6-3.3 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures:
All accessory uses and structures which are permitted in the R-2 District.
6-3.4 Special Exceptions Permissible by the Board of Zoning Appeals:
After public notice and hearing before the Board of Zoning Appeals, the
Board may permit as special exceptions subject to appropriate conditions
and safeguards:
(1) Public utilities, transformer stations, water tanks and towers,
electrical transmission lines and towers, telephone exchanges with
no vehicles or equipment stored on the premises, subject to the
height requirements of Section 5-9.
(2) Mobile Home Parks subject to the terms and provisions of Section
7-6.
(3) See chart.
For each of these special exceptions, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
consider:
(a) Existing zoning and characteristics of development in adjacent areas.
(b) Potential effect of such establishments on traffic flow characteristics of
adjacent streets.
36
(c) Ingress, egress, parking, circulation, and site design of the proposed
use.
(d) Potentially adverse characteristics of lighting and other characteristics
of operation and use of adjacent property.
and after so doing so shall impose such conditions and safeguards as
deemed appropriate to protect adjacent properties from potentially
incompatible characteristics of use, to preserve efficient traffic flow on
public streets, and otherwise fulfill the intent of this ordinance.
For Special Exception of a Bed and Breakfast, the Board of Zoning
Appeals, shall as a minimum, require the following considerations:
(a) The proposed use of the property will not adversely affect the
immediate neighborhood;
(b) The proposed use of the property will not create noise, light, or traffic
conditions detrimental to the neighboring residents or properties;
(c) No exterior alterations or additions other than those necessary to
assure safety of the structure (provided they would not damage the
National Register status) shall be made to any building for the purpose
of providing a bed and breakfast inn;
(d) Meals, if provided, may be served only to overnight guests;
(e) No more than five (5) bedrooms in a residence may be rented for this
purpose and the number of rooms must be specified in the request and
in the permit;
(f) The resident owner shall keep a current guest register to include
names, addresses, and dates of occupancy of all guests;
(g) The resident owner shall comply with all tax, business license and
revenue collection ordinances of the Town of Winnsboro and the State
of South Carolina, any necessary health certificates and applicable
DHEC regulations, and all applicable Fairfield County building codes;
(h) The principal use of any structure shall be residential;
(i) No on site advertising will be permitted other than one sign no larger
than six (6) square feet stating the name and/or number of the
residence (pursuant to Article 8);
(j) No walk-in guests shall be permitted; and
(k) Use must be specifically requested and may be granted by the BZA
after review of all facts and public hearing.
6-3.5 Minimum Area, Yard, Lot Coverage, and Height Requirements:
(1) Minimum area for first residential unit: 6,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum area for each additional residential unit: 2,500 square
feet.*
(3) Minimum area for other permitted principal uses and special
exceptions: 10,000 square feet.
37
(4) Maximum lot coverage by buildings: 30%.
(5) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
(7) Minimum side yard: 5 feet for first story and 3 feet for each
additional story or part thereof.
(8) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(9) Maximum height of structures: 35 feet.**
*See Section 7-3.3 for group housing regulations.
**See Sections 5-9 and 7-12 for exceptions to height limitations.
6-4 RO RESIDENTIAL OFFICE DISTRICT
6-4.1 Intent: This district is intended to permit either high density residential,
small scale retail, or office uses or a compatible mixture of these uses and
to discourage encroachment by intensive retail uses capable of adversely
affecting the specialized commercial, institutional, and housing character
of the district. This district is intended for application in areas undergoing
transition from residential to commercial uses and is intended to
accomplish that transition with a minimum of conflict between uses and is
to act as a buffer between residential and general commercial zones.
6-4.2 Permitted Principal Uses and Structures:
(1) Child Daycare facilities subject to the requirements of Section 7-8.
(2) See Chart.
6-4.3 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures:
(1) All accessory uses and structures permitted in the R-2 District.
(2) Dwelling units in connection with other permitted or permissible
uses or structures if located on the same premises therewith for
occupancy only by owners or employees thereof.
(3) Parking area and lots of uses permitted in this district, subject to
the provisions of Section 7-1.
38
6-4.4 Special Exceptions Permissible by the Board of Zoning Appeals:
After public notice and hearing before the Board of Zoning Appeals, the
Board may permit as special exceptions subject to appropriate conditions
and safeguards:
(1) Public utilities, transformer stations, water tanks and towers,
electrical transmission lines and towers, telephone exchanges with
no vehicles or equipment stored on the premises, subject to the
height requirements of Section 5-9.
(2) See chart.
For each of these special exceptions, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
consider:
(a) Existing zoning and characteristics of development in adjacent areas.
(b) Potential effect of such establishments on traffic flow characteristics of
adjacent streets.
(c) Ingress, egress, parking, circulation, and site design of the proposed
use.
(d) Potentially adverse characteristics of lighting and other characteristics
of operation and use of adjacent property.
And after so doing so shall impose such conditions and safeguards as
deemed appropriate to protect adjacent properties from potentially
incompatible characteristics of use, to preserve efficient traffic flow on
public streets, and otherwise fulfill the intent of this ordinance.
For Special Exception of a Bed and Breakfast, the Board of Zoning
Appeals, shall as a minimum, require the following considerations:
(a) The proposed use of the property will not adversely affect the
immediate neighborhood;
(b) The proposed use of the property will not create noise, light, or traffic
conditions detrimental to the neighboring residents or properties;
(c) No exterior alterations or additions other than those necessary to
assure safety of the structure (provided they would not damage the
National Register status) shall be made to any building for the purpose
of providing a bed and breakfast inn;
(d) Meals, if provided, may be served only to overnight guests;
(e) No more than five (5) bedrooms in a residence may be rented for this
purpose and the number of rooms must be specified in the request and
in the permit;
(f) The resident owner shall keep a current guest register to include
names, addresses, and dates of occupancy of all guests;
(g) The resident owner shall comply with all tax, business license and
revenue collection ordinances of the Town of Winnsboro and the State
39
of South Carolina, any necessary health certificates and applicable
DHEC regulations, and all applicable Fairfield County building codes;
(h) The principal use of any structure shall be residential;
(i) No on site advertising will be permitted other than one sign no larger
than six (6) square feet stating the name and/or number of the
residence (pursuant to Article 8);
(j) No walk-in guests shall be permitted; and
(k) Use must be specifically requested and may be granted by the BZA
after review of all facts and public hearing.
6-4.5 Minimum Area, Yard, Lot Coverage and Height Requirements:
(1) Minimum area for first residential unit: 6,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum area for each additional residential unit: 2,500 square
feet.*
(3) Minimum area for other permitted principal uses and special
exceptions: 10,000 square feet.
(4) Maximum lot coverage by buildings: 30%.
(5) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(6) Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
(7) Minimum side yard: 5 feet for first story and 3 feet for each
additional story or part thereof.
(8) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(9) Maximum height of structures: 35 feet.**
*See Section 7-3.3 for group housing regulations.
**See Sections 5-9 and 7-12 for exceptions to height limitations.
6-5 C-1 PRINCIPAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
6-5.1 Intent: To provide a district for principal retail and office uses which
serve the entire community and trade area. Since the principal commercial
district of the Town serves a unique and special function, it is the intent of
this Ordinance that the C-1 district classification be applied to one
contiguous and continuous area.
40
6-5.2 Permitted Principal Uses and Structures:
(1) Public utilities, transformer stations, water tanks and towers,
electrical transmission lines and towers, and telephone exchanges,
subject to the height requirements of Section 5-9.
(2) Child Daycare facilities subject to the requirements of Section 7-8.
(3) See Chart.
6-5.3 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures:
(1) Accessory structures and uses which are customarily accessory and
clearly incidental and subordinate to permitted or permissible uses
and structures.
(2) Storage yards for permitted uses are permitted but must meet the
screening requirements of Section 7-9.
(3) Signs subject to the provisions of Article 8.
6-5.4 Special Exceptions Permissible by the Board of Zoning Appeals:
After public notice and hearing before the Board of Zoning Appeals, the
Board may permit as special exceptions subject to appropriate conditions
and safeguards.
(1) Historic sites and structures, located on the same premises
therewith for occupancy only by owners or employees thereof.
(2) Dwelling units in connection with permitted or permissible uses or
structures, located on the same premises therewith for occupancy
only by owners or employees thereof. At the time of the approval
of the revision of this ordinance, existing employer/employee
occupancies previously permitted will be grandfathered, however,
all future residential occupancy by owners or their employees of
dwelling units within businesses in the Principal Commercial
District (C-1) will require special exception consideration and
approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals. Additionally, while any
existing employer/employee occupancies will be grandfathered,
any changes of ownership or usage of the business, changes in the
existing occupants, increases in the number of occupants, or any
other changes in the current existing employer/employee
occupancy relationship will require the owner to apply for a
Special Exception as outlined in this Section (6-5.4.)
(3) Residential over commercial: the provisions of this Article shall
apply to conforming businesses within the Principal Commercial
District (C-1) for the establishment, operation and maintenance of
41
a Residential over commercial initiative. The purpose of this
Article is to promote the general economic development and
atmosphere of the C-1 District and other areas for the benefit of all
businesses and citizens located within the town. Residential over
commercial uses are allowed within the Principal Commercial
District (C-1) as part of a larger, mixed-use development and not
as a stand-alone principal use.
Conditions:
a. Residential components may not exceed 50% of the total gross
floor area.
b. Residential units may only be located on the upper floors of the
commercial buildings. No units are located on street level or
within a basement.
c. One parking space is provided for each dwelling unit.
d. Units must have a means of egress separate from the
commercial use. No access to the units shall be through a
commercial establishment.
e. All units must meet the minimum requirements of the building
and health codes for habitable space.
(4) See Chart
For each of these special exceptions, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
consider:
(a) Existing zoning and characteristics of development in adjacent areas.
(b) Potential effect of such establishments on traffic flow characteristics of
adjacent streets.
(c) Ingress, egress, parking, circulation, and site design of the proposed
use.
(d) Potentially adverse characteristics of lighting and other characteristics
of operation and use of adjacent property.
and after so doing so shall impose such conditions and safeguards as
deemed appropriate to protect adjacent properties from potentially
incompatible characteristics of use, to preserve efficient traffic flow on
public streets, and otherwise fulfill the intent of this ordinance.
6-5.5 Minimum Area, Yard, and Height Requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: No minimum except as needed to meet other
requirements herein.
(2) Maximum lot coverage by all buildings: No maximum except as
needed to meet other requirements herein.
(3) Minimum lot width: No minimum except as needed to meet other
requirements herein.
42
(4) Minimum front yard: No minimum except as needed to meet other
requirements herein.
(5) Minimum side yard: No minimum except as needed to meet other
requirements herein except that if a side yard is provided, it shall
not be less than three (3) feet in width.
(6) Minimum rear yard: No minimum except as needed to meet other
requirements herein.
(7) Maximum height of structures: 45 feet.*
*See Sections 5-9 and 7-12 for exceptions to height limitations.
6-6 C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
6-6.1 Intent: This district is intended to accommodate a variety of general
commercial and non-residential uses which are not oriented to the
downtown area.
6-6.2 Permitted Principal Uses and Structures:
See Chart.
6-6.3 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures:
Any accessory use permitted in the C-1 district.
6-6.4 Special Exceptions Permissible by the Board of Zoning Appeals:
After public notice and hearing before the Board of Zoning Appeals, the
Board may permit as special exceptions subject to appropriate conditions
and safeguards:
(1) Historic sites and structures, located on the same premises
therewith for occupancy only by owners or employees thereof.
(2) See chart
For each of these special exceptions, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
consider:
(a) Existing zoning and characteristics of development in adjacent areas.
(b) Potential effect of such establishments on traffic flow characteristics of
adjacent streets.
43
(c) Ingress, egress, parking, circulation, and site design of the proposed
use.
(d) Potentially adverse characteristics of lighting and other characteristics
of operation and use of adjacent property.
and after so doing so shall impose such conditions and safeguards as
deemed appropriate to protect adjacent properties from potentially
incompatible characteristics of use, to preserve efficient traffic flow on
public streets, and otherwise fulfill the intent of this ordinance.
6-6.5 Minimum Area, Yard, Lot Coverage and Height Requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
(2) Maximum lot coverage by all buildings: 40%.
(3) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard: No minimum except as needed to meet other
requirements herein except that if a side yard is provided, it shall
not be less than five (5) feet in width.
(6) Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
(7) Maximum height of structures: 45 feet.*
*See Sections 5-9 and 7-12 for exceptions to height limitations.
6-7 I-1 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
6-7.1 Intent: This district is intended to accommodate industrial uses which do
not create excessive noise, odors, or smoke, and do not possess other
objectionable characteristics, and which do not have undue detrimental
effects upon adjoining prosperities; to create and protect efficient
industrial areas; to provide a proper relationship between industrial areas
and adjoining land uses; to assure the careful design, placement, and
grouping of industrial uses; to provide for area and setback requirements;
and for other purposes.
6-7.2 Permitted Principal Uses and Structures:
(1) Public utilities, transformer stations, water tanks and towers,
electrical transmission lines and towers, and telephone exchanges,
subject to the height requirements of Section 5-9.
44
(2) See Chart.
6-7.3 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures:
(1) Parking for uses located herein.
(2) Signs.
(3) Retail outlets for goods manufactured on the premises thereof.
(4) Offices for use by a permitted use.
6-7.4 Special Exceptions Permissible by the Board of Zoning Appeals:
After public notice and hearing before the Board of Zoning Appeals, the
Board may permit as special exceptions subject to appropriate conditions
and safeguards:
(1) Historic sites and structures, located on the same premises
therewith for occupancy only by owners or employees thereof.
(2) See chart
For each of these special exceptions, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
consider:
(a) Existing zoning and characteristics of development in adjacent areas.
(b) Potential effect of such establishments on traffic flow characteristics of
adjacent streets.
(c) Ingress, egress, parking, circulation, and site design of the proposed
use.
(d) Potentially adverse characteristics of lighting and other characteristics
of operation and use of adjacent property.
and after so doing so shall impose such conditions and safeguards as
deemed appropriate to protect adjacent properties from potentially
incompatible characteristics of use, to preserve efficient traffic flow on
public streets, and otherwise fulfill the intent of this ordinance.
6-7.5 Minimum Area, Yard, and Height Requirements:
(1) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
(2) Maximum lot coverage by all buildings: No maximum except as
needed to meet other requirements herein.
(3) Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
45
(4) Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard: No minimum except as needed to meet other
requirements herein except that if a side yard is provided, it shall
not be less than three (3) feet in width.
(6) Minimum rear yard: No minimum except as needed to meet the
other requirements herein.
(7) Maximum height of structures: 45 feet.*
*See Sections 5-9 and 7-12 for exceptions to height limitations.
6-8 PPD - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
6-8.1 Intent: The intent for planned development districts (also called planned
unit developments) is to derive the benefits of efficiency, economy, and
flexibility by encouraging unified development of large sites, while also
obtaining the advantage of creative site design, improved appearance,
compatibility of uses, optimum service by community facilities, and better
functioning of vehicular access and circulation. It is the intent of this
Ordinance to allow development of large sites subject to specific
regulations concerning permitted uses, but only subject to regulations
concerning lot area, building coverage, yard spaces, and building height in
so far as the Town Council shall deem appropriate to fulfill the intent of
this Ordinance, upon presentation of certification from the owners,
developers, or other parties of interest in the development of such sites
that they will adhere to development policies which will fulfill the intent
of this Ordinance.
6-8.2 Types of Planned Development Districts: Three types of planned
development districts accommodating primarily residential or
nonresidential uses are created as follows:
(1) PD-R Planned Development – Residential:
The PD-R district is intended to accommodate primarily
residential uses, with nonresidential uses integrated into the design
of such districts as secondary uses.
(2) PD-C Planned Development – Commercial:
The PD-C is intended to accommodate primarily non-residential
uses, with residential uses integrated into the design of such
districts as secondary uses.
(3) PD-M Planned Development – Mixed Use:
46
The PD-M is intended to accommodate a variety of mixed uses,
with both residential and commercial uses integrated into a design
which follows neo-traditional neighborhood design standards
where both types of uses of such district are primarily uses
typically on the same lot.
Intent: The types of residential dwelling units, and the types of nonresidential
uses allowed to be established in such districts increase with
the increasing site size of such districts, based upon the premise that
increased site size will allow proper design including functional
interrelations, buffer treatments separating uses with potentially
incompatible characteristics of uses within such planned development
districts with uses in adjacent districts.
It is the intent of the Ordinance that such design and planning features be
incorporated properly into any PD district hereafter created, and that the
Planning Commission and Town Council shall consider the existence and
appropriateness of such features before any amendment to the Zoning Map
is adopted to create such district.
6-8.3 Permitted Principal Uses and Structure:
Permitted principal uses and structures vary with increasing size and are
different PD-R, PD-C, and PD-M districts. Such uses are permitted as per
the uses enumerated for specific districts in Sections 6-1 through 6-7
above. Where uses for more than one district are permitted, the uses of the
less restrictive district shall be permitted. Permitted principal uses and
structures for various site sizes and types of PD districts are as follows:
Site size in acres
PD-R
Uses permitted as
for the following
districts:
PD-C
Uses permitted as
the following
districts:
PD-M
Uses permitted as
for the following
districts:
2 but less than 4…
R-3, R-2
C-1, RO
R-3, RO, C-1
4 but less than 8…
R-3, R-2
C-1, RO
R-3, R-2, RO, C-1
8 but less than 15…
R-3, R-2, R-1
C-1, R-3, RO
R-3, R-2, RO, C-1
15 but less than 25.
R-3, R-2, R-1, RO
C-1, R-3, RO
All districts except I-1
25 or more….
R-3, R-2, RO, C-1
All districts
All districts
6-8.4 Maximum Area of Commercial or Industrial Uses in PD-R Districts:
In PD-R districts in which commercial or industrial uses are permitted, the
total gross floor area of such commercial or industrial uses shall not
47
exceed the percentages listed below as related to gross floor area of all
structures within the PDD at any time. In addition, in PD-R districts in
which commercial or industrial uses are permitted, the area of land
devoted to such uses, including land coverage of structures, parking, and
related characteristics and accessory uses thereto, shall not exceed the
percentages listed below as related to total PD site size at any time.
Total PD
Maximum Percentage of Gross Floor Area
Size in Acres
and Maximum Percentage of Site Area for
Commercial or Industrial Structures and Uses
8 but less than 15
5
15 but less than 25
15
25 or more
30
Provided however, that these percentages shall apply to commercial and
industrial uses, and not to other nonresidential uses such as schools, parks,
community buildings, or public facilities.
6-8.5 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures: Accessory uses and
structures shall be permitted as for the least restrictive districts indicated in
6-8.6 Special Exceptions Permissible by the Board of Zoning Appeals:
No special exception actions are required to establish any specific use.
Uses and structures permitted in the least restrictive districts indicated in
Section 6-8.3 for any specific site size are permitted outright, provided
however, that the Planning Commission and Town Council shall ascertain
that the effects and benefits usually derived from safeguards and
conditions normally imposed upon special exceptions permissible for
districts as listed in Section 6-1 through 6-7 will substantially be met by
the terms of the proposed planned development district.
6-8.7 Minimum Area, Yard, and Height Requirements:
(1) Minimum Area: No minimum lot area is required for any specific
structure, however, minimum site size to accommodate specific uses
shall be as listed in Section 6-8.3.
(2) Minimum lot width, minimum yard requirements, maximum lot
coverage, and maximum height of structures: Minimum setbacks,
minimum lot width, minimum yard sizes, maximum lot coverage,
and maximum height are not regulated within PD districts,
provided however, that the Planning Commission and Town
Council shall ascertain that the characteristics of building siting
shall be appropriate as related to structures within the planned unit
development and otherwise fulfill the intent of this Ordinance.
48
6-8.8 Minimum Off-Street Parking and Loading: Off-Street parking and
loading requirements as set forth in Article 7 shall be met as for the least
restrictive districts indicated in Section 6-8.3 for any specific site size.
6-8.9 Signs: Signs are permitted in PD districts only in accordance with
provisions of Article 8 “Regulation of Signs” as for the least restrictive
districts indicated in Section 6-8.3 for any specific site size.
6-8.10 Administrative Application and Review Procedures:
(1) General: The establishment of a PD district shall be by
amendment to the Zoning Map accompanied by certain sureties
that the development will be in harmony with the intent of this
Ordinance and that the public interest in adequate site design,
access, and community facilities and amenities will be defended.
Application for amendment to establish a PD district shall be
subject to the provisions of Article 9 “Amendments”, and in
addition, the procedures described below shall apply. It is the
intent of this Ordinance that the public interest will be served not
only by consideration of those specific criteria set forth herein, but
also by consideration of the total anticipated effect of the planned
development district upon the community at large. The provisions
of the PD district represent a relaxation of specific site design
requirements as applied to other districts herein, and in return for
the design flexibility granted thereby, the applicant for amendment
to PD district classification, by requesting the PDD designation
and making application therefor shall agree to furnish information
about the proposed development, and later to abide by certain
conditions and safeguards as may be imposed by the Town Council
in establishing such developments. To that end the regulations set
forth herein are minimum requirements and it is the intent of this
Ordinance that the Town Council may impose conditions and
safeguards in excess of, or in a addition to the specific
requirements set forth herein, and that guarantee of meeting the
minimum requirements set forth herein does not per se create an
indication that an applicant should be entitled to such an
amendment, and notice is hereby given to that effect.
(2) Pre-application Conference: The applicant is encouraged to
communicate his intentions to establish a planned unit
development, and the proposed characteristics thereof, to the
Planning Commission prior to initiating an Application for
Amendment in order to avoid undue delay in the review process
after initiating such application, and in order to facilitate review of
materials which may be in preliminary form, and in order to avoid
49
unnecessary expense in preparation of materials in final form
which may later be found to be unacceptable or incomplete.
(3) Application for Amendments: The applicant shall make
application for an amendment to PDD classification as specific by
(4) Site Development Plans to be Submitted to Planning
Commission for Review: The applicant shall submit site
development plans to the Planning Commission for review, which
shall be similar in content and format to preliminary plats required
for review by the Land Development Regulations of the Town of
Winnsboro, South Carolina, and in addition shall show locations of
development, drawn approximately to scale, and in addition shall
indicate the proposed uses of all such buildings, and in addition
shall contain such other information as may be deemed reasonably
appropriate for Planning Commission review.
(5) Descriptive Statement to be Submitted to Planning
Commission for Review: The applicant shall also submit a
descriptive statement describing the characteristics and standards
to be followed in developing the proposed planned development
district.
The Descriptive Statement shall generally include, but not be
limited to the following:
a. Legal description of proposed development boundaries.
b. Total number of acres in the development area.
c. Number of acres devoted to residential, commercial, industrial,
and other nonresidential uses to reflect requirements of Section
6-8.4.
d. Number of dwelling units of various types and overall density
thereof.
e. Number of off-street parking and loading spaces as needed to
meet requirements of individual buildings as required by
Section 6-8.8.
f. If commercial development is proposed, indication of
economic feasibility and justification for size of facilities.
g. Description of open space uses and areas proposed, adequacy
thereof to serve anticipated demand, and if dedication of open
space is proposed, procedures and conditions thereof in detail.
h. If a homeowners association or other group maintenance or
group ownership features are to be included, a detailed
description of the proposed procedures and operation thereof.
i. An outline of development phasing indicating the timing of
development of all proposed facilities, and justification of
50
development phasing with respect to nonresidential facilities in
relation to residential facilities.
j. Design standards, administrative procedures, and other
characteristics which will guarantee the development of the
project as an integrated, functionally operable, well planned
whole.
k. Other such information or descriptions as may be deemed
reasonably appropriate for Planning Commission review.
(6) Planning Commission and Town Council Hearing: A public
hearing shall be held in accordance with procedures set forth in
Article 9, except that such hearing shall be a joint hearing before
the Planning Commission and Town Council simultaneously.
(7) Planning Commission Recommendation: The Planning
Commission shall make a recommendation upon the proposal
which shall be advisory to the Town Council. Requirements of
Article 9 are applicable if the Planning Commission should fail to
report within the time limit established by Article 9.
(8) Town Council Approval: The Town Council may, after fulfilling
all applicable requirements of this Section and all applicable
requirements of Article 9, act to either approve or disapprove the
Application for Amendment.
(9) Issuance of Zoning or Building Permits: The Zoning
Administrator shall not issue any Zoning Permit or Certificate of
Occupancy, and the Building Official shall not issue any until the
applicant for amendment which established such districts shall
have:
a. Filed with the Town Clerk and recorded with the Register of
Mesne Conveyances of Fairfield County plats showing all
proposed features of the planned development district as approved
by the Town Council which approval shall be certified by the
Town Clerk.
b. Completed any necessary agreements with the Town that the Town
may become a party to deed restrictions and other restrictive
covenants related to the planned development district, and
recorded such agreement with the Town Clerk and with the
Register of Mesne Conveyances of Fairfield County.
c. Recorded with the Register of Mesne Conveyances of Fairfield
County all required deed restrictions or other restrictive covenants
as required by the Town Council upon approval of the amendment
establishing the planned development
d. Recorded with the Town Clerk and with the Register of Mesne
Conveyances of Fairfield County the descriptive statement as
51
approved by Town Council setting forth and committing the
developer to certain design standards, development phasing
schedules, and other pertinent matters.
e. Completed the posting of a bond or giving of other surety that
adequate progress will be made in developing the project as may
be required by Section 6-8.12 below.
6-8.11 Changes of Plans for Planned Development District: Changes which
do not require changes of the boundaries of an established PD district or
establishment of a new PD district are not considered amendments to the
Zoning Ordinance. Any change in boundary of such PD district shall be
accomplished only by following procedures set forth in Article 9 herein.
Changes in the approved characteristics or agreements relating to a PD
district, but not involving change in the boundary thereof shall be classed
as either major changes or minor changes and shall be approved or
disapproved as follows:
(1) Minor Changes: Revisions of minor characteristics of the planned
development district, such as relocation of driveways or revision of
floor plans of specific structures, may be authorized by the
Planning Commission, provided that such authority is granted to
the Planning Commission by the approved and recorded
descriptive statement concerning development of the planned unit
minor change, the developer or other party at interest may then
seek a change by the regular amendment process as outlined below
for major changes.
(2) Major Changes: Major changes which materially affect the
characteristics of the planned development shall follow the same
procedural requirements as for the amendment originally
establishing the planned development district, including Planning
Commission review, public hearing, and Town Council
determination, as set forth in Article 9 herein.
(3) It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to determine
whether any specific request shall be considered a major change or
a minor change, provided however that the applicant for change
shall have the right to have any request for change processed as a
change.
(4) The Zoning Administrator shall issue no Zoning Permit or
Certificate of Occupancy and the Building Official shall issue no
Building Permit in connection with any action related to such
changes until such changes have been duly recorded as for the
original documents recorded as set forth in Section 6-8.10 (9)
above.
52
6-8.12 Failure to Begin, Failure to Complete, or Failure to Make Adequate
Progress:
The descriptive statement as approved by Town Council and duly
recorded shall set forth the development schedule for the project including
phasing of development of nonresidential uses in relationship to
residential use. The Town Council shall require the posting of a bond with
a corporate surety to guarantee that the schedule as set forth in the
descriptive construction statement will be materially adhered to in order to
guarantee construction of streets, utilities, and other facilities and
amenities or to allow for rectification of improper development
characteristics such as failure to develop areas designated as common
open spaces. If there is failure to begin, or failure to complete, or failure
to make adequate progress as agreed in the descriptive statement, the
Town Council may enforce and collect upon such bonds or sureties as
described above, or may change the district classification of the planned
development in accordance with provisions of Article 9, and thus
terminated the right of the applicant to continue development, or may
initiate action to charge the developers with specific violation of the
Zoning Ordinance subject to the penalties set forth in Article 10 or any
appropriate combination of the above remedies may be taken.
6-8.13 Terms of this Section to Prevail: In case of any conflict of the terms of
Section 6-8 with terms of other sections of this Ordinance, the terms of
Section 6-8 shall prevail.
6-9 DESIGN OVERLAY DISTRICTS
The Board of Architectural Review shall have purview over all proposed new
developments, and over all alterations and/or additions (excluding normal maintenance
and repair of an internal nature) to existing developments which have a visual impact
from the corridor, located on land which lies within the rights-of-way and within all
zoning districts which abut each side of the rights-of-way of the following commercial
corridors, herein defined as “Design Overlay Districts”, currently within town limits.
(1) Congress Street
(2) Historic District (as defined by the Historical Society of Fairfield County)
The boundaries of the design overlay districts shall be shown on the official zoning map.
6-9.1 Architectural Design Review Guidelines
The architectural compatibility and aesthetic harmony of structures located
along designated thoroughfares, defined as “Designed Overlay Districts,”
are of critical importance in protecting and promoting the appearance,
character, and economic value of land, in addition to protecting the public
53
from the impact of adverse visual experiences. The intent of the
Architectural Review process is to assure respect for the character,
integrity, and quality of the built and natural environment environments of
the Town of Winnsboro it is not intended to stifle innovative architecture.
(A) Proposed development shall avoid excessive or unsightly grading,
indiscriminate earth moving or clearing, and removal of trees and
vegetation which could cause disruption of natural water courses
or disfigure natural land forms.
(B) Proposed development shall be located and configured in a
visually harmonious manner with the terrain and vegetation of the
subject parcel and with that of adjacent parcels. Proposed
structures shall be designed in visual harmony with existing
structures as well.
(C) Where it is reasonably practical, proposed structures shall not
impede scenic views from the main road, from existing structures,
or from natural settings.
(D) Proposed structures will contribute to the establishment of the
image of the Town of Winnsboro as a unique place of visual
character, integrity, and quality. Proposed structures of inferior
architectural design and/or material composition shall not be
permitted.
(E) Although maximum lot coverage and height restrictions, and
special site requirements defined for particular zoning categories in
the Winnsboro Zoning Ordinance shall be preserved, proposed
structures shall not dominate, in an incompatible manner, an
adjacent building, nor surrounding general development, which is
substantially in compliance with this article.
(F) There shall be an overall maximum 35 foot front setback along the
street right-of-way. Emphasis shall be placed on maintaining
prevailing setbacks of existing structures on the block. No new
structures shall have smaller setbacks from the street than adjacent
structures do.
(G) In reviewing a proposed structure, specific consideration shall be
given to its compatibility with adjacent structures where such
structures are substantially in compliance with these sections.
(H) Materials shall be compatible with other permitted visible
materials already in use in nearby areas of the Design Overlay
District. Use of low maintenance materials is encouraged, such as
54
brick, glass, and aluminum storefront materials. In pedestrian
oriented areas, non-reflective, non-mirror glass should be used.
(I) Materials shall express their function clearly and honestly and shall
not appear as materials which are foreign to the character of the
rest of the building. For example, on a façade, materials that
appear heavy, such as brick, shall not be used above materials that
appear light, such as wood.
(J) Entrances should receive architectural emphasis with at least one
primary entrance of structures fronting the street shall be oriented
to Wilson Road. Walkways shall be provided between the
building entrance and the sidewalk, and shall be as wide as the
entrance they lead to.
(K) All elevations of a structure shall be architecturally harmonious
with the front elevation and one another in terms of scale,
proportion, detail, material, color, and high design quality,
especially when those side or rear elevations are most often viewed
by the public. Rooflines and architectural detailing shall present a
consistency in design.
(L) Any building exterior elevation shall consist of architectural
materials which are equal in quality, appearance, and detail to all
other exterior elevations of the same structure. Nothing in this
section shall preclude the use of different materials on different
exterior elevations of the same structure so long as those materials
maintain the architectural unity and integrity of the entire structure.
(M) No portion of a building constructed of unadorned concrete
masonry unit’s metal siding shall be visible in any manner from
adjoining developed properties, from existing public rights-ofways,
or from adjoining properties which are eligible for future
development.
(N) Color combinations of paints or stains shall be harmonious. In no
case shall garish colors be permitted.
(O) All structures within a proposed development, including gasoline
canopies, which utilize a uniform architectural theme and shall be
designed to create a harmonious whole. It is not to be inferred that
buildings must look alike to achieve a harmony of design.
Harmony of design can be created through proper considerations
of scale, proportion, detail, materials, color, site planning, and
landscaping.
55
(P) The scale of buildings and accessory structures (including
canopies) shall be appropriate to the scale of structures located in
the adjacent area. Canopies designed as domineering or
overpowering architectural features are strongly discouraged.
(Q) The architectural design and material finish of buildings, signage,
gasoline pump canopies, and other necessary structures shall be
compatible with one another and with adjacent structures where
such structures are substantially in compliance with these sections.
(R) Mechanical equipment, whether ground level, raised, or roof-top,
shall be shielded and screened from public view, and designed to
be perceived as an integral part of the building.
(S) Structures shall be oriented so that loading areas are in no manner
visible from residential districts, from existing public rights-of-way
or from planned future public rights-of-way. Loading areas may
be oriented toward adjoining developed properties which are
commercially zoned or toward adjoining properties eligible for
future commercial development if and only if they are entirely
screened from view by the use of fencing which is compatible with
the overall architectural scheme of the project and/or are
appropriately landscaped.
(T) Signs shall comply with the Winnsboro sign regulations and shall
maintain compatibility with the architectural features of the
structure.
(U) Buildings must be maintained in a neat, clean, and orderly fashion.
Paint on painted surfaces must be fresh and unpainted surfaces
must be kept clean. The Board of Architectural Review shall
assure that properties are maintained in accordance with the spirit
and intent of this ordinance.
6-9.2 Landscaping Design Review Guidelines
A comprehensive landscaping program for each individual lot or parcel
located within the Design Overlay District is essential for the protection
and promotion of the appearance, character, and economic value of land.
Additionally, the purpose and intent of landscaping requirements is to
reduce the visibility of paved areas from adjacent properties and streets,
moderate climatic effects, minimize noise and glare, and enhance public
safety by defining spaces to influence traffic movement. Landscaping will
reduce the amount of storm water runoff and provide transition between
neighboring properties.
56
(A) Emphasis shall be placed upon landscaping as a means of
achieving beauty in the community. It will be required on all
projects, and in some areas it will be the primary tool available.
(B) Landscape design and planning shall be integrated with the overall
project design concept and shall not be considered as merely an
afterthought. Toward this end, proposed landscaping will be
evaluated in relation to existing natural landscape, and to
developed and proposed landscaping, including that existing on
adjacent properties and street rights-of-way, and in relation to
buildings existing or proposed.
(C) Each approved application for development shall provide a
minimum visual buffer between the development and the right-ofway
line of the subject roadway, between all proposed structures
and parking areas, and between neighboring developments in
accordance with the landscaping requirements of the Winnsboro
Zoning Ordinance. The purpose of the minimum visual buffer is to
soften the appearance of structures and parking lots from the road,
to screen vehicular headlight glare on and off site, to lessen
spillover light from on-site lighting, and to enhance the aesthetics
of the site.
(D) No existing vegetation of any type, size or origin shall be altered or
removed unless it satisfies the requirements of this ordinance.
(E) Landscaping shall be required between buildings and sidewalks,
and parking lots and driveways. The scale of the proposed
landscaping shall be in proportion to the building.
(F) Shrubbery between buildings and the sidewalk and parking lots
and the sidewalk shall be not exceed three feet in height. Planting
beds of less than 10 feet in depth shall use a mulch or other ground
cover instead of grass.
(G) Landscaping includes not only trees and plantings, but paving,
benches, fountains, exterior lighting fixtures, fences, and any other
item of exterior furniture. All items of the landscape are to be
selected not only for their functional value but for their aesthetic
value, and must compliment the whole.
(H) All utility lines such as electric, telephone, cable TV, or other
similar lines serving individual sites as well as all utility lines
necessary within the property shall be placed underground. All
junction and access boxes shall be screened with appropriate
landscaping. All utility pad fixtures and meters should be shown
57
on the site plan. The necessity for utility connections, meter boxes,
etc., should be recognized and integrated with the architectural
elements of the site plan.
(I) Parking areas and driveways shall be paved with material which is
appropriate to the comprehensive design scheme of the project and
to the intensity of use to which parking areas and driveways will be
subject.
(J) The placement of a proposed development’s parking area to the
side or rear of a main structure’s corridor façade, or within a
courtyard surrounded on two or more sides by a proposed
structure, is required. The rationale for this guideline is to promote
good proportional spatial definition for the Wilson Road area to be
accomplished through a reduction in the distance required for a
building’s setback.
(K) Where possible, curb cuts and driveways shall be combined to
ensure the traffic handling capacity of area roads. In the Wilson
Road Design, connections between and joint use of rear parking
lots is encouraged.
(L) All exterior lights shall be arranged and installed so that the direct
or reflected illumination does not exceed 0.5 foot candles above
the background measured at the lot line of any adjoining residential
or agricultural parcel. Lighting standards shall be of a directional
type capable of shielding the light source from direct view from
any adjoining residential or agricultural parcel and public right-ofway.
(M) Lighting shall enhance the overall aesthetics of the site and shall
provide security for pedestrians and visitors to the area.
(N) Lighting shall be compatible with the architectural design of the
buildings.
(O) Ease of pedestrian access between proposed developments and
adjacent developments shall be a required consideration in the
development of a proposed project’s site and circulation plans.
58
ARTICLE 7
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
7-1 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Permanent off-street parking is required in all districts except the C-1 Principal
Commercial Districts unless stated otherwise in this Section. Such parking shall be
provided in the amount required by this section at the time of erection, alteration,
enlargement, establishment or change in use of any building or use.
7-1.1 General requirements: Off-street parking shall be required as listed
below for all general uses, except for specific requirements listed in
following sections for specific uses or unless modified by requirements of
following sections:
a. The following general uses shall provide one (1) off-street parking
space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area:
(1) Offices (excluding medical and dental offices) in all
districts.
(2) Financial institutions in all districts. In addition, a stacking
area must be provided for each drive-thru lane providing
enough space for five (5) vehicles in each lane.
(3) Photography studios, art studios, art galleries, art sales,
interior design studios, craft studios, craft sales, antique
shops, establishments for the teaching of music, dancing or
other performing arts in all districts.
(4) Automobile service stations and automobile repair garages
in all districts.
(5) Personal service establishments in all districts.
(6) Veterinary establishments in all districts.
b. The following general uses shall provide one (1) off-street parking
space for each 600 square feet of gross floor area:
(1) Service and repair establishments, excluding automobile
service stations and automobile repair garages in all
districts.
(2) Laboratories in all districts.
(3) Private clubs and lodges in all districts.
(4) Veterinary establishments in all districts.
(5) Wholesaling, warehousing and distribution operations in all
districts, of the first 12,000 square feet, one space per 600
square feet of gross floor area, and one (1) space per 900
square feet of gross floor are for any remaining area over
12,000 square feet.
(6) Industrial, manufacturing, and processing uses.
59
c. Retail stores, retail sales and display rooms in all districts: five (5)
spaces per 1000 square feet of gross floor area.
d. Sit down eating and drinking establishments in all districts,
including restaurants, bars, nightclubs, taverns, and lounges shall
provide one (1) off-street parking space for every three (3) seats
plus one (1) space per employee during the peak shift. Drive-thru
restaurants shall provide one (1) space per fifty (50) square feet of
gross floor area with a minimum of ten (10) spaces and eleven (11)
stacking spaces per drive-thru window, with a minimum of five (5)
stacking spaces designated for the ordering station.
7-1.2 Special requirements: The following requirements shall apply to the
following specific uses, instead of the general requirements listed above:
(1) Dwelling units:
(a) In single family detached structures: 3 spaces per dwelling
unit.
(b) In all other types of structures housing dwelling units: 2
spaces per dwelling unit, or 1.25 spaces for each 500 square
feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater. However, at
no time shall this requirement exceed 3 parking spaces per
dwelling unit.
(2) Elementary schools, junior high or middle schools: two (2)
spaces per classroom plus two (2) spaces per office, plus one (1)
space for every five (5) seats of maximum seating capacity in the
main assembly room, whichever is greater.
(3) Senior high schools, business schools, vocational schools: Four
(4) spaces per classroom plus two (2) spaces per office plus one (1)
space for every five (5) seats of maximum seating capacity in the
main assembly room.
(4) Colleges and universities: Required parking shall be based upon
the uses of each individual structure as required for structures not
in connection with colleges and universities. Classrooms shall be
considered as in (3) above.
(5) Churches, auditoriums, commercial recreation establishments,
other places of public assembly excluding motion picture
theaters: One (1) space for every four (4) seats of maximum
capacity in the main assembly room.
(6) Motion picture theaters: One (1) space for every 3 seats.
(7) Bowling alleys: Five (5) spaces for each bowling alley.
(8) Hotels, motels, rooming and boarding houses: One (1) space for
each rental unit, plus one (1) space for every three (3) employees.
(9) Rooming and boarding houses: Two (2) spaces plus one (1)
space for each rental unit.
60
(10) Bed and Breakfasts: Two (2) spaces plus one (1) space per room
for rent.
(11) Hospitals: One space for each two patient beds.
(12) Nursing homes, convalescent homes, and similar instructions:
One space for each patient bed.
(13) Medical and dental offices, clinics: One (1) space for each 150
square feet of gross floor space.
(14) Home occupations: In addition to spaces required for dwelling
units, one (1) space for each 200 square feet of floor space utilized
in connection with such home occupations.
(15) Funeral homes: Five (5) spaces plus one space for each (2) seats
of maximum seating capacity in the main assembly room, or one
(1) space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is
greater.
7-1.3 Modifications to Above General and Specific Requirements:
(1) Reduction of required parking for residential facilities intended for
occupancy by the elderly. The Board of Zoning Appeals may, as a
special exception, after notice and hearing, and subject to
appropriate safeguards and conditions, grant a reduction in offstreet
parking requirements of not more than fifty (50) percent of
that generally required for such facilities, provided that adequate
land is available for future expansion to accommodate the
generally required amount of parking and that the site design of
such reduced parking area will facilitate future expansion if such is
required.
(2) Reduction of required off-street parking for industrial, processing,
storage, warehousing, distribution, or wholesaling uses: The Board
of Zoning Appeals may, as a special exception, after notice and
hearing, and subject to appropriate safeguards, and conditions,
grant a reduction of not more than fifty (50) percent in the amount
of parking required for industrial, processing, storage,
warehousing, distribution, or wholesaling uses located in I-1
district if such action appears to be reasonably justified as based
upon employment levels and characteristics of operation of such
uses.
(3) Reduction of required off-street parking for drive-in facilities other
Appeals may, as a special exception, after notice and hearing, and
subject to appropriate safeguards, and conditions, grant a reduction
of not more than fifty (50) percent in the generally required offstreet
parking for facilities offering drive-in service to customers or
patrons provided that:
61
(a) The applicant for such special exception demonstrates that the
installation of drive-in facilities will reduce customer or patron
parking requirements in direct ration to the number of off-street
parking spaces proposed to be eliminated.
(b) That adequate off-street parking will remain to accommodate
employees.
(4) Requirements for Combined Facilities: Combined Facilities --
The off-street parking facilities required of two or more uses
located on the same Building Site may be combined and used
jointly; provided, however, that where the facilities are combined
and used jointly by two or more uses having different standards for
determining the amount of facilities required, the off-street parking
facilities shall be adequate in area to provide the sum total of the
facilities required of all such uses provided, further, that where the
facilities are combined and used jointly by two or more uses
having the same standard for determining the amount of facilities
required, of all such uses, for the purposes of this section, shall be
considered as a single unit in determining the amount of off-street
parking facilities required.
7-1.4 Other Regulations Relating to Off-Street Parking
(1) Required Improvements for Off-Street Parking Areas: Off-
Street parking areas developed to meet minimum requirements of
this Ordinance, and all off-street parking facilities located within
the C-1 Principal commercial District shall be within properly
graded, marked and improved parking lots or within parking
structures which meet the following standards:
(a) Drainage and surfacing: They shall be properly graded for
drainage, surfaced with concrete, asphaltic concrete, or asphalt
and maintained in good condition free of weeds, dust, trash,
and debris;
(b) Wheel Guards: They shall be provided with wheel guards or
bumper guards, so located that no part of parked vehicles will
extend beyond the parking space;
(c) Protective barriers of such dimensions that occupants of
adjacent structures are not unreasonably disturbed, either by
day or night, by the movement of vehicles;
(d) Lighting: Facilities shall be so arranged that the source of light
is concealed from public view and from adjacent residential
properties and does not interfere with traffic;
(e) Entrances and Exits: They shall be provided with entrances and
exits so located as to minimize traffic congestion;
62
(f) Prohibition of Other Uses: They shall not be used for the sale,
repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment,
materials, or supplies.
(2) Design of Parking Area:
All off-street parking areas with the exception of parking areas for
one and two family detached dwellings shall be so designed that no
maneuvering incidental to parking shall be on any public street and
so that an automobile may be parked or unparked without moving
any other automobile.
(3) Size of Required Parking Spaces:
For purposes of this Ordinance the minimum size of one parking
space shall be nine feet in width and twenty (20) feet in depth plus
sufficient areas for access to and maneuvering for parking in any
respective space.
(4) Remote Parking Space:
If the off-street parking space required by this Ordinance cannot be
reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is
located, such space may be provided on any land within four
hundred (400) feet of the principal use; provided that the owner or
authorized agent for the land upon which such remote parking is
located shall restrict the use of such parking areas for parking only
in connection with the use or structure for which such remote
parking is provided, and that such restriction shall be recorded by a
declaration of restrictions properly filed with the Register of
Mesne Conveyances of Fairfield County, which may be released
only by the written consent of the Town of Winnsboro.
(5) Major Recreational Equipment: Not more than one (1) piece of
major recreational equipment, per family living on the premises,
shall be permitted to be parked on a lot in any residential zone; and
the equipment shall not be occupied temporarily or permanently
while it is parked or stored, except in an authorized mobile home
park.
(6) Parking and Storage of Certain Vehicles:
Automotive vehicles or trailers (excluding trailers not legally
required to have licensing) of any kind or type without current
license plates shall not be parked on any residentially zoned
property other than in completely enclosed buildings. However,
one boat or one travel trailer may be stored in the rear yard if they
have a current license.
63
7-2 OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Every building or structure hereafter erected and used for business, trade, or industry
shall provide space as indicated herein for the loading and unloading of vehicles, with
access to a public street or alley. Such space shall be so arranged that vehicles shall
maneuver for loading and unloading entirely within the property lines of the premises.
Off-street loading spaces shall meet the following requirements of size and number:
7-2.1 Retail and service businesses: One space ten (10) feet by twenty-five
(25) feet with overhead clearance of fourteen (14) feet for each twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.
7-2.2 Wholesale and industrial uses: One space ten (10) feet by fifty (50) feet
with fourteen (14) feet overhead clearance, as follows:
Square feet of gross
floor area in structure
Number of berths
0 - 25,000
1
25,000 - 40,000
2
40,000 - 100,000
3
100,000 - 160,000
4
160,000 - 240,000
5
240,000 - 320,000
6
320,000 - 400,000
7
Each 90,000 and above 400,000 1
7-2.3 Bus and truck terminals: Sufficient spaces to accommodate the
maximum number of buses or trucks to be loading, unloading, or stored at
the terminal at any one time.
7-3 GROUP DEVELOPMENTS
Group development where permitted must meet the provisions of the Winnsboro Land
Development Regulations. Group commercial or industrial districts may be permitted in
any commercial or industrial zone, subject to the provisions of the Winnsboro Land
Development Regulations.
7-3.1 Types of Group Developments:
(1) Group commercial or industrial developments consist of more
than one commercial or industrial structure erected on a single lot.
(2) Group housing developments consist of:
64
(a) Any structure containing more than four dwelling units on
the first floor level thereof or containing more than eight
dwelling units throughout.
(b) More than one structure containing dwelling units erected
on a single lot.
7-3.2 Regulation of Group Commercial or Industrial Developments:
Group commercial or industrial developments may be established in any
district provided that:
(1) They house only permitted or permissible uses for the district in
which they are located.
(2) They meet all lot, yard, and other requirements of this Ordinance.
(3) Off-street parking facilities established in connection with such
developments shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission to
see that the design, location and arrangement will not interfere
with the efficient flow of traffic and with the access of emergency
or service vehicles.
(4) They are reviewed by the Planning Commission. Before the
Zoning Administrator may act on any proposal for a zoning permit
for the construction or enlargement of any group commercial or
industrial development, the Planning Commission shall review site
plans, descriptions and other such materials as set forth in Section
V, Large Scale Development, of the Winnsboro Subdivision
Regulations in order to determine that the requirements of that
ordinance will be met by the proposed development and further
shall find that such development is in harmony with the intent and
purposes of this ordinance and shall certify such findings to the
Zoning Administrator. In the event that the Planning Commission
shall fail to report its findings to the Zoning Administrator within
sixty days from the time that all required materials are submitted,
the Zoning Administrator may act upon such proposal as if the
Planning Commission had reported favorably on all aspects
thereof.
7-3.3 Regulations of Group Housing Developments:
(1) Establishment: Group housing developments may be established
as follows:
a. Containing single family detached dwellings only in R-1
districts.
b. Containing single family detached dwelling or duplexes only in
R-2 districts.
65
c. Containing single family detached dwellings, duplexes, or
multi-family dwellings in R-3 and RO districts.
(2) Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit: A group housing development shall
conform to the minimum lot area per dwelling unit of the district in
which it is located, provided however, that any group housing
development containing more than one structure shall have lot area
of at least 20,000 square feet.
(3) Street Access: Any building established in connection with such
group housing development which does not face directly on a
public street shall be provided with access to a public street by a
paved driveway having a pavement width of not less than twelve
(12) feet in width for a one-way street and twenty (20) feet in
width for two-way streets. These pavement widths are exclusive
of parking spaces.
(4) Setback Requirements: Unless otherwise provided by this
Ordinance, all buildings and structures established in connection
with such development shall comply with the front yard setbacks
established for the district in which located and shall be set back
not less than twenty (20) feet from any side or rear property line.
Parking facilities or driveways shall not be permitted in the side
and rear yard setbacks for a distance of ten (10) feet from the
property line.
(5) Orientation of Yards: The orientation of yards for structures
within group housing developments shall be based upon the
orientation of the lot and upon the orientation of individual
structures, as further set forth in Section 5-12.4.
(6) Spacing Between Buildings: All buildings shall be at least 20 feet
apart; but at least 40 feet apart when front-to-front or rear-to-rear
and one hundred (100) feet when front-to-rear.
(7) Uses Prohibited: In no case shall a use be permitted in connection
with such development that is prohibited by this Ordinance in the
district in which such group housing development is to be located.
(8) Off-Street Parking Facilities: Off-street facilities established in
connection with such developments shall be of such design,
location and arrangement that will not interfere with the efficient
flow of traffic through the area and that will not interfere with the
access of emergency or service vehicles.
66
(9) Elevators or Escalators: Any residential structures within a group
housing development, or defined as being a group housing
development, containing three stories or more above or below the
level of the principal entrance shall contain elevators or escalators.
(10) Buffer requirements: The Planning Commission at its discretion
may require a buffer between a group housing development and
other adjoining uses to mitigate any adverse impact of the
development on surrounding uses.
(11) Review by Planning Commission:
a. Before the Board of Zoning Appeals may act on any proposal
for construction or enlargement of any group housing
development requiring special exception therefore, the
Planning Commission shall review site plans, descriptions, and
other such materials as set forth in the Winnsboro Land
Development Regulations in order to determine that the
requirements listed above will be met by such proposed
development, and further shall find that such development is in
harmony with the intent and purposes of this Ordinance and
shall certify such findings to the Board of Zoning Appeals. In
the event that the Planning Commission shall fail to report its
findings to the Board of Zoning Appeals within sixty days from
the time that all required materials are submitted, the Board of
Zoning Appeals may act upon such proposal as if the Planning
Commission had reported favorably on all aspects thereof.
b. If the group development is a permitted use in the district, the
Planning Commission shall review the same materials as set
forth in (a) above and may accept or reject the said proposal.
7-4 MOBILE HOMES
Mobile homes are permitted only in certified mobile home parks, and subject to the
following procedures and requirements in addition to those of the Mobile Home Park
Regulations:
7-4.1 The applicant shall apply for a mobile home permit from the Zoning
Administrator prior to moving a mobile home within the town limits
and/or the connection of utilities;
7-4.2 The mobile home shall meet or exceed all current federal regulations
governing design and construction of mobile homes, and shall not be older
than five (5) years from date of construction to the date of installation.
7-4.3 The permit shall be issued only after advertisement in a newspaper of
67
general circulation in the Town. This notice shall be placed at least seven
(7) days prior to granting the permit;
7-4.4 The applicant shall submit an approved zoning permit to the County
Assessor’s office for proper moving permits, stickers and payment of any
applicable taxes.
7-4.5 The mobile home must subsequently be legally connected with all utilities
except gas.
7-5 MANUFACTURED HOMES
7-5.1 DEFINITIONS
A. Manufactured building - Has the following features and
characteristics; it is
1. Mass-produced in a factory;
2. Designed and constructed for transportation to a site of
installation and use when connected to required utilities;
and
3. Either an independent, individual building or a module for
combination with other elements to form a building on the
site.
NOTE: The term “manufactured building” is not intended to apply
to use of prefabricated panels, trusses, plumbing subsystems, or
prefabricated sub-elements incorporated in the course of
construction of buildings on the site (modular), but only to major
elements requiring minor and incidental on-site combination or
installation.
B. Manufactured Home - A transportable dwelling unit over
35 feet in length and at least 20 feet in width, designed
without a permanent foundation, capable of supporting
year-round occupancy, and which may be joined into one
unit at the final site of occupancy. The house must be
permanently attached to the ground once moved to its site
of occupancy and all transportable features used to move
the house to the site of occupancy must be removed.
C. Classes of Manufactured Homes:
1. Class A-New manufactured homes certified as
meeting the 1974 Federal Manufactured Home
Construction and Safety Standards of the
Department of Housing and Urban Development
68
and approved by the Zoning Administrator as
meeting “acceptable similarity” appearance
standards in accordance with Section 7-5.2(g) of
this ordinance.
7-5.2 CLASS “A” MANUFACTURED HOMES – INTENT AND EFFECT
OF APPROVAL PROCEDURES; GUIDES AND STANDARDS
A. Intent: It is the intent of these regulations to encourage the
provision of moderate and middle income housing in a general
residential environment by permitting the use of Class A
manufactured homes, as defined herein, in the R-2 and R-3
districts, and the MH Mobile Home Park subject to the
requirements and procedures set forth herein to assume acceptable
similarity in exterior appearance between such manufactured
homes and dwellings that have been or might be constructed under
these and other lawful regulations on adjacent lots in the same
district.
B. Effect of Approval of Class A Manufactured Homes;
Limitations: Manufactured homes approved as Class A, either
individually or by specified model, shall be permitted in any
district in which similar residential occupancy is permitted, subject
to requirements and limitations residential occupancy is permitted,
subject to requirements and limitations applying generally to such
residential use in the district, including minimum lot, yard, and
building-spacing dimensions, percentage of the lot that may be
covered by building, transitional provision at district boundaries,
and off-street parking requirements, and subject to the following
additional requirements and limitations.
C. Approved Permanent Foundation and Curtain Wall Required:
No manufactured home shall be placed or occupied for residential
use on a separate site in any district permitting the use of Class A
manufactured homes, except with a permanent masonry foundation
and curtain wall, with proper ventilation.
D. Approval of Permanent Foundation and Curtain Wall: The
Zoning Administrator may, on his own initiative, establish general
approval for specified types, brands, varieties or design of
permanent foundation and brick curtain wall to be used in
connection with installation of Class A manufactured homes in
areas where such homes are permitted on their own sites. Such
general approval shall be based on a determination of acceptable
similarity in appearance to foundations for housing built on the site
and on durability adequate to preserve such appearance with
proper brands, varieties, or designs, the Zoning Administrator shall
make similar determinations. Where approval is granted for
permanent foundations or brick curtain wall in connection with
69
applications on individual Class A manufactured homes, the same
type, brand, variety, or design shall hereafter be construed to be
generally approved. If the Zoning Administrator shall find that a
specified type, brand, variety, or design of permanent foundation
or brick curtain wall that has been approved fails to preserve
acceptable appearance with proper maintenance, he shall order
necessary correction and/or shall suspend or remove the type,
brand, variety, or design from the generally approved listing, with
reasons stated in writing.
E. Application for Class A Determination; Material to be
Supplied: Application for approval of manufactured homes as
Class A shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator in such
form as he may reasonably require to make determinations. In
particular, in addition to such information as is generally required
for permits and is necessary for administrative purposes, such
application shall include all information necessary to make
determination as to their conformity with Standards for
Determinations of Acceptable Similarity in Exterior Appearance,
Class A Manufactured Homes, including elevation or photographs
of all sides of the manufactured home, exterior dimensions, roof
slopes, exterior finish, and the like.
F. Action by the Zoning Administrator; Time Limitation on
Determinations; Nature of Determination: Within fifteen
working days of receipt of the application and all required
supporting material, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the
applicant of approval, conditional approval, or denial of the
application. Conditional approval shall be granted only when the
conditions and reason therefor are stated in writing and agreed to
by the applicant, and such conditions shall be binding upon the
applicant. In case of disapproval, the reasons therefore shall be
stated in writing.
G. Standards for Determination of Acceptable Similarity of
Exterior Appearance; Class A Manufactured Homes: The
following standards shall be used in determination of acceptable
similarity in appearance between manufactured homes and
residences constructed on the site to assure that such manufactured
homes, with permanent foundation or curtain wall approved (as
provided at Approval of Permanent Foundation) will be compatible
in appearance with site-built housing that has been or may be
constructed on adjacent or nearby locations. In addition to meeting
the following specific standards, no manufactured home to be
approved as Class A shall have an arrangement and appearance of
windows and doors or other features or use colors or color
combinations that would be incompatible in a neighborhood in
which most residences are site-built.
70
1. Minimum Width of Structure: Minimum width of the
manufactured home as assembled on the site shall not be
less than 20 feet, measured across the narrowest point.
2. Minimum Roof Pitch, Minimum Eave Overhang, Roofing
Materials: The pitch of the main roof shall not be less than
3:12. Minimum overhang of eaves shall be twelve (12)
inches. Roofing materials shall consist of one of the
following categories: wood, shingle, wood shake, synthetic
composite shingle, concrete tile, or any other material may
be used that is generally acceptable for site-built housing, if
applied in such a manner as to be similar in appearance.
Metallic roofing surfaces shall not be permitted on the
residential structure or on any garage or carport unless
approved by the Town’s Building Official.
3. Exterior Siding: Exterior siding shall be made of
nonreflective, nonglossy, and nonmetallic materials unless
approved by the Town’s Building Official. Acceptable
siding materials include: vinyl, brick, wood, stucco, stone,
or other masonry materials or any combination of these
materials or any material that the Town’s Building Official
deems to meet the intent of this regulation, and which is
compatible with surrounding development shall be used.
4. Average Assessed Valuation of Homes Within the Block
Immediately Surrounding and Opposite the Proposed Site:
The assessed valuation of the manufactured home must be
100% of other homes within the block immediately
surrounding and opposite the proposed site for approval.
7-6 MOBILE HOME PARK REGULATION
The Winnsboro Mobile Home Park Ordinance is hereby repealed.
7-6.1 Mobile Home Park: In any district in which mobile home parks are
permitted the minimum standards listed below shall apply.
(1) Definitions: For purpose of this section, the following terms are
defined:
(a) Mobile Home: Any vehicle or similar portable structure
mounted or design for mounting on wheels, used or intended
for use for dwelling purposes, including structural additions,
except parked and unoccupied camping type trailers. Any such
vehicles or structure shall be deemed to be a mobile home
whether or not the wheels have been removed therefrom and
71
whether or not resting upon a temporary or permanent
foundation.
(b) Mobile Home Stand: That part of an individual lot which has
been reserved for the placement of a mobile home.
(c) Mobile Home Park: Any premises used or set apart for the
purpose of supplying to the public parking space for two or
more mobile homes for living and sleeping purposes, and
which include any buildings, structures, vehicles, or enclosure
used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such
mobile home park.
(d) Property Line: The recorded boundary of a mobile home park.
(2) Area:
(a) The minimum area for a mobile home park shall be two acres.
(b) The maximum number of mobile homes per acre shall not
exceed seven.
(c) The minimum mobile home stand shall be at least 4,000 square
feet. These stands shall be indicated by permanent flush
stakes, markers, or other suitable means at each corner.
(3) Driveways, Walkways and Parking:
(a) All mobile home stands, other than those fronting upon a
public street, shall abut upon a private driveway that has a
minimum roadway width of 24 feet, exclusive of on-street
parking. Such driveway shall be graded in accordance with
standards of Fairfield County, shall be well marked and
lighted, and shall have unobstructed access to a public street.
(b) In the event such driveway is not a “through street”, it shall
have a minimum of 50 foot radius turn-around (cul-de-sac).
(c) A minimum of one automobile parking space shall be provided
for each mobile home. The space should be located on or
adjacent to the mobile home stand. Concrete curbs or other
appropriate and durable car stops shall be installed at the end of
all “head-in” parking bays.
(4) Setbacks and Clearances:
72
(a) All mobile homes and all buildings or structures within a
mobile home park shall have a minimum setback of 25 feet
from the park’s side or rear property lines and shall comply
with the front yard requirements.
(b) Mobile homes shall be situated on each space so that a
minimum setback of at least 15 feet exists between the mobile
home stand and any abutting driveway.
(c) There shall be at least a 20 foot side clearance and a 20 foot
end to end clearance between adjacent mobile home stands.
(d) Accessory structures shall not be erected within five feet of any
mobile home stand or within 20 feet of any common building
such as offices or laundry facilities.
(5) Drainage, Recreation, Screening and Improvements:
(a) A mobile home park shall be located on a well-drained site,
properly graded to insure rapid drainage and freedom from
stagnant water.
(b) A safe, useable recreation area shall be conveniently located in
each park and shall comprise an area to at least 150 square feet
for each mobile home stand.
(c) Mobile home parks shall be effectively screened along the rear
and side property lines by a planting of evergreen trees or
shrubs designed to be at least five feet high and four feet deep
at maturity. In addition to such planting strip, a wall or fence
at least seven (7) feet high, which is designed to provide
equivalent screening, shall be provided.
(d) Construction of the required drives, utilities, mobile home
stands, and other improvements shall be completed for at least
seven mobile home stands before any part of the park is
occupied.
(6) Plot Plan: An application for a permit to develop a mobile home
park shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator upon forms
supplied from his office. This application, together with five (5)
copies of the plot plan drawn at a scale of 1” to 40’ or larger, shall
show the following:
(a) The total park area, including the shape and dimensions of the
site and a North arrow;
73
(b) The location and dimensions of proposed driveways, entrances,
exits, and walkways;
(c) The location and dimensions of mobile home stands and
parking areas;
(d) The method and plan of sewage disposal;
(e) The plan of water, gas, and electrical supply;
(f) The location and quantity of refuse receptacles;
(g) The location of recreation areas, and
(h) The park screening and landscaping plans.
After the Zoning Administrator has reviewed the permit and plot
plan, he shall forward same, together with his written comments to
the Planning Commission for review. The Planning Commission
will have 30 days in which to make a recommendation.
7-7 HOME OCCUPATIONS
Occupations, professions, or trades customarily carried on by occupants of dwelling units
as secondary uses which are clearly incidental to use of dwelling units for residential
purposes are allowed as accessory uses in districts where dwelling units are permitted or
permissible, subject to the following provisions:
7-7.1 No person other than members of the family residing on a premises shall
be engaged in such occupation.
7-7.2 The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants, and not more than 25% of the floor area of the dwelling unit
shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation;
7-7.3 There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or
premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home
occupation other than one sign, not exceeding two square feet in area, nonilluminated,
and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building;
7-7.4 The home occupation shall be conducted only within the principal
structure;
7-7.5 There shall be no sales in connection with such home occupation;
74
7-7.6 No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes
than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any
need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall
be met off the street and other than in a required front yard, in accordance
with Section 7-1.
7-7.7 No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted
in a single family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in
other than a single family residence. In the case of electrical interference,
no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible
interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes
fluctuations in line voltage off the premises;
7-7.8 No outdoor storage shall be allowed in connection with any home
occupation;
7-7.9 Operation of home occupations shall be limited to the hours between 8:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
7-8 CHILD DAYCARE FACILITY
Child Daycare facilities are permitted in C-1, C-2 and RO districts, subject to the
following provisions:
7-8.1 General requirements: Before granting a special exception for
establishment of a child daycare facilities, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall determine that such facility meets the requirements set forth in the
South Carolina Department of Social Services “Rules and Regulations
Relating to Licensing Day Care Facilities and Child Care Centers.”
7-8.2 Fencing: A fenced play area of not less than 3,000 square feet shall be
provided. Also the number of children in the fenced play area at any time
shall not exceed the ratio of one child for every 150 square feet of fenced
in the play area. No fence shall be less than five (5) feet in height.
7-8.3 Loading and unloading: An area adequate for loading and unloading of
children to be accommodated shall be provided and such area shall not be
located within any public right-of-way.
7-8.4 Signs: Notwithstanding provisions of Article 8 of the Zoning Ordinance,
signs in connection with any day nursery or kindergarten located in C-1 or
75
C-2 districts shall be limited to one sign for each facility, not to exceed
two (2) square feet of display area, and not illuminated.
7-8.5 Play Equipment: No play equipment shall be closer than twenty (20) feet
to any residential lot line.
7-8.6 Facilities, operation and maintenance shall meet requirements of the
appropriate health department.
7-8.7 Additional Conditions: The Board shall determine if additional
safeguards and conditions are appropriate in order to protect children
accommodated from detrimental characteristics of use of adjacent areas, or
to protect adjacent uses from potentially incompatible characteristics
arising from such day nurseries and kindergartens.
7-9 YARD SALES, GARABE SALES, OR RUMMAGE SALES
Yard sales shall not be permitted more than three times per year at one address. No new
or used merchandise can be purchased for purposes of resale at a yard sale, garage sale,
or rummage sale. The family living in the dwelling unit at the site of the sale may
include the merchandise of other families in the sale.
7-10 REQUIRED SEPARATION BETWEEN COMMERCIAL AND/OR INDUSTRIAL
AND RESIDENTIAL LOTS
When the rear or side lot lines of a lot zoned and used for commercial or industrial
purposes adjoins the rear or side lot line of a lot zoned for residential purposes, the
commercial or industrial development shall comply with the following requirements:
7-10.1 The required setback line for buildings on the commercial or industrial lot
shall be increased to ten (10) feet from the zoning line of the residential
district;
7-10.2 A vision screening buffer shall be provided along the rear or side lot line
used and zoned for commercial or industrial purposes. This buffer shall
consist of a vegetative, opaque screen which at the end of a two year
period would be at least four (4) feet deep and six (6) feet tall, a solid wall
or fence at least six (6) feet tall, or any combination of the above offering
equal protection. All buffers must be constructed, planted, and maintained
so they do not adversely affect utilities.
7-10.3 These provisions shall not apply when the aforesaid side or rear lot lines
do not meet due to the presence of an easement, water course or right-ofway
greater than twenty-five (25) feet in width. In such cases said
76
easement, water course or other right-of-way shall be deemed as a
sufficient buffer for the purpose of this Ordinance.
7-11 REQUIRED CONCEALMENT OF LIGHTING
Lighting facilities used to illuminate parking areas or for other purposes shall be so
arranged that the source of light is concealed from adjacent residential properties and
does not interfere with traffic.
7-12 EXCESS HEIGHT
Any principal structure may be erected or altered to a height in excess of that specified
for the district in which the structure is located providing that each required front, side,
and rear yard is increased one foot for each foot of such excess height, provided, further
that where no front yard is required the part of the structure exceeding the height
specified for the district shall be set back from the vertical planes of all street lines one
foot for each two feet of such excess height.
7-13 CLUSTER HOUSING REGULATIONS
7-13.1 Intent: Is it the intent of these regulations to encourage variety and
flexibility in land development and land use for residential areas, subject
to the purpose of zoning and the conditions and safeguards which will
promote the comprehensive plan; to provide harmonious relationship with
surrounding development, minimizing such influences as land use
incompatibilities, heavy traffic and congestion, and excessive demands on
existing and planned public facilities; to provide a means of developing
areas of physiographic or other physical features to enhance natural beauty
and other attributes, and in so doing, to provide for the use of such lands
as recreational space for the residents of such developments; to encourage
the efficient use of those public facilities required in connection with new
residential development; and to encourage innovative design techniques to
utilize the environment as a guide to development such as, but not limited
to, zero lot lines, party walls, site locations with regard to energy
consumption, and other concepts.
7-13.2 Definitions
(1) Detached Cluster House: A single family dwelling unit which has
no common wall with any building other than its accessory
structure or structures and located on its own individual lot.
(2) Attached Cluster House: A single family dwelling unit in a
building that has not less than 2 nor more than 8 single family
77
housekeeping units intended for owner occupancy which are
erected in a row or cluster on adjoining lots, each being separated
from the adjoining unit or units by an approved two hour fire wall,
and each such building being separated from any other building by
space on all sides.
(3) Detached Cluster Housing Development: A minimum of four
detached cluster houses.
(4) Attached Cluster Housing Development: A minimum of two
attached cluster houses (or principal building).
7-13.3 Zoning Districts Where Allowed: Cluster housing developments are
allowed in certain districts as permitted uses or special exceptions. See
Article 6 as to where district cluster housing is allowed.
7-13.4 Materials to be submitted for Planning Commission Review: All
applicants for Cluster Housing Developments shall submit architectural
plans including details such as number, location, and orientation of
dwelling units; plat plans, landscaping plans, plans for off-street parking
and service areas, ingress and egress arrangements, elevations of all
portions of proposed structures, perspective drawings showing the
relationship between the proposed structures and between proposed
structures and any other adjoining existing structures within fifty feet of
the exterior property lines of the proposed Cluster Housing Development
area. Also a copy of the legal documentation for land in private
ownership, common ownership and public ownership must accompany the
application for Planning Commission review. The Planning Commission
may require additional information if the members feel there is a need.
7-13.5 Requirements Concerning Planning Commission Review:
(1) The Zoning Administrator shall issue no zoning permit for the
erection of any attached or detached cluster house or any alteration
to any cluster house, which (a) increases its height or coverage of
land; (b) increases the total number of residential units in the
approved cluster housing development; (c) alters the parking
requirements or reduces the number of off-street parking spaces; or
(d) infringes on the common ownership property or the designated
exterior buffer areas along the fringe of the identified cluster
housing development until the Planning Commission shall have
reviewed the application and documents required to be submitted
therewith and reported concerning conformity with the provisions,
intent and purposes of this Ordinance.
78
(2) Where cluster housing developments are allowed as permitted
uses, the site plan must be approved by the Planning Commission
prior to the issuance of a building permit. The Planning
Commission as a condition of approval may require screening or
modifications to the landscaping, parking and circulation plans.
(3) Where cluster housing developments are allowed as special
exceptions, the approval of the site plan must be obtained prior to
the consideration by the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Planning
Commission as a condition of approval may require screening or
modifications to the landscaping, parking and circulation plans.
The screening as determined by the Planning Commission and the
placement of curb cuts as approved by the Planning Commission,
along with the arrangement of land in private ownership, common
ownership and public ownership, are binding upon the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
7-13.6 Maximum Dwelling Unit Density for Cluster Housing Developments:
The dwelling unit density of a clustering housing development must not be
greater than the following:
REQUIRED LAND AREA PER UNIT EXCLUSIVE OF STREET
ZONING DISTRICT
RIGHTS-OF-WAY
R-1
10,000 square feet per dwelling unit
R-2
6,000 square feet per dwelling unit
R-3 & RO
6,000 square feet for the first dwelling unit and
2,500 square feet for each additional
dwelling unit
7-13.7 Minimum Yard Requirements from Exterior Property Lines of
Cluster Housing Developments:
DISTANCE FROM:
ZONING
RIGHT-OF-WAY ALONG
OTHER EXTERIOR
DISTRICT EXISTING PUBLIC STREET PROPERTY LINES
R-1
30 feet
25 feet
79
R-2
25 feet
25 feet
R-3 & RO
25 feet
25 feet
7-13.8 Minimum Yard Requirements from New Street Rights-of-Way
Within A Cluster Housing Development:
ZONING DISTRICT
MINIMUM REQUIRED YARD
Secondary
Front
Front
R-1, R-2, R-3, & RO
20 feet
10 feet
7-13.9 Minimum Spacing Between Principal Buildings:
FRONT
FRONT
SIDE
REAR
REAR
REAR
ZONING
TO
TO
TO
TO
TO
TO
DISTRICT FRONT SIDE SIDE FRONT SIDE REAR
R-1 & R-2
35'
25'
6'
100'
10'
20'
R-3 & RO
25'
20'
4'
100'
10'
20'
7-13.10 Minimum Required Open Space:
(1) Open space for the purpose of cluster housing development is
defined as follows: That land area in common ownership of the
homeowners, exclusive of parking areas and roadways, which is
designed to meet the primary objective of supplying passive or
active recreation needs.
MINIMUM OPEN SPACE
PERCENT OF LAND IN OPEN
ZONING DISTRICT
SPACE IN COMMON OWNERSHIP
R-1
35%
R-2
25%
R-3 & RO
20%
80
(2) Maintenance of Opening Space – Recreation area designated for
use by the residents of the Cluster Housing Development as
generated by the requirements in Section 7-12.10, of this
ordinance, shall be maintained either by the developer in perpetuity
and a document executed and recorded to that effect, or by a Home
Owner’s Association to be set up by the developer in accord with
and chartered by the State under the applicable regulations. Such
association charter or declaration of incorporation shall be
submitted with the Development Plan for approval by the Planning
Commission and shall be recorded along with the development
plat(s) in the Register of Mesne Conveyances Office.
7-13.11 Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces:
(1) Where a Cluster Housing Development is dependent completely on
off-street parking grouped in concentrations of greater than four
spaces and under common ownership, two off-street parking
spaces per dwelling unit;
(2) Two off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit on an individual
privately owned driveway and appropriate visitor parking as
determined by the Planning Commission.
7-13.12 Requirements for Streets and Parking Areas:
(1) All new streets and their rights-of-way must meet the requirements
of subdivision streets as stated in the Land Development
Regulations and be approved by the Zoning Administrator.
(2) The quality of paving standards for off-street parking areas
containing more than four parking spaces are the same as quality
of paving standards for minor residential streets, as set forth in the
Land Development Regulations.
(3) All dwelling units and appropriate community facilities must be
provided adequate access to streets meeting the standards of the
Land Development Regulations.
7-13.13 Other Lot Requirements:
Notwithstanding other provisions of this ordinance lots within Cluster
Housing Developments are not subject to minimum lot area, lot width, lot
frontage, or requirements concerning access to a public or private street.
81
7-14 FENCES
7-14.1 In any residential district:
Electric fences, barbed wire fences, or other fences constructed of sharp
materials are prohibited in all residential districts, unless the electrified,
barbed, or sharp portions of the fence are shielded in such a way that
persons on the exterior side of the fence cannot be harmed. Existing
fences may be replaced or repaired notwithstanding the requirements
listed above.
7-14.2 In non-residential districts adjoining a residential district: When a lot
line of a lot used for commercial or industrial purposes adjoins a lot line of
a lot zoned or used for residential purposes the commercial or industrial
development must set back any barbed wire fence, electrified fence, or
fenced constructed of sharp materials at least 12 feet from any such lot
line, unless the electrified, barbed, or sharp portions of the fence are
shielded in such a way that persons on the exterior side of the fence cannot
be harmed. Existing fences may be replaced or repaired, notwithstanding
the requirements listed above.
7-15 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
It is the purpose of this section to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the
health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Winnsboro, and
to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the continued deleterious
location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the town. The
provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of any communicative materials including sexually oriented
materials. Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of this ordinance to restrict or deny
access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to
deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market. Neither is it the intent or effect of this section to condone or legitimize
the distribution of obscene material.
7-15.1. Definitions
7-15.1.1. Adult arcade means any place to which the public is
permitted or invited within coin-operated or slug-operated
or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled
still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other imageproducing
devices are maintained to show images to five
(5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and
where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by the depicting or describing of “certain
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
82
7-15.1.2. Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial
establishment which, as one of its principal business
purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of
consideration any one or more of the following:
a. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, or video reproductions, slides, or
other visual representations which depict or
describe “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas”;; or
b. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are
designed for use in connection with “specified
sexual activities”. A commercial establishment
may have other principal business purposes that do
not involve the offering for sale or rental of material
depicting or describing “specified sexual activities”
or “specified anatomical areas” and still be
categorized as adult bookstore or adult video store.
Such other business purposes will not serve to
exempt such commercial establishment from being
categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video
store so long as one of its principal business
purposes is the offering for sale or rental for
consideration the specified materials which depict
or describe “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas”.
7-15.1.3. Adult cabaret means a night club, bar, restaurant or
similar commercial establishment which regularly features:
a. Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or
b. Live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas”;; or
c. Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or
other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas”.
83
7-15.1.4. Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment:
a. Offers accommodations to the public for any form
of consideration; provides patrons with closedcircuit
television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized
by the depiction or description of “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”;; and has
a sign visible from the public right-of-way which
advertises the availability of this adult type or
photographic reproductions; or
b. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time
that is less than ten (10) hours; or
c. Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to
sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less
than ten (10) hours.
7-15.1.5. Adult motion picture theater means a commercial
establishment where, for any form of consideration, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized by the depiction or description of “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.
7-15.1.6. Adult theater means a theater concert hall, auditorium, or
similar commercial establishment which regularly features
persons who appear in a state of nudity or live
performances which are characterized by the exposure of
“specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual
activities”.
7-15.1.7. Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or
offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another
person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie
or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
7-15.1.8. Escort Agency means a person or business association who
furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts
as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or
other consideration.
7-15.1.9. Establishment means and includes any of the following:
84
a. The opening or commencement of any sexually
oriented business as a new business.
b. The conversion of an existing business, whether or
not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually
oriented business;
c. The additions of any sexually oriented business to
any other existing sexually oriented business; or
d. The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
7-15.1.10. Permittee and/or licensee means a person in whose name
a permit and/or license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as
an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license.
7-15.1.11. Nude Model Studio means any place where a person who
appears in a state of nudity or displays “specified
anatomical area” is provided to be observed, sketched,
drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of
consideration.
7-15.1.12. Nudity or a state of nudity means the appearance of a
person’s genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or
cleavage of the buttocks, including the portion of the
buttocks within four (4) inches on either side of a vertical
line extending upward from the anus, or any simulation
thereof, or any portion of a female breast below a
horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest
point or any simulation thereof. This definition shall
include the entire lower portion of the female breast.
7-15.1.13. Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, association, or other legal entity.
7-15.1.14. Semi-nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers
no more than the genitals, pubic region, and exposes the
female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by
supporting straps or devices.
7-15.1.15. Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial
enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes,
offers for any form of consideration:
85
a. Physical contact in the form of wrestling or
tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or
b. Activities between male and female persons and/or
persons of the same sex when one or more of the
persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
7-15.1.16. Sexual oriented business means an adult arcade, adult
bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel,
adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency,
nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.
7-15.1.17. Specified anatomical areas means the male genitals in a
state of sexual arousal and/or the vulva or more intimate
parts of the female genitals.
7-15.1.18. Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the
following:
a. The fondling or other erotic touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female
breasts;
b. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
c. Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
d. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with
any of the activities set forth in (a) through (c)
above.
7-15.1.19. Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business
means the increase in floor areas occupied by the business
by more than (25) percent, as the floor areas exist on the
date this ordinance is adopted.
7-15.1.20. Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented
business means and includes any of the following:
a. The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
b. The transfer or securities which constitute a
controlling interest in the business, whether by sale,
exchange, or similar means; or
86
c. The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar
legal device which transfers the ownership or
control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of
the person possessing the ownership or control.
7-15.2. Classification
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
1. Adult arcades;
2. Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
3. Adult cabarets;
4. Adult motels;
5. Adult motion picture theaters;
6. Adult theaters;
7. Escort agencies;
8. Nude model studios; and
9. Sexual encounter centers.
7-15.3. Permit required
7-15.3.1. A person commits a misdemeanor if he operates a sexually
oriented business without a valid permit issued by the town
for the particular type of business.
7-15.3.2. An application for a permit must be made on a form
provided by the Zoning Administrator. The application
must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the
configuration of the premises, including a statement of total
floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or
diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be
drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of
plus or minus six (6) inches.
7-15.3.3. The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions
of this chapter and the premises must be inspected and
found to be in compliance with the law by the health
department, fire department, and building official.
7-15.3.4. If the person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is an individual, that person must sign the
application for a permit as applicant. If a person who
wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than
87
an individual, each individual who has a ten (10) percent or
greater interest in the business must sign the application for
a permit as applicant. If a corporation is listed as owner of
a sexually oriented business, each individual having a (10)
percent or greater interest in the corporation must sign the
application for a permit as applicant.
7-15.3.5. The fact that a person possesses other types of state,
county, or city permits and/or licenses does not exempt that
person from the requirement of obtaining a sexually
oriented business permit.
7-15.4. Issuance of permit and fee.
7-15.4.1. The Town Zoning Administrator shall approve the issuance
of a permit to an applicant within thirty (30) days after
receipt of an application unless any one or more of the
following is found to be true:
a. An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
b. An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue
payment to the town for taxes, fees, fines, or
penalties assessed or imposed in relation to a
sexually oriented business.
c. An applicant has failed to provide information
reasonably necessary for issuance of the permit of
has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application.
d. An applicant if residing with a person who has been
denied a permit by the town to operate a sexually
oriented business within the preceding twelve (12)
months, or residing with a person whose license to
operate a sexually oriented business has been
revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months,
or residing with a person whose license to operate a
sexually oriented business has been revoked within
the preceding twelve (12) months.
e. The premises to be used for the sexually oriented
business have not been approved by the health
department, fire department, and the building
official as being in compliance with applicable laws
and ordinances.
f. The permit fee required by this ordinance has not
been paid.
g. An applicant of the proposed establishment is in
violation of or is not in compliance with any of the
provisions of this ordinance.
88
h. The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the
name of the person or persons to whom it is
granted, the expiration date, and the address of the
sexually oriented business. The permit shall be
posted in a conspicuous place at or near the
entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it
may be easily read at any time.
7-15.4.2. The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit is
one thousand dollars ($1,000) dollars.
7-15.5. Inspection.
An application of permittee shall permit representatives of the sheriff
department, health department, fire department, or any town of Winnsboro
officials to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the
purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or
open for business, and it is unlawful to refuse to permit such inspection of
the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business.
7-15.6. Expiration of Permit.
7-15.6.1. Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance
and may be renewed only by making application as
provided herein. Application for renewal should be made
at least (30) days before the expiration date, and when
made less than (30) days before the expiration date, the
expiration of the permit will not be affected except for good
cause shown.
7-15.6.2. When the zoning administrator denies renewal of a permit,
the applicant shall not be issued a permit for one year from
the date of denial. If subsequent to denial, the zoning
administrator finds that the basis for denial of the renewal
permit has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be
granted a permit.
7-15.7. Suspension of Permit.
The zoning administrator may suspend a permit for a period not to exceed
thirty (30) days if it is determined that a permittee or an employee of a
permittee has:
7-15.7.1. Violated, or is not in compliance with any section of this
ordinance;
89
7-15.7.2. Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on
the sexually oriented business premises;
7-15-7.3. Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented
business premises as authorized by this chapter;
7-15-7.4. Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the
sexually oriented business premises.
7-15.8. Revocation of Permit.
7-15.8.1. The zoning administrator shall revoke a permit if a cause
for suspension in Section 7-15.7 occurs and the permit has
been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months
for willful and knowing violation of this ordinance.
7-15.8.2. The zoning administrator shall revoke a permit if it is
determined that:
a. A permittee knowingly gave false or misleading
material information in the application submitted to
the zoning department during the application
process;
b. A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed
possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on
the premises;
c. A permittee or an employee knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premise;
d. A permittee or an employee knowingly operated the
sexually oriented business during a period of time
when the permittee’s permit was suspended;;
e. A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed
any act of sexual conduct to occur in or on the
permitted premises;
f. A permittee is delinquent in payments to the town,
county, or state for any taxes or fees past due
related to the sexually oriented business.
7-15.8.3. When the zoning administrator revokes a permit, the
revocation shall continue for one year, and the permittee
shall not be issued a sexually oriented permit for one year
from the date revocation became effective. If subsequent to
revocation the zoning administrator finds that the basis for
the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant
may be granted a permit if at least ninety (90) days have
elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.
90
7-15.9. Transfer of Permit.
A permittee shall not transfer his permit to another, nor shall a permittee
operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a permit at any
place other than the address designated in the application.
7-15.10. Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses.
7-15.10.1. Reserved.
7-15.10.2. A person commits a misdemeanor when operating or
causes to be operated, a sexually oriented business outside
of a designated I-1 district. All sexually oriented
businesses shall be located within an I-1 district.
7-15.10.3. A person commits a misdemeanor when operating, or
causes to be operated, a sexually oriented business within
one thousand (1000) feet of:
a. A church;
b. A public or private elementary or secondary school;
c. A public park;
d. The property line of a lot devoted to residential use;
e. The property line of a lot devoted to a child Day-
Care Center.
7-15.10.4. A person commits a misdemeanor by causing or permitting
the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or
transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented
business within one thousand (1000) feet of another
sexually oriented business.
7-15.10.5. A person commits a misdemeanor by causing or permitting
the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than
one sexually oriented business in the same building,
structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor areas
of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure,
or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented
business.
7-15.10.6. For the purpose of this ordinance, measurement shall be
made in a straight line, without regard of intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the
building or structure used as a part of the premises where a
sexually oriented business is conducted to the nearest
property line of the premises of a church or public or
91
private elementary or secondary school, or to the nearest
boundary of an affected public park, residential district, or
residential lot.
7-15.10.7. For purposes of subsection (4) of this section, the distance
between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall be
measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the
structure in which each business is located.
7-15.10.8. Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on date
ordinance that is in violation of subsection (1) through (7)
of this section shall be deemed to nonconforming use will
be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed two (2)
years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or
voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or
more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased,
enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be
changed to a conforming use. If two (2) or more sexually
oriented businesses are within one thousand (1000) feet of
one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the
sexually oriented business which was first established and
continually operating at a particular location is the
conforming use and the later-established businesses is
nonconforming.
7-15.10.9. A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a
conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the
location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually
oriented business permit, of a church, public or private
elementary or secondary school, public park, residential
district, or a residential lot within one thousand (1000) feet
of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies
only to the renewal of a valid permit, and does not apply
when an application for a permit is submitted after a permit
has expired or has been revoked.
7-15.11. Additional Regulations for Adult Models.
7-15.11.1. Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar
commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two
(2) or more times in a period of time that is less than ten
(10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the
establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in
this chapter.
92
7-15.11.2. A person commits a misdemeanor if, as the person in
control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar
commercial establishment that does not have a sexually
oriented permit, he rents or sub-rents a sleeping room to a
person and, with ten (10) hours from the time the room is
rented, he rents or sub-rents the same sleeping room again.
7-15-11.3. For purposes of subsection (2) of this section, the terms
“rent” or “sub-rent” mean the act of permitting a room to
be occupied for any form of consideration.
7-15.12. Regulations for Exhibition of Sexually Explicit Films or Videos.
7-15.12.1. A person who operates or causes to be operated, a sexually
oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits
on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred
fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette,
or other reproduction which depicts specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with
the following requirements:
a. Upon application for a sexually oriented permit, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of
the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the
location of one or more manager’s stations and the
location of all overhead lighting fixtures and
designating any portion of the premises in which
patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station
may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor
area. The diagram shall also designate the place at
which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if
granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the
nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall
not be required; however each diagram should be
oriented to the north or to some designated street or
object and should be drawn to a designated scale or
with marked dimensions sufficient to show the
various internal dimensions of all areas of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six (6) inches. The zoning administrator may
waive the foregoing diagram for renewal
applications if the applicant adopts a diagram for
renewal applications that the configuration of the
premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
b. The application shall be sworn to be true and
correct by the applicant.
93
c. No alteration in the configuration or location of a
manager’s station may be made without the prior
approval of the zoning administrator or his
designee.
d. It is the duty of the owners and operator of the
premises to ensure that at least one employee is on
duty and situated in each manager’s station.
e. The interior of the premises shall be configured in
such a manner that there is an unobstructed view
from a manager’s station of every area of the
premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may
not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises has two or more manager’s stations
designated, then the interior of the premises shall be
configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to
which any patron is permitted access for any
purpose from at least one of the manager’s station.
The view required in this subsection must be by
direct line of sight from the manager’s station.
f. It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and
it shall also be the duty of any agents and
employees present in the premises, to ensure that
the view area specified in subsection (e) remains
unobstructed by any wall, merchandise, display
racks or other materials at all times and in every
booth or room in which viewing of videos, as
defined in subsection (a) of this section, is taking
place the bottom of the door must be at least
eighteen (18) inches above the floor level, and to
ensure that no patron is permitted access to any
area of the premises which has been designated as
an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the
application filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this
section.
g. No viewing room may be occupied by more than
one person at any time.
h. The premises shall be equipped with overhead
lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate
every place to which patrons are permitted access at
an illumination of not less than one foot candle as
measured at the floor level.
i. It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it
shall also be the duty of any agents and employees
present in the premises, to ensure that the
94
illumination described above, is maintained at all
times that any patron is present in the premises.
7-15.12.2. A person having a duty under subsection (a) through (i) of
subsection (1) above commits a misdemeanor if he
knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
7-15.13. Exemptions.
It is a defense to prosecution under this Article that a person appearing in a
state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
7-15.13.1. By a proprietary school, licensed by the state of South
Carolina; a college, junior college, or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation;
7-15.13.2. By a private college or university which maintains and
operates education programs in which credits are
transferable to a college, junior college, or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
7-15.13.3. In a structure:
a. Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising that indicates a
nude person is available for viewing; and
b. Where, in order to participate in a class a student
must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the
class; and
c. Where no more than one nude model is on the
premises at any one time.
7-16 LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS
7-16.1 Purposes for Required Landscaping
Landscaped open areas are required by this ordinance to provide buffer
areas or screening between adjacent land uses to reduce the impact of
incompatible activities; to improve, protect, preserve and promote the
aesthetic character, natural beauty, and value of land; and to promote and
protect public interests in recreation, safety, health, reduction of pollution,
and tree protection. The standards in this Section shall apply to all zoning
districts.
7-16.2 Buffer Areas
95
Landscaped buffer areas along the perimeter of lots, but not in a street
right-of-way, which areas may be used for passive recreation only, shall
be maintained by property owners as follows:
TYPE LAND USE WHERE
REQUIRED
BUFFER SIZE AND
REQUIRED PLANTS
A Multi-family complex, mobile
home park, non-residential use
not adjacent to residential
district, and all surface parking
lots.
Along street
rights-of-way,
except
driveways and
visibility
triangles.
Minimum buffer width: five (5)
feet. Plants required per 100
linear feet of street frontage: 12
ornamental shrubs, 2 evergreen
understory trees, and grass or
other ground cover. Shrubs may
be clustered.
B Multi-family complex, mobile
home park, commercial or
institutional use adjacent to
single-family residential use
not separated by street or
alley.
Along adjacent
residential
property lines.
Minimum buffer width: ten (10)
feet. Plants required per 100
linear feet: 2 deciduous canopy
trees 40 to 60 feet on center, and
8 evergreen plants 10 feet on
center.
C Industrial, warehouse, outdoor
sales or storage use adjacent to
residential district not
separated by street at least 18
feet wide.
Along adjacent
residential
district lines.
Minimum buffer width: fifteen
(15) feet. Plants required per
100 linear feet: 2 deciduous
canopy trees 40 to 60 feet on
center, and 17 evergreen plants
or understory trees in double
staggered rows 10 feet on
center.
Plant Standards: Minimum installation height: Evergreen understory trees and shrubs -- 6
feet; deciduous canopy trees -- 8 feet.
Minimum mature size: Evergreens -- 10 feet; deciduous trees -- 25 feet.
Substitutions: Existing plants: Existing plants meeting minimum standards may be
retained to meet buffer requirements.
Evergreens: Evergreen plants may be substituted for deciduous plants.
Fence or wall: Where existing lot use, size, shape, configuration,
topography or unusual circumstances prevent reasonable compliance
with buffer landscaping requirements, the Zoning Administrator may
approve substitution of an opaque fence or wall at least six feet in height,
but not exceeding ten feet in height, for a Type B or C buffer. Fences
and walls shall be neat in appearance and have a finished surface facing
adjacent property.
96
7-16.3 Open Space Landscaping Requirements
The following open space landscaping requirements shall apply to land
used in all zoning districts.
LAND USE OPEN SPACE REQUIRED LANDSCAPING
Single-family and twofamily
residential,
except clustered.
District yard requirements. None required.
Clustered residential 15% of land area. Grass, shrubs and trees
selected by owner.
Mobile home park 2,500 square feet for each acre
or major fraction or an acre in
the park.
Greenbelt along all
interior lot lines.
Multi-family residential,
commercial and
industrial, except
surface parking lots
District yard requirements.
Required buffer areas,
woodlands and wetlands may
be used to satisfy requirements.
Grass, shrubs and trees
sleeted by owner.
Surface parking lots 100 square feet of planted area
for each 20 parking spaces.
Required buffer areas may be
used to satisfy requirements.
One evergreen or
deciduous tree for each
20 parking spaces. Grass
and shrubs selected by
owner.
7-16.4 Tree Protection
An existing healthy tree greater than ten (10) inches in DBH (diameter
breast high) is a valuable natural resource by virtue of age, size and
contribution to the environment, and must be preserved and protected to
the extend practical and feasible. Trees ten (10) inches in DBH shall be
flagged and shown on a required plat or site plan for development. No
more than 25% of said trees shall be removed from a lot, except by
variance granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. In the event a variance
is granted, each tree removed shall be replaced by a tree at least two (2)
inches in DBH in a location meeting required landscaping.
7-17 Sidewalk Cafes
7-17.1 Purpose
The provisions of this Article shall apply to conforming businesses within
a Principal Commercial District (C-1) for the establishment, operation and
97
maintenance of dining areas on sidewalks and public plazas. The purpose
of this Article is to promote the general economic development and
atmosphere of the C-1 District and other areas for the benefit of all
businesses and citizens located within the town. No rights of individuals
or individual businesses are created by Article 7-17. The Zoning
Administrator shall have broad discretion to grant, modify or revoke
Permits issued, pursuant to this Article, in the interest of improving public
health, safety and welfare. This Article is an exception to Public Works
Article A Section 3-100 et al. which remains in effect for all other persons
or businesses not covered herein.
7-17.2 Definitions:
7-17.2.1 Administrator means the Municipal personnel designated
by the Town Manager to enforce this Article as Zoning
Administrator.
7-17.2.2 Permitted Obstructions on Sidewalks means stands,
tables, umbrellas, chairs, signs, objects related to the
business, or other items on the sidewalk, public right-ofway,
or common areas on the Town’s public property.
7-17.2.3 Permit is the Special Use Certificate from the Zoning
Administrator under the terms and provisions of this
Article.
7-17.2.4 Permittee means the recipient of Special Use Permit from
the Zoning Administrator under the terms and provisions of
this Article.
7-17.2.5 Sidewalk Café means the business of providing food and
beverage services with chairs, tables on sidewalks and
plazas, adjacent to, and operated exclusively by, a business
licensed to operate as an eating establishment where food
and/or refreshments are served.
7-17.2.6 Sidewalk means the area of the public right-of-way
between the curblines or the lateral lines of a roadway and
the adjacent property line, which is reserved for pedestrian
traffic, but does not include street crossings.
7-17.3 Penalties
A person violating any provision of this Article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, may be fined in an amount not
exceeding $50.00, or imprisonment not exceeding 10 days, or both. Each
98
day any violation of this Article shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
7-17.4 Permits Required
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to create, establish, operate,
maintain or otherwise be engaged in the business of running a
Sidewalk Café or to place any items upon the sidewalks or public
property in the Town, unless he shall hold a current valid Permit
issued by the Zoning Administrator under the terms of this Article.
B. Permits shall be issued only to valid licensed businesses that wish to
set up, on the public sidewalk or Town property adjacent to their
business, premise signs, tables, chairs or other objects related to their
food and beverage businesses.
7-17.5 Application for Permit: Fee
A. Application for Permits, provided by this Article, shall be made with
the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with Section 11-2.3. The
application form shall be deemed appropriate by the Town Manager
and shall include, but not limited to, the following information:
(1) The name, home and business address and telephone number of the
applicant, who shall be the business owner.
(2) The name, home address and telephone number of a responsible
person who the Town may notify or contact at any time concerning
the applicant’s encroachment.
(3) A copy of a valid Business License to operate a business
establishment adjacent to the sidewalk or public property which is
the subject of the application.
(4) A sketch, to scale, of the proposed location, showing the layout
and dimensions of the existing public area and adjacent private
property.
(5) Proof of current liability insurance, issued by an insurance
company licensed to do business in the State, protecting the license
and the Town from all claims and damages to property and bodily
injury, including death, which may arise from the operation under
or in connection with the permitted obstruction. Such insurance
shall name the Town as an additional insured and shall provide that
the Policy shall not terminate or be cancelled prior to the
termination date without 30 days advance notice to the Town. The
Policy shall be a minimum amount required by law or regulation
governing the applicant’s business or a high amount, if deemed
necessary by the Town’s risk management advisors.
99
(6) Proof of any required ABC license, Health Permit or other State
permit for the business involved.
B. Applicants shall not begin operation of a Sidewalk Café until a Special
Use Permit has been issued.
C. An initial Application Fee of $50.00 will be charged. This Application
Fee may be modified, from time to time, by Town Council Resolution.
D. The Permit shall be annually renewed and a fee of $25.00 will be due
and payable at the time of renewal. This Renewable Fee is subject to
modification, from time to time, by Town Council Resolution.
E. The Application Fee and Renewal Fee are in addition to the Business
License Fee required for operation within the Town. Only new
permits shall be prorated on a quarterly basis.
7-17.6 Prohibited Areas
A. No Permit Holder or Property Owner shall:
(1) Place any tables, chairs, signs, moveable barriers or café
equipment on any portion of public property other than directly in
front of his existing business. (“Existing business” means from the
point of origin to the point of termination of the front boundary
line).
(2) Block or restrict the pedestrian passageway to less than six feet in
width, or block ingress and egress to or from any building. In
areas of congested pedestrian activity, the Zoning Administrator is
authorized to require a wider pedestrian path, as circumstances
dictate. Also, no item is to be placed so as to block any driveway,
crosswalk, bus stop, counter service window, or visibility within an
intersection.
(3) Use tables, chairs, umbrellas, any other objects of such quality,
design, materials and workmanship, which are not authorized by
the Zoning Administrator.
(4) Sound or permit the sounding of devices on the public property
which produces a loud noise or use or operate any loudspeaker,
public address system, radio, sound amplifier or similar device.
(5) Fail to pick up, remove and dispose of all trash or refuse left by the
business or its patrons on the public right-of-way.
(6) Store, park, or leave any stand or items of business overnight on
the street or sidewalk, except for tables and chairs, which may be
kept in permitted areas at the Permittee’s risk.
100
B. The Special Exception Certificate is a permit and temporary license,
which may be denied, suspended or revoked for any conduct, which is
contrary to the provisions of this Article, or for conduct of the business
in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or constitute a danger
to the operators or a danger to the public health, safety or welfare.
7-17.7 Conditions of Permits
A. The Permit required by this Article3 shall be issued on a form deemed
suitable by the Zoning Administrator. In addition to naming the
Permittee and any other information deemed appropriate, the Permit
shall contain the following conditions:
(1) The sidewalk area or public property covered by the Permit shall
be maintained in a neat and orderly appearance at all times, and the
area shall be cleaned of all debris on a periodic basis during the
day, and again at the close of each business day.
(2) No advertising is permitted (except the posting of prices).
(3) No tables, chairs or any other parts of the business shall be
attached, chained or, in any manner affixed to a tree, post, sign, or
fixture, curb or sidewalk within or near the permitted area in a
manner which causes or threatens to cause injury or damage to
public or private properties. No additional outdoor seating under
this Article shall be used for calculating seating requirements
pertaining to location of, application for, or issuance of an ABC
License for any establishment, or be used as a basis for computing
required seating for restaurants and dining rooms, or as grounds for
claiming exemptions from such requirements under the provisions
of any Town Ordinance or State Law.
(4) Tables, chairs, umbrellas, and other objects in the permitted area
shall be maintained with a clean and attractive appearance and
shall be kept safe and in good repair at all times.
(5) The serving of and consumption of alcoholic beverages on Town’s
sidewalks and public property shall be limited to beer and wine.
Consumption of alcoholic beverages at Sidewalk Cafés is limited
to patrons seated at tables. The food and drink area is to be roped
or fenced off to control the movement of patrons with alcoholic
beverages in or out of the permitted area.
(6) Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted to alter or abridge the
Permittee’s responsibility to comply with the terms of service of
alcoholic beverages, as required now or as amended by the South
Carolina Law Enforcement Division or South Carolina Alcoholic
and Beverage Commission.
101
7-17.8 Denial, Suspension, Retraction or Revocation of Permit
A. The Zoning Administrator may deny, retract, or suspend a Permit
issued under this Article for any business in the Town, if it is found
that:
(1) Any necessary Business or Health Permit has been suspended,
revoked, or canceled.
(2) The Permittee does not have insurance in force, which is correct
and effective in a minimum amounts described in Sub-section 17-
17.4(5).
(3) Changing conditions of pedestrian or vehicular traffic cause
congestion or changing of property conditions necessitate removal
of the Sidewalk Café. Such decision shall be based upon findings
by the Zoning Administrator that the minimum six foot pedestrian
path is insufficient under existing conditions or circumstances and
represents a danger to the health, safety, and general welfare of
pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
(4) The Permittee has failed to correct violations of this Article or
conditions of the Permit upon receipt of the Zoning
Administrator’s Notice of the Violation, delivered in writing to the
Permittee.
(5) The Permittee has failed to take positive actions to prohibit
violations from recurring.
(6) The Permittee has failed to make modifications after receipt of the
Zoning Administrator’s Notice to make such modifications
delivered in writing to the Permittee.
Tables, chairs, and other vestiges of the business may be removed by
the Department of Public Works, and a reasonable fee charged for
labor, transportation and storage, should the Permittee fail to remove
the items within 36 hours of receipt of the Zoning Administrator’s
Final Notice to do so for any reason provided for under this Article. If
the action is taken based upon Sub-section (a)(2) or (a)(3) of this
Section, the action shall become effective upon the receipt of such
Notice, and the Permittee shall have four hours to remove the items.
B. Notice of Denial or Revocation. Upon denial or revocation, the
Zoning Administrator shall give written Notice of such action to the
Applicant or Permittee, stating the action which has been taken and the
reason thereof. The action shall be effective upon giving such Notice
to the Permittee.
C. Appeal. The Permittee shall have the right to appeal the decision of
the Zoning Administrator to the Board of Zoning Appeals in
accordance with Article 11-2.1.
102
ARTICLE 8
REGULATION OF SIGNS
8.1 INTENT
The intent of this Ordinance is to establish requirements for placement, installation and
maintenance of business and advertising signs, in order to preserve and protect the health,
safety, welfare and general well-being of the community’s citizens. As regulation of
placement, construction and maintenance of buildings and structures is a valid use of the
police power, so too is regulation of placement, installation and maintenance of signs,
since such signs in the literal sense must ordinarily be considered structures, and in a
practical sense are capable of producing many of the same nuisances as are produced by
buildings.
Regulation of placement, installation and maintenance of signs is further justified by their
purpose which is to draw mental attention to them, potentially to the detriment of sound
driving practices and to the safety of the motoring public to which a majority of signs are
oriented. Therefore, it is the intent of this Ordinance to regulate the size and location of
business and advertising signs so that their purpose can be served without unduly
interfering with motorists and causing unsafe conditions.
Finally, it is the objective of this Ordinance to protect and preserve the aesthetic qualities
of the community by regulating placement, installation and maintenance of signs. The
fact that such signs are intended to command visual contact grants to business and
advertising signs a proportionately greater role that other structures in determining the
overall aesthetic quality of the community. The aesthetic impact of business and
advertising signs is an economic fact which may bear heavily upon the enjoyment and
value of property; therefore the regulation of signs is validly justified on the basis of
conserving the value of property and encouraging the most appropriate use of land
throughout the municipality. It is contended that it is not irrational for a community’s
citizens to plan their physical surroundings in such a way that unsightliness is minimized.
8.2 DEFINITIONS
In addition to the definitions set forth in Article 2 of this ordinance, the following
definitions relate to signs.
8-2.1 Advertising Sign: Any sign, pictorial or otherwise, regardless of size
or shape, which directs attention to a business, commodity, attraction,
profession, service or entertainment conducted, sold, offered,
manufactured, existing, or provided at a location other than on the
premises where the sign is located or to which it is affixed. Such signs are
sometimes called “off-premise signs,” “non-point-of-sale signs,” and
103
include, but are not limited to those signs commonly referred to as outdoor
advertising signs, billboards, or poster boards.
8-2.2 Animated Sign: Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to
depict action or create a special effect or scene.
8-2.3 Banner: Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is
permanently mounted to a pole or building of a permanent frame at one or
more edges. National flags, state or municipal flags or the official flag of
any institution or business shall not be considered banners.
8-2.4 Beacon: Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere
or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light
source, also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
8-2.5 Building Marker: Any sign indicating the name of a building and date
and incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a
masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material.
8-2.6 Building Sign: Any sign attached to any part of a building as contrasted to
a freestanding sign.
8-2.7 Business Sign: Any sign, pictorial or otherwise, regardless of size or
shape, which directs attention to a business, commodity, attraction,
profession, service or entertainment conducted, sold, offered,
manufactured, existing or provided on the premises where the sign is
located or to which it is affixed. Such signs are sometimes called “onpremise
signs” or “point-of-sale signs.”
8-2.8 Canopy Sign: Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy,
or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance,
window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy.
8-2.9 Changeable Copy Sign: A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters,
or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face
or the surface of the sign. A sign on which this message changes more
than eight times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a
changeable copy sign for the purpose of this ordinance. A sign on which
the only copy that changes is an electronic on mechanical indication of the
time or temperature shall be considered a “time and temperature” portion
of a sign and not a changeable copy sign for the purposes of this
ordinance.
8-2.10 Commercial Copy: Any sign wording, logo, or other representation that,
directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business,
product, service, or other commercial activity.
104
8-2.11 Commercial Center: A commercial complex consisting of more than one
retail, commercial, or office establishment grouped together, usually
developed under one ownership or management, and generally sharing
parking areas and vehicular entrances and exits.
8-2.12 Copy Extension: Part of the copy of an advertising sign which extends
beyond the edge or border of the sign, sometimes called a “cut-out” or
“drop-out.”
8-2.13 Digital sign: a form of electronic display that shows a variety of
programming to include advertising, menus, information, and other
messages. Digital signs may use a variety of technologies such as LCD,
LED, plasma displays, or projected images to display content. Digital
Signs are usually controlled by computers or servers.
8-2.14 Director: The Zoning Administrator or his designee.
8-2.15 Directory Sign: Any sign listing only the names, uses, or locations of
more than one business, activity, firm, professional office, or tenant within
a building, group of buildings, or commercial center.
8-2.16 Electrical sign: a fixed or portable self-contained, electrically illuminated
appliance with words or symbols designed to convey specific information
or attract attention. Such signage maybe backlit, LED, light box, neon, or
similar technologies.
8-2.17 Freestanding Sign: Any sign supported by structures or supports that are
placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any
building or other structure.
8-2.18 Flag: Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors,
patterns, or symbols, used a symbol of a government, political subdivision
or other entity.
8-2.19 Ground or Monument-type Sign: A freestanding sign which extends
from the ground or is attached directly to the ground generally for the
entire length of its bottom sign face dimensions or which has a support
which places the bottom of the sign less than twelve (12) inches from the
ground.
8-2.20 Incidental Sign: A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose
secondary to the use of the zone lot on which it is located, such as “no
parking,” “entrance,” “loading only,” “telephone,” and other similar
directives. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off
the zone lot on which the sign is located shall be considered incidental.
105
8-2.21 Information Sign: Any sign containing no message, copy, an
announcement, or decoration other than instructions or directions to the
public except for subordinate identity. Such signs include, but are not
limited to, identifying the following: restrooms, public telephones,
walkways, entrance and exit drives, freight entrances and traffic
directions.
8-2.22 Lot: Any piece or parcel of land or portion of a subdivision, the
boundaries of which have been established by some legal instrument of
record that is recognized and intended as a unit for the purpose of transfer
of ownership.
8-2.23 Marquee: Any permanent roof-like structure projecting behind a building
or extending along and projecting beyond a wall of the building, generally
designed to provide protection from the weather.
8-2.24 Marquee Sign: Any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of a
marquee.
8-2.25 Mobile Sign: A sign which may be moved from one location to another, is
not permanently affixed to the ground, and is differentiated from a
portable sign in that it may be equipped for transporting by motor vehicle
or other mechanical means and includes signs referred to as trailer signs.
See Section 7-5.2 for time limits placed on using mobile signs.
8-2.26 Nonconforming Sign: Any sign that does not conform to the
requirements of this ordinance.
8-2.27 Off-premises Sign: See “Advertising sign.”
8-2.28 Pennant: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material whether or not
containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string,
usually in series, designed to move in the wind
8-2.29 Person: Any association, company, corporation, firm, organization, or
partnership, singular or plural of any kind.
8-2.30 Portable Sign: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other
permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but
not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs
converted to A or T frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons
used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or
painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way,
unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the
business.
106
8-2.31 Principal Building: The building in which is conducted the principal use
of the zone lot on which it is located. Zone lots with multiple principal
uses may have principal use buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and
other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings.
8-2.32 Product Sign: Any sign not permanently affixed to a building or the
ground, and whose purpose is to advertise products sold on or off the
premises.
8-2.33 Projecting Sign: Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner
that its leading edge extends more than 6 inches beyond the surface of the
building or wall.
8-2.34 Residential Sign: Any sign located in a district zoned for residential uses
that contains no commercial message except advertising for goods or
services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located, if
offering such service at such location conforms to all requirements of the
zoning ordinance.
8-2.35 Roof Sign: Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof
of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically
above the highest portion of the roof.
8-2.36 Roof Sign, Integral: Any sign erected or constructed as an integral or
essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that
no part of the design extends vertically above the highest portion of the
roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof
by a space of more than 6 inches.
8-2.37 Setback: The distance from the property line to the nearest part of the
applicable building, structure, or sign measured perpendicularly to the
property line.
8-2.38 Sign: Any device, fixture, placard or structure that uses any color, form,
graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to advertise, announce the
purpose of, or identify the purpose of, or identify the purpose of a person
or entity, or to communicate information of any kind to the public.
8-2.39 Street: A strip of land or way subject to vehicular traffic (as well as
pedestrian traffic) that provides direct access to property, including, but
not limited to, alleys, avenues, boulevards, courts, drives, highways, lanes,
places, roads, terraces, trails, or other thoroughfares.
8-2.40 Windblown Sign: Any banner, pennant, flag, spinner, streamer, or other
sign designed to be moved by the wind.
107
8-2.41 Window Sign: Any sign mounted inside a window for the purposes of
viewing from the outside, not to include merchandise on display.
8-2.42 Zone Lot: A parcel of land in single ownership that is of sufficient size to
meet minimum zoning requirements of area, coverage, and use, and that
can provide such yards and other open spaces as required by the zoning
regulations.
8-3 COMPUTATIONS
The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign height.
8.3.1 Computation of Area of Individual Signs. The area of a sign face
(which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face)
shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle,
triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of
the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any
material or color forming an integral part of the background or the display
or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop of structure against
which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing,
or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets
zoning ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to the display itself.
8.3.2 Computation of Area of Multifaced Signs. The sign area for a sign with
more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all
sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign faces are
placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at
the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign
structure and are more than 42 inches apart, the sign area shall be
computed by the measurement of one of the faces.
8.3.3 Computation of Height. The height of the sign shall be computed as the
distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest
attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be constructed to be
the lower of (1) existing grade prior to construction or (2) the newly
established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, beaming,
mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In
cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign
height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the
normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest
point of the crown of a public street of the grade of the land at the
principal entrance to the principal; structure on the zone lot, whichever is
lower.
8.3.4 Computation of Maximum Total Permitted Sign Area for a Zone Lot.
The permitted sum of the area of all individual signs on a zone lot shall be
108
computed by applying the formula contained in Table 8-2, Maximum
Total Sign Area, to the lot frontage, building frontage, or wall area, as
appropriate, for the zoning district in which the lot is located. Lots
fronting on two or more streets are allowed the permitted sign area for
each street frontage. However, the total sign area is oriented toward a
particular street may not exceed the portion of the lot’s total sign
allocation that is derived from the lot, building or wall are a frontage on
that street.
8-4 SIGNS ALLOWED ON PRIVATE PROPERTY WITH AND WITHOUT
PERMITS
If the letter “P” appears for a sign type in a column, such sign is allowed without prior
permit approval in the zoning districts represented by that column. If the letter “S”
appears for a sign type in a column, such sign is allowed only with prior permit approval
in the zoning districts represented by that column. Special conditions may apply in some
cases. If the letter “N” appears for sign type in a column, such a sign is not allowed in
the zoning districts represented by that column under any circumstance.
Although permitted under the previous paragraph, a sign designated by an “S” or “P” in
Table 8-1 shall be allowed only if:
a. The sum of the area of all building and freestanding signs on the zone lot
conforms with the maximum permitted sign area as determined by the
formula for the zoning district in which the lot is located as specified in
Table 8-3.
b. The size, location, and number of signs on the lot conform with the
requirements of Tables 8-2 and 8-5, which establish permitted sign
dimensions by sign type, and to any additional limitations listed in Table
8-4.
c. The characteristics of the sign conform with the limitations of Table 8-4,
Permitted Sign Characteristics, and to any additional limitations on
characteristics listed in Table 8-3.
TABLE 8-1
PERMITTED SIGNS BY TYPE AND ZONING DISTRICT
Sign Type
All
R1
All
R2
All
R3
INSa
All
RO
All
C1
All
C2
All
I1
All
PD
Freestanding
Residentialb P P P N N N N N N
Other N N N S S S S S S
Incidentialc N Pd P Pd Pd Pd P P Pd
109
Advertising N N N N N N N N N
Temporaryh N N N S S S S S S
Product N N N N N N N N N
Building
Banner N N N N S S S S S
Building markere P P P P P P P P P
Canopy N N N N S S S S S
Identificationd P P P P P P P P P
Incidentalc N Pf P Pf Pc Pc P P Pc
Marqueeg N N N N N S S S N
Projectingg N N N N S S S S S
Residentialg P P P P P P P P P
Roof N N N N N N N N N
Roof, Integral N N N N N N S S N
Suspendedh N N N P N N P P P
Temporaryh N N N S S S S S S
Wall N N N S S S S S S
Window N N N N S S S S S
Miscellaneous
Bannerc N N N N S S S S S
Flagi P P P P P P P P P
Monument N N Sf Sd Sc Sb Sb Sc Sc
Portable N N N N N N S S N
P = Allowed without sign permit S = Allowed only with sign permit N = Not allowed
a. This column does not represent a zoning district. It applies to institutional uses permitted
under the zoning ordinance in residential zoning districts. Such use may include, but are
not necessarily limited to, churches, schools, funeral homes, and cemeteries.
b. No commercial message allowed on sign, except for a commercial message drawing
attention to an activity legally offered on the premises.
c. No commercial message of any kind allowed on sign, if such message is legible from any
location off the zone lot on which the sign is located.
d. Only address and name of occupant allowed on sign.
e. May include only building name, date of construction, or historical date on historic site;
must be cut or etched into masonry, bronze, or similar material.
f. No commercial message of any kind allowed on sign.
110
g. If such a sign is suspended or projects above the public right-of-way, the issuance and
continuation of a sign permit shall be conditioned on the sign owner obtaining and
maintaining in force liability insurance for such sign in such form and such amount as the
Director may reasonably determine, from time to time, provided that the amount for such
liability insurance shall be at least $500.00 per occurrence per sign.
h. The contents of Section 8-15 of this ordinance shall apply.
i. Flags of the United States, the state, the town, foreign nations having diplomatic relations
with the United States, and any other flag adopted or sanctioned by an elective body of
competent jurisdiction, provided that such a flag shall not exceed 60 square feet in area
and shall not be flown from a pole the top of which is more than 40 feet in height. These
flags must be flown in accordance with protocol established by the Congress of the
United States for the Stars and Stripes. Any flag not meeting any one or more of these
conditions shall be considered a banner sign and shall be subject to regulation as such.
j. Permitted on the same terms as a temporary sign, in accordance with Section 8-15, except
that it may be freestanding.
8-5 PERMITS REQUIRED
If a sign requiring a permit under the provisions of this ordinance is placed, constructed,
re-erected, or modified on a zone lot, the owner of the lot shall secure a sign permit prior
to the construction, placement, erection, or modification of such a sign in accordance
with the requirements of Section 8-12.
Furthermore, the property owner shall maintain in force, at all times, a sign permit for
such sign in accordance with Section 8-14.
No signs shall be erected in the public right-of-way except in accordance with Section 8-
9 and the permit requirements of Section 8-16.
No sign permit of any kind shall be issued for an existing or proposed sign unless such
sign is consistent with the requirements of this ordinance (including those protecting
existing signs) in every respect and with the Master Signage Plan or Common Signage
Plan effect for the property.
8-6 DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, AND MAINTENANCE
All signs shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following
standards:
a. All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of the Uniform Building
Code and electrical code for the town at all times.
b. Except for banners, flags, temporary signs, and window signs conforming
in all respect with the requirement6s of this ordinance, all signs shall be
constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently attached to
111
the ground, a building or another structure by direct attachments to a rigid
wall, frame or structure.
c. All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance
with all building and electrical codes, and conformance with this code, at
all times.
TABLE 8-2
MAXIMUM TOTAL SIGN AREA PER ZONE LOT BY ZONING DISTRICT
The maximum total area of all signs on a zone lot except incidental, building marker and
identification signs and flagsb shall not exceed the lesser of the above.
Sign Type
All
R1
All
R2
All
R3
INS
All
RO
All
C1
All
C2
All
I1
All
PD
Maximum Number of total Square
Feet 8 8 50 42 100 200 300 300 300
Percentage of Wall area of
Principal Building N/A N/A 2% N/A 10% 4% 8% 2% 8%
Square Feet of Signage per Linear
Foot of Street Frontage N/A N/A N/A 1/2 2 3 4 N/A 4
a. This column does not represent a zoning district. It applies to institutional uses permitted
under the zoning ordinance in residential zoning districts. Such use may include, but are
not necessarily limited to, churches, schools, funeral homes, and cemeteries.
b. Flags of the United States, the state, the town, foreign nations having diplomatic relations
with the United States, and any other flag adopted or sanctioned by an elective body of
competent jurisdiction, provided that such a flag shall not exceed 60 square feet in area
and shall not be flown from a pole, the top of which is more than 40 feet in height. These
flags must be flown in accordance with protocol established by the Congress of the
United States for the Stars and Stripes. Any flag not meeting any one or more of these
conditions shall be considered a banner sign and shall be subject to regulation as such.
TABLE 8-3
NUMBER, DIMENSIONS, AND LOCATION OF
INDIVIDUAL SIGNS BY ZONING DISTRICT
Individual signs shall not exceed the applicable maximum number dimensions or setbacks shown
on this table and on Table 8-5.
All
R1
All
R2
All
R3 INSa All
RO
All
C1
All
C2
All
I1
All
PD
Freestanding
Area (sq. ft.) 6 6 20 40 40 45 160 80 140
112
Height (feet) 4 4 4 7 7 7b 20 12 16
Setback (feet)c 10 10 10 10 10 5 5 5 5
Number Permitted
Per Zone Lot 1 1 1 1 1 N/A N/A N/A N/A
Per feet of
Street N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
1 per
500
feet
1 per
500
feet
1 per
500
Frontage feet d
Building
Area (max. sq. ft.) 2 2 N/A 2 3 N/A N/A N/A N/A
Wall Area
(percentc) N/A N/A 5% N/A 5% 10% 15% 5% 10%
a. This column does not represent a zoning district. It applies to institutional uses permitted
under the zoning ordinance in residential zoning districts. Such use may include, but are
not necessarily limited to, churches, schools, funeral homes, and cemeteries.
b. Maximum height is 7 feet, and minimum setback is five feet; however, in no case shall
the actual sign height exceed the actual sign setback for any adjacent lot this is zone and
used for residential purpose. For example is the sign if set back five feet from such a lot,
may be no more than five feet high.
c. In addition to the setback requirements on this table, sign shall be located such that there
is at every street intersection a clear view between heights of three feet and 10 feet in a
triangle formed by the corner and points on the curb 30 feet from the intersection or
entranceway.
d. Lots fronting on two or more streets are allowed the permitted signage for each street
frontage, but signage cannot be accumulated and used on one street in excess of that
allowed for lots worth only one street frontage.
e. The percentage figure here shall mean the percentage of the area of the wall of which
such sign is a part or to which each sign is most nearly parallel.
TABLE 8-4
PERMITTED SIGN CHARACTERISTICS BY ZONING DISTRICT
All
R1
All
R2
All
R3 INSa All
RO
All
C1
All
C2 All I1 All
PD
Animated N N N N N S S N
Changeable
Copy N N N S N S S N
113
Illumination, N N S Sb Sb Sb S S
Internal
Illumination, N N S Sb Sb Sb S S
External
Illumination,
Exposed bulbs N N N N N S S S
or
Neon
P = Allowed without sign permit S = Allowed only with sign permit N = Not allowed
a. This column does not represent a zoning district. It applies to institutional uses permitted
under the zoning ordinance in residential zoning districts. Such use may include, but are
not necessarily limited to, churches, schools, funeral homes, and cemeteries.
b. No direct light or significant glare from sign shall be cast onto any adjacent zone lot that
is zoned and used for residential purposes.
8-7 MASTER OR COMMON SIGNAGE PLAN
No permit shall be issued for an individual sign requiring a permit unless and until a
Master Signage Plan or a Common Signage Plan for the zone lot on which the sign will
be erected has been submitted to the Director and approved by the Director as
conforming to this section.
8-7.1 Master Signage Plan: For any zone lot on which the owner proposed to
erect one or more signs requiring a permit unless such zone lot is included
in a Common Signage Plan, the owner shall submit to the Director a
Master Signage Plan containing the following:
a. An accurate plot plan of the zone lot, at such scale as the
Director may reasonably require;
b. Location of buildings, parking lots, driveways, and
landscaped areas on such zone lot;
c. Computation of the maximum total sign area, the maximum
area for individual signs, the height of the signs and the
number of freestanding signs allowed on the zone lot(s)
included in the plan under this ordinance, and
d. An accurate indication on the plot plan of the proposed
location of each present and future sign of any type,
whether requiring a permit or not, except that incidental
signs need not be shown.
8-7.2 Common Signage Plan: If the owners of two or more contiguous
(disregarding intervening streets and alleys) zone lots of the owner of a
114
single lot with more than one building (not including any accessory
building) file with the Director for such zone lots a Common Signage Plan
conforming with the provisions of this section, a 25 percent increase in the
maximum total sign area shall be allowed for each included zone lot. This
bonus shall be allocated within each zone lot as the owner(s) elect.
8-7.3 Provisions of Common Signage Plan: The Common Signage Plan shall
contain all the information required for a Master Signage Plan and shall
also specify standards for consistency among all signs on the zone lots
affected by the Plan with regard to:
a. Color Scheme;
b. Lettering or graphic style;
c. Lighting;
d. Location of each sign on the buildings;
e. Material, and
f. Sign proportions
8-7.4 Showing Window Signs on Common or Master Signage Plan. A
Common Signage Plan or Master Signage Plan including window signs
may simply indicate the areas of the windows to be covered by the
window signs and the general type of the window signs (e.g. paper affixed
to window, painted, etched on glass or some other material hung inside
window) and need to specify the exact dimension or nature of every
window sign.
8-7.5 Limit on Number of Freestanding Signs Under Common Signage
Plan. The Common Signage Plan, for all zone lots with multiple uses or
multiple users, shall limit the number of freestanding signs to a total of
one for each street on which the zone lots included in the plan have
frontage and shall provide for shared or common usage of such signs.
8-7.6 Consent. The Master or Common Signage Law shall be signed by all
owners or their authorized agents in such form as the Director shall
require.
8-7.7 Procedures. A Master or Common Signage Plan shall be included in any
development plan, site plan, planned unit development plan or other
official plan required by the town for the proposed development and shall
be processed simultaneously with such other plan.
8-7.8 Amendments. A Master or Common Signage Plan may be amended by
filing a new Master or Common Signage Plan that conforms with all
requirements for the ordinance then in effect.
8-7.9 Existing Signs not Conforming to Common Signage Plan. If any new
or amended Common Signage Plan is filed for a property on which
115
existing signs are located, it shall include a schedule for bringing into
conformance, within three years, all signs not conforming to the proposed
amended plan or to the requirements of this ordinance in effect on the date
of submission.
8-7.10 Binding Effect. After approval of a Master or Common Signage Plan, no
sign shall be erected, placed, painted, or maintained, except in
conformance with such plan, and such plan may be enforced in the same
way as any provision of this ordinance. In case of any conflict between
the provisions of such a plan and any other provision of this ordinance, the
ordinance shall control.
TABLE 8-5
NUMBER AND DIMENSIONS OF CERTAIN INDIVIDUAL SIGNS BY SIGN TYPE
No sign shall exceed any applicable maximum numbers or dimensions, or encroach on any
applicable minimum clearance shown on this table.
SIGNS NUMBER
ALLOWED
MAXIMUM
SIGN AREA
VERTICAL
CLEARANCE
FROM
SIDEWALK OR
PRIVATE
DRIVE OR
PARKING
HORIZONTAL
CLEARANCE
FROM
PUBLIC
STREET
Freestanding
Residential, Other
and Incidental See Table 8-3 See Table 8-3 N/A N/A
Building
Banner N/A N/A 9 ft. 12 ft.
Building Marker 1 per bldg. 5 sq. ft. N/A N/A
Canopy 1 per bldg.
25% of vertical
surface of
canopy
9 ft. 12 ft.
Identification 1 per bldg. N/A N/A N/A
Incidental N/A N/A N/A N/A
Marquee 1 per bldg. N/A 9 ft. 12 ft.
Projecting 1 per bldg. 15 sq ft. 9 ft. 12 ft.
Residential 1 per zone lot N/A N/A N/A
Roof 1 per principal
bldg. N/A N/A N/A
Roof, Integral 2 per principal
bldg. N/A N/A N/A
116
Suspended 1 per entrance N/A 9 ft. N/A
Temporary See Section 8-15 N/A N/A N/A
Wall N/A N/A N/A N/A
Window N/A 25% of total
window area N/A N/A
Miscellaneous
Banner N/A N/A 9 ft. 12 ft.
Flag N/A 60 sq. ft. 9 ft. 12 ft.
Portable 1 where allowed 20 sq. ft. N/A N/A
8-8 SIGNS PERMITTED IN PD-R, PD-C, AND PD-M DISTRICTS
No specific regulations are imposed upon signs located in PD-R and PD-C districts.
However, it is the intent of this Ordinance that signs within PD-R, PD-C, and PD-M
districts be appropriate for the locations in which they are established, and that
regulations governing the display surface area, number, location, and height of signs
should be generally followed as for the least restrictive zone related to the site size of the
development, as set forth in Section 6-8.3.
8-9 SIGNS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY
No sign shall be allowed in the public right-of-way, except for the following:
8-9.1 Permanent Signs. Permanent signs, including:
A. Public signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental
body to post legal notices, identify public property, convey
public information, and direct or regulate pedestrian or
vehicular traffic;
B. Bus stop signs erected by a public transit company;
C. Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles,
lines, pipes, or facilities; and
D. Awning, projecting, and suspended signs projecting over a
public right-of-way in conformity with the conditions of
Table 8-5 of this ordinance.
8-9.2 Temporary Signs. Temporary signs for which a permit has been issued
in accordance with Section 8-15 which shall be issued only for signs
meeting the following requirements:
117
A. Such signs shall contain no commercial message; and
B. Such signs shall be no more than two square feet in area
each.
8-9.3 Emergency Signs. Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental
agency, a public utility company, or a contractor doing authorized or
permit work within the public right-of-way.
8-9.4 Other Signs Forfeited. Any sign installed or placed on public property,
except in conformance with the requirements of this section, shall be
forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation. In addition to other
remedies hereunder, the town shall have the right to recover from the
owner or person placing such a sign the full costs of removal and disposal
of such sign.
8-10 SIGNS EXEMPT FROM REGULATION UNDER THIS ORDINANCE.
The following signs shall be exempt from regulation under this ordinance:
8-10.1 Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal,
state, or local law, regulation, or ordinance;
8-10-2 Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door, that is not
legible from a distance of more than three feet beyond the lot line of the
zone lot or parcel on which such sign is located;
8-10.3 Works of art that do not include a commercial message;
8-10-4 Holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message, but only
between November 15 and January 15; and
8-10-5 Traffic control signs on private property, such as Stop, Yield, and similar
signs; the face of which meet the Department of Transportation standards
and which contain no commercial message of any sort.
8-11 SIGNS PROHIBITED UNDER THIS ORDINANCE
All signs not expressly permitted under this ordinance or exempt from regulation
hereunder in accordance with the previous section are prohibited in the town. Such signs
included, but are not limited to: beacons; billboards; poster boards; outside product;
pennants; strings or lights not permanently mounted to a rigid background, except those
exempt under the previous section; and inflatable signs and tethered balloons.
118
8-12 GENERAL PERMIT PROCEDURES
The following procedures shall govern the applicant for, and issuance of, all signs
permitted under this ordinance, and the submission and review of Common Signage
Plans and Master Signage Plan.
8-12.1 Applications. All applications for sign permits of any kind and for
approval of any kind and for approval of a Master or Common Signage
Plan shall be submitted to the Director on an application form or in
accordance with application specifications published by the director.
8-12.2 Fees. Each application for a sign permit or for approval of a Master or
Common Signage Plan shall be accompanied by the applicable fees which
shall be established by the governing body of the town from time to time
by resolution.
8-12.3 Completeness. Within five days of receiving an application for a sign
permit or for a Common or Master Signage Plan, the Director shall review
it for completeness. If the director finds that it is complete, the application
shall then be processed. If the Director finds that it is incomplete, the
Director shall, within such five-day period, send the applicant a notice of
the specific ways in which the application is deficient, with appropriate
references to the applicable sections of this ordinance.
8-12.4 Action. Within seven days of the submission of a complete application
for a sign permit, the Director shall either:
A. Issue the sign permit, if the sign(s) that is subject of the
application conforms in every respect with the
requirements of this ordinance and of the applicable Master
or Common Signage Plan; or
B. Reject the sign permit if the sign(s) that is the subject of the
application fails in any way to conform to the requirements
of this ordinance and of the applicable Master or Common
Signage Plan. In case of a rejection, the Director shall
specify in the rejection the section or sections of the
ordinance or applicable plan with which the sign(s) is
inconsistent.
8-12.5 Action on Plan. On any application for approval of a Master Signage
Plan or Common Signage Plan, the Director shall take action on the
applicable one of the following dates:
A. Fourteen days after the submission of a complete
application if the application is for signs for existing
buildings; or
119
B. On the date of final action on any related application for
building permit, site plan, or development plan for sign
involving new construction.
On or before such applicable date, the Director shall either;
C. Approve the proposed plan if the sign(s) as shown on the
plan and the plan itself conforms in every respect with the
requirements of this ordinance; or
D. Reject the proposed plan if the sign(s) as shown on the plan
or the plan itself fails in any way to conform to the
regulations of this ordinance. In case of rejection, the
Director shall specify in the rejection, the section or
sections of the ordinance with which the plan is
inconsistent.
8-13 PERMITS TO CONSTRUCT OR MODIFY SIGNS
Signs identified as “P” or “S” in Table 8-1 shall be erected, installed, or created only in
accordance with a duly issued and valid construction permit from the Director. Such
permits shall be issued only in accordance with the following requirements and
procedures.
8-13.1 Permits for New Signs or for Sign Modification. An application for
construction, creation, or installation of a new sign or for modification of
an existing sign shall be accompanied by detailed drawings to show the
dimensions, design, structure and location of each particular sign, to the
extent that such details are not contained on a Master Signage Plan or
Common Signage Plan then in effect for the zone lot. One application and
permit may include multiple signs on the same zone lot.
8-13.2 Inspection. The Director shall cause an inspection of the zone lot for
which each permit for a new sign or for modification of an existing sign is
issued during the sixth month after the issuance of such permit or at such
earlier date as the owner may request. If the construction is not
substantially complete at the time of inspection, the permit shall lapse and
become void. If the construction is complete and in full compliance with
this ordinance and with the building and electrical codes, the Director shall
affix to the premises a permanent symbol identifying the sign(s) and the
applicable permit by number or other reference. If the construction is
substantially complete but not in full compliance with this ordinance and
applicable codes, the Director shall give the owner or applicant notice of
120
deficiencies and shall allow an additional 30 days from the date of
inspection for the deficiencies to be corrected. If the deficiencies are not
correct by such date, the permit shall lapse. If the construction is then
complete, the Director shall affix to the premises the permanent symbol
described above.
8-14 SIGN PERMITS - CONTINUING
The owner of a zone lot containing signs requiring a permit under this ordinance shall at
times maintain in force a sign permit for such property. Sign permits shall be issued for
individual zone lots, notwithstanding the fact that a particular zone lot may be included
with other zone in a Common Signage Plan.
8-14.1 Initial Sign Permit. An initial sign permit shall be automatically issued
by the Director covering the period from the date of the inspection of the
completed sign installation, construction, or modification through the last
day of the calendar year.
8-14.2 Sign Permits, Subsequent. Sign permits shall be issued for 12 months.
Except as provided herein, sign permits shall be renewable annually upon
submission of a renewal application form and applicable fees.
Renewable applications shall contain a representation by the applicant that
no change in signage under the permits has been made or shall contain
dimensions, drawings, and photos of any changes.
8-14.3 Lapse of Sign Permit. A continuing sign permit shall lapse automatically
if not renewed or if the business license for the premises lapses, is
revoked, or is not renewed. A sign permit shall also lapse if the business
activity on the premises is discontinued for a period of 180 days or more
and is not renewed within 30 days of notice from the town to the last
permittee, sent to the premises, that the sign permit will lapse if such
activity is not renewed.
8-14.4 Assignment of Sign Permits. A current and valid sign permit shall be
freely assignable to a successor as owner of the property or holder of a
business license for the same premises, subject only to filing such
application as the Director may require and paying any applicable fee.
The assignment shall be accomplished by filing and shall not require
approval.
8-15 TEMPORARY SIGN PERMITS (PRIVATE PROPERTY)
121
Temporary signs on private property shall be allowed only upon issuance of a Temporary
Sign Permit, which shall be subject to the following requirements:
8-15.1 Term. A temporary sign permit shall allow the use of a temporary sign
for a specified 15-day period.
8-15.2 Number. No more than three temporary sign permits shall be issued to
the same business license holder on the same lot in any calendar year.
8-15.3 Other Conditions. A temporary sign shall be allowed only in districts
with a letter “S” on Table 8-1, and subject to all of the requirements for a
temporary sign noted therein.
8-16 PERMITS FOR SIGNS IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
Permits for temporary political signs in the public right-of-way shall be issued in
accordance with the following conditions:
8-16.1 Terms and Number of Permits. The term of such a permit shall be 60
days. No more than one permit for temporary signs shall be issued to any
applicant in any calendar year. For any sign containing the name of a
political candidate, the candidate shall be deemed to be the applicant.
8-16.2 Number of Signs. No more than 5 signs may be erected under one permit.
8-16.3 Identification of Permitted Signs. Each sign erected under such a permit
shall contain an official stamp of the Director, authenticating the sign and
giving the number of the permit and the date of issuance.
8-16.4 Other Conditions. In addition to applicable fees otherwise payable, the
applicant shall post a bond of $25 for each sign authorized by the
Director’s stamp, which bond shall be held to ensure the removal of the
signs and shall be refundable upon the surrender to the Director of the
actual sign(s) for disposal. The bond on any sign not surrendered for
disposal within 75 days of the issuance of the permit or actually removed
by the town because it is located on public property more than 60 days
after the date of permit issuance shall be forfeited.
8-17 TIME OF COMPLIANCE: NONCONFORMING SIGNS AND SIGNS WITHOUT
PERMITS
Any sign which is in existence on the date of approval of this ordinance shall be
grandfathered. For new signage and any sign that is modified or replaced, the
122
owner must apply for the valid sign permit and must conform to the requirements
of this ordinance.
8-17.1 Sign Removal Required. A sign that was constructed, painted, installed,
or maintained in conformance with a permit under this ordinance, but for
which the permit has lapsed or not been renewed or for which the time
allowed for the continuance of a nonconforming sign has expired, shall be
forthwith removed without notice or action from the town.
8-18 VIOLATIONS
Any of the following shall be a violation of this ordinance and shall be subject to the
enforcement remedies and penalties provided by this ordinance, by the zoning ordinance,
and by state law:
1. To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign in a way that is inconsistent
with any plan or permit governing such sign or the zone lot on which the
sign is located;
2. To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign requiring a permit without
such a permit;
3. To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign in a way that is inconsistent
with any plan or permit governing such sign or the zone lot which sign is
located;
4. To fail to remove any sign that is installed, created, erected, or maintained
in violation of this ordinance, or for which the sign permit has lapsed; and
5. To continue any such violation. Each such day a continued violation shall
be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty portions of
this ordinance. Each sign installed, created, erected, or maintained in
violation of this ordinance shall be considered a separate violation when
applying the penalty portions of this ordinance.
8-19 ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES
Any violation or attempted violation of this ordinance or of any condition or requirement
adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected, or abated, as the case may be, by
injunction or other appropriate proceedings pursuant to state law. A violation of this
ordinance shall be considered a violation of the zoning ordinance of the town. The
remedies of the town shall include the following:
123
1. Issuing a stop-work order for any and all work on any signs on the same
zone lot.
2. Seeking an injunction or other order of restraint or abatement that requires
the removal of the sign(s) or the correction of the nonconformity.
3. Imposing any penalties that can be imposed directly by the town under the
zoning ordinance.
4. Seeking in court the imposition of penalties that can be imposed by such
court under the zoning ordinance; and
5. In the case of a sign that poses an immediate danger to the public health or
safety, taking such measures as is available to the town under the
applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance and the building code for
such circumstances.
The town shall have such other remedies as are and as may from time to time be
provided for or allowed by state law for the violation of the zoning ordinance.
All such remedies provided herein shall be cumulative. To the extent that state
law may limit the availability of a particular remedy set forth herein for a certain
violation or a part thereof, such remedy shall remain available for other violations
or other part of the same violation.
8-20 FEE SCHEDULE-SEE SECTION 10-6
Reserved
124
ARTICLE 9
AMENDMENTS
9-1 INITIATION OF PROPOSALS FOR ZONING AMENDMENTS
An amendment to this Ordinance may be proposed by the Town Council, the Planning
Commission, the Zoning Administrator, any department or agency of the Town, or any
other individual, corporation, or agency. A request for an amendment to the Zoning Map,
other than a request from the Town Council or Planning Commission, including property
other than that owned by the applicant, shall include a written certification that the
owners or authorized agents of all properties other than that owned by the applicant for
amendment are in agreement with the proposed amendment. Requests for amendments
shall be submitted in writing to the Zoning Administrator whose duty it shall be to
present such amendments to the Planning Commission for review and to the Town
Council for determination.
9-2 PLANNING COMISSION REVIEW
All proposed amendments shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for study and
recommendation. The Planning Commission shall study such proposals to determine:
a. The need and justification for the change.
b. When pertaining to a change in the district classification of the property, the effect
of the change, if any, on the property and on surrounding properties.
c. When pertaining to a change in the district classifications of property, the amount
of land in the general area and in the Town having the same district classification
as that required.
d. The relationship of the proposed amendment to the purposes of the general
planning program, with appropriate consideration as to whether the proposed
change will further the purposes of this Ordinance and the comprehensive plan.
9-3 PLANNING COMMISSION RECOMMENDATION TO TOWN COUNCIL
Within thirty (30) days from the date that any proposed zoning amendment is referred to
it (unless a longer period shall have been established by mutual agreement between the
Town Council and the Planning Commission in the particular case) the Planning
Commission shall submit its report and recommendation to Town Council. The
recommendations of the Planning Commission shall be advisory only, and shall not be
binding on Town Council. If the Planning Commission does not submit its report within
the prescribed time, the Town Council may proceed to act on the amendment without
further awaiting the recommendations of the Planning Commission.
125
9-4 PUBLIC HEARING TO BE HELD
Before making a recommendation to Town Council on any proposed amendment, the
Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing. Such public hearing shall be held at
such times as the Planning Commission shall decide but in no case shall it be longer than
thirty (30) days from the date the proposed zoning amendment was referred to the
Planning Commission.
9-5 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARINGS
In scheduling a public hearing concerning zoning amendments, the Town Council shall
publish two notices in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Winnsboro;
once at least 15 days prior to the hearing and once at least 7 days prior thereto, which
notices shall state the time, date and place of the hearing, shall be blocked in, and shall
have an appropriate descriptive title. When a proposed amendment made by anyone
other than the Planning Commission or Town Council affects the district classification of
a particular piece of property, the Zoning Administrator shall cause to be conspicuously
located on or adjacent to the property affected, one (1) hearing notice for every one
hundred (100) feet of street frontage or portion thereof. Such notice shall be posted at
least 15 days prior to the hearing and shall indicate the nature of the change proposed,
identification of the property affected, time, date and place of the hearing.
9-6 RECONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED AMENDMENTS
The Town Council shall not reconsider a proposed amendment to the Zoning Map if such
amendment requests a change affecting the same lot, parcel, or portion thereof, for a
period of one year from the date of the amendment fee payment of the prior request
unless the Planning Commission recommends to the Town Council that such
reconsideration be given, after the Planning Commission has found that either (a) there
has been a substantial change in the character of the area or (b) evidence of factors or
conditions exist which were not considered by the Planning Commission or the Town
Council in previous deliberations which might substantially alter the basis upon which
the previous determination was reached.
9-7 MINIMUM AREA FOR NEW DISTRICTS
No request from any individual, corporation, or agency other than the Town Council or
the Planning Commission for a change in zoning classification or creation of a separate
district shall be considered which involves an area of less than two acres, except that the
following changes may be made to apply to areas of less than two acres:
a. The extension of existing district boundaries,
b. The addition of C-2 zoning contiguous to existing C-1 or I-1 zones,
c. The addition of RO zoning contiguous to existing C-1, C-2, or I-1 zones.
126
ARTICLE 10
ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALITIES
10-1 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION
A Zoning Administrator designated by the Town Manager shall administer and enforce
this Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator may be provided with the assistance of such
other persons as the Town Manager may direct. It is the intent of this Ordinance that all
questions of administration and enforcement shall first be presented to the Zoning
Administrator and that such questions shall be presented to the Board of Zoning Appeals
only upon reference by, or appeal from, the Zoning Administrator, and that resource from
the decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be to the courts as provided by law.
It is further the intent of this Ordinance that the function of the Town Council under this
Ordinance shall not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and
enforcement which may arise, but that the Town Council shall have only the
responsibility for acting on proposals for amendment or repeal of this Ordinance, and for
establishing a schedule of fees and charges as herein provided.
10-2 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
The duties of the Zoning Administrator shall include:
10-2.1 Interpretation of the terms and provisions of this Ordinance.
10-2.2 Administration of the provisions of this Ordinance relating to Zoning
Permits, Certificates of Zoning Compliance and fee collection.
10-2.3 Administration of the provisions of this Ordinance relating to applications
for variances, appeals from administrative decision and other actions
before the Board of Zoning Appeals.
10-2.4 Administration of the provisions of this Ordinance relating to applications
for zoning amendments, the presentation of same to the Planning
Commission and Town Council, and giving notice of hearings on such
amendment requests as specified herein.
10-2.5 The receipt of complaints from persons who allege that violations of this
Ordinance have occurred, to properly investigate or cause to be
investigated such complaints, and to initiate or cause to be initiated action
to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove such violations.
10-2.6 The maintenance of complete and accurate records relating to adoption,
amendment, interpretation, enforcement and administration of the terms
127
and provisions of this Ordinance. Such official materials shall be a public
record and shall include but not be limited to:
(a) The maintenance of the official copy of the text of the Zoning
Ordinance and Zoning Map and other such records and official
materials as may relate to the adoption, amendment, enforcement
or administration of this Ordinance;
(b) The retention of records relating to application and disposition of
applications for variances, interpretations, appeals from an
administrative decision and other actions before the Board of
Zoning Appeals;
(c) The retention of records of complaints and disposition of
complaints from persons who allege that violations of this
Ordinance have occurred; and
(d) The retention of application records for zoning permits, plats, and
plans in connection with said permits, occupancy certificates,
denials of permits and reasons for denying such permits.
10-2.7 Other such duties as may properly relate to the accomplishment of the
spirit and intent of this Ordinance.
10-3 ZONING PERMITS
10-3.1 Zoning Permits required: No building or other structure shall be
erected, moved, added to or structurally altered without a zoning permit
therefore issued by the Zoning Administrator. A zoning permit shall not
be issued by the Zoning Administrator except in conformity with the
provisions of this Ordinance, unless he receives a written order from the
Board of Zoning Appeals in the form of an interpretation involving error
or a special exception or variance as provided in Article 11. If the permit
is denied, reasons shall be stated for the denial.
10-3.2 Applications for Zoning Permits: All applications for zoning permits
shall be accompanied by plans drawn to scale, showing the actual
dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and
locations on the lot of all buildings already existing, if any; and the
location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration. The
application or plans shall include such other information as lawfully may
be required by the Zoning Administrator, including existing or proposed
uses of the building and land; the number of families, housekeeping units,
or rental units the building is designed to accommodate; conditions
existing on the lot and on nearby lots; and such other matters as may be
128
necessary to determine conformance with and provide for the enforcement
of this Ordinance. One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant
by the administrative official, after he shall have marked such copy either
as approved or disapproved and attested to same by his signature on such
copy.
10-3.3 Zoning Permits to be Posted: The zoning permit shall be posted in a
conspicuous place upon the premises to which the permit applies within
five days of the date of issuance of the permit, and shall remain posted
until completion of the action for which the permit was issued.
10-3.4 Expiration of Zoning Permit: If the work described in any zoning
permit has not begun within six months from the date of issuance thereof,
or in the case of a special exception, within the time limit established
therefor, the permit shall expire and be cancelled by the Zoning
Administrator. Written notice thereof shall be given to the persons
affected.
If the work described in any zoning permit has not been substantially
completed within one year of the date of issuance thereof, said permit
shall expire and be cancelled by the Zoning Administrator, except as
follows:
a. In the case of a special exception, work shall be substantially
completed within the time limit established therefor by the Board
of Zoning Appeals, or
b. In the case of work which may reasonably be expected to require
more than one year for completion, the Zoning Administrator may
specify a time limit in excess of one year at the time of original
issuance of the zoning permit
Written notice of the expiration of any zoning permit shall be given to the
persons affected, including notice that further work as described in the
cancelled permit shall not proceed unless and until a special zoning permit
has been obtained.
10-4 CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE
10-4.1 Certificates of Zoning Compliance to be issued: It shall be unlawful to
use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises,
or both, or part thereof, hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or
wholly or partially altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a
certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued therefor by the
Zoning Administrator stating that the building or proposed use of the
building or land conforms to the requirements of this Ordinance.
129
10-4.2 Certificates May be Issued for Nonconforming Uses: Upon enactment
or amendment of this Ordinance, owners or occupants of uses made
nonconforming shall apply for Certificates of Zoning Compliance for the
purpose of establishment of vested interest in such nonconforming uses,
and the Zoning Administrator may issue such certificates upon acceptance
of reasonable proof that the nonconformity was in existence at the time of
such enactment or amendment, provided however, that owners or
occupants must make application within six months of the time of
enactment or amendment, and Certificates of Zoning Compliance issued
upon such application shall state specifically wherein the nonconforming
use differs from the requirements of this Ordinance.
10-4.3 Temporary Certificates of Zoning Compliance: A temporary certificate
of zoning compliance may be issued by the Zoning Administrator for a
period not exceeding six months during alterations or partial occupancy of
a building pending completion, provided that such temporary certificates
may include such conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of
occupants and the public.
10-5 CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS APPROVED
Zoning permits or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of plans and
applications approved by the Zoning Administrator and other officials or agencies where
additional approval is required authorize only the use, arrangement, location set forth in
such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, location or
construction.
Use, arrangement, location or construction at variance with that authorized shall be
deemed violations of this Ordinance, punishable as provided herein.
10-6 SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES
The Town Council may establish a schedule of fees and charges, and a collection
procedure, for zoning permits, certificates of zoning compliance, appeals, amendments,
and other matters pertaining to these regulations. This schedule of fees and charges, if
established, shall be posted in the office of the Zoning Administrator, and may be altered
or amended only by the Town Council, provided however, that such fees and charges
shall not be levied against the Town Council, the Planning Commission, the Zoning
Administrator, or any department or agency of the Town. No permit, certificate, special
exception, or variance shall be issued or granted unless and until such costs, charges,
fees, or expenses have been paid in full, nor shall any action be taken on proposed
amendments or on proceedings before the Board of Appeals unless and until applicable
charges and fees have been paid in full.
130
10-7 VIOLATION
If the Zoning Administrator shall find that any of the provisions of this Ordinance are
being violated, he shall in writing notify the owner or tenant of the property, indicating
the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order
discontinuance of any illegal use of land, buildings or structures; removal of illegal
buildings or structures or of additions, alterations, or structural changes thereto;
discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized
by this Ordinance to insure compliance with, or to prevent violation of, its provisions.
10-8 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS
Whenever a violation of this Ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person
may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof,
shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. He shall record the compliant properly,
investigate promptly, and take action thereon as provided by the Ordinance.
10-9 REMEDIES
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
maintained or used in violation of this Ordinance, or regulations in furtherance hereof,
the Town Council, Town Attorney, Zoning Administrator, or any person aggrieved may,
in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, abatement, or any
other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent enjoin, abate or remove such unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, maintenance or use.
10-10 PENALTIES
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired,
converted or maintained; or any structure or land is used in violation of this Ordinance; or
there is violation of any condition or requirement in connection with special exceptions,
variances, or rezoning under the terms of this Ordinance, such violations shall constitute
a misdemeanor. Violations of this Ordinance or failure to comply with any of the
requirements hereof shall be a misdemeanor. Each day such violation continues after due
notice to discontinue such violation shall be considered a separate offense. The owner or
tenant of any building, structure, premise, or part thereof, and any architect, surveyor,
builder, engineer, contractor, agent, or other person, who commits, participates in, assists
in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer
the penalties herein provided. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
131
ARTICLE 11
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
11.1 PROCEDURES OF THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
11-1.1 Establishment and Membership: A Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby
established which shall consist of five members who are residents of the
Town of Winnsboro, appointment by the Town Council. The term of
office of the members of the Board shall be for three years, provided
however, that the initial Board of Zoning Appeals established under this
Ordinance shall be appointed with terms as follows: one to serve for one
year, two to serve for two years, and two to serve for three years and their
successors shall serve for three years or until their respective successors
are appointed. Members may be removed for cause by Town Council
upon written charges and after a public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled
for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant.
Members shall not hold any other Town of Winnsboro public office.
11-1.2 Organization and Structure: The essential elements of the
organizational structure of the board include the following:
A. Chairperson. The board shall elect one of its members as
chairperson. The chairperson serves for one year or until a
successor is elected and qualified. The chairperson may be
reelected.
B. Secretary. The board must appoint a secretary. He/she may be an
officer of the governing authority or the zoning board. It is
customary for the zoning board to appoint the zoning administrator
as secretary.
C. Rules of Procedure. The board must adopt rules of procedure
complying both with the 1994 Local Government Comprehensive
Planning Enabling Act and this zoning ordinance. The rules of
procedure shall address the following elements as a minimum.
1) Election of a chairperson and his/her duties
2) Procedure for electing an acting chairperson
3) Appointment of a secretary and his/her duties
4) Procedures for calling meetings
5) Time and place for meetings
6) Posting of meeting notices to comply with Freedom of
Information Act and S.C. Code § 6-29-70 for variances and
special exceptions
7) Setting agenda
8) Quorum and attendance requirements
9) Rules of procedure for conducting meetings
10) Time for appeal from decision of zoning administrator
132
11) Time and procedure for hearing appeals, variances and
special exceptions
12) Time and procedure for rendering and serving decisions
13) Procedure for making and keeping records of actions
14) Procedure for granting re-hearings
15) The oath administrated to witnesses
D. Meetings. The board meets at the call of the chairperson and other
times as determined by the board
E. Notice. The board must give a public notice of all meetings in a
general circulation newspaper in the community.
F. Posting property. In cases involving variances or special
exceptions, the board must post conspicuous notices on or next to
the affected property. At least one notice must be visible from
each street that borders the property.
G. Witnesses. The chairperson or acting chairperson may
administrator oaths and subpoena witnesses.
H. Minutes. The board must provide for minutes of its proceedings to
be taken. They must be a public record on file in the office of the
board. Minutes must record the vote of each member on each
question.
11-1.3 Freedom of Information Act: The Freedom of Information Act (S.C. §
Code 30-4-10, et seq.,) requires all public bodies to conduct their meetings
in public. Public bodies may go into executive session only for matters
such as receipt of legal advice, employment matters and contract
negotiations. The commission/board must give a written public notice of
regular meetings at the beginning of each calendar year. The
commission/board must post regular meeting agendas at the meeting place
24 hours before a meeting. Notices and agenda for called, special or
rescheduled meetings must be posted at least 24 hours before meetings.
The board must notify persons, organizations and news media that request
meeting notifications.
11-2 POWERS OF THE BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the following powers and duties:
11-2.1 Administrative Review: The board shall hear and decide appeals where it
is alleged the Zoning Administrator erred in an order, requirement,
decision or determination. In such cases, the board may reverse or affirm,
wholly or in part, the Zoning Administrator’s actions, provided that such
appeal is made within thirty (30) days after the order, requirement,
decision, or determination which is alleged to be in error is made. The
board has all the powers of the Zoning Administrator in such cases and
may direct the issuance of a permit.
133
11-2.2 Variances: The board has the power to hear and decide appeals for
variances when strict application of the zoning ordinance would cause an
unnecessary hardship.
A. Standards for Granting Variances:
(1) The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant a variance for an
unnecessary hardship if it makes and explains in writing all
of the following findings:
(a) There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions
pertaining to the particular piece of property in
question because of its size, shape, or topography
and
(b) These conditions do not generally apply to other
property in the vicinity, and
(c) Because of these conditions, the application of the
Ordinance to a particular piece of property would
effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the
utilization of the property, and
(d) The authorization of a variance will not be of
substantial detriment to adjacent property or the
public good, and the character of the district will not
be harmed by granting of the variance.
(2) Other issues affecting findings of the board in a variance
application:
(a) The fact that property may be used more profitably
if a variance is granted is not grounds for a
variance.
(b) In granting a variance, the board may attach
conditions to it. These conditions may address the
location, character or other feature of a proposed
building, structure, or use. The board sets the
conditions to protect established property values in
the surrounding area or to promote the public
health, safety or general welfare.
(c) Under the general rule, the board may not grant use
variances. A “use variance” involves the
establishment of a use not otherwise permitted in a
zoning district, or extends physically a
nonconforming land use or changes zoning district
boundaries shown on the official zoning map.
134
(3) No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or
buildings in the district, and no permitted use of lands,
structures, or buildings in other districts shall be considered
grounds for the issuance of a variance.
(4) Granting of a special exception shall not be considered as a
basis for the granting of a variance, and the Board of
Appeals shall grant no variance for the establishment,
enlargement, or alteration of any use, structure, or
characteristic of use which arises from or is necessitated by
the granting of any special exception.
C. Effect of Failure to Meet Condition:
(1) Violation of conditions and safeguards prescribed in
conformity with this Ordinance when made a part of the
terms under which the variance is granted shall be deemed
a violation of this Ordinance, punishable under penalties
established herein.
(2) Failure to begin or complete, or being and complete, an
action for which a variance is granted, within the time limit
specified, when such time limit is made a part of the terms
under which the variance is granted shall void the variance.
11-2.3 Special Exceptions: The board of zoning appeals can permit uses by
special exception if the terms and conditions described in this zoning
ordinance are met.
A. Duties of the Board:
(1) To hear and decide only such applications for special
exceptions as the Board of Zoning Appeals is specifically
authorized to pass upon by the terms of this Ordinance;
(2) To decide such questions as are involved in determining
whether special exceptions should be granted;
(3) To prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in
conformity with this Ordinance, or
(4) To deny special exceptions when not in harmony with the
intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
B. Procedures in consideration of Special Exception Applications:
135
(1) A written application for a special exception shall be
submitted indicating the section of this Ordinance under
which the special exception is sought and stating the
grounds on which it is requested;
(2) Notice of public hearing shall be posted on the property for
which the special exception is sought and shall be
published at least 15 days prior to the public hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town of
Winnsboro;
(3) The public hearing shall be held, and any party may appear
in person, or by agent or attorney;
(4) The Board of Zoning Appeals shall make a finding that it is
empowered under the section of this Ordinance described
in the application to grant the special exception, and that
the granting of the special exception will not adversely
affect the public interest;
(5) The regulations of this Ordinance setting forth specific
standards to be met prior to the establishment of any special
exception shall be binding upon the Board of Zoning
Appeals and no variance to such requirements shall be
granted.
(6) The Board of Zoning Appeals shall grant no special
exception for the establishment of any use or structure
which necessitates the concomitant granting of a variance.
C. Effect of Failure to Meet Conditions:
(1) Violation of conditions and safeguards prescribed in
conformity with this Ordinance, when made a part of the
terms under which the special exception is granted shall be
deemed a violation of this Ordinance, punishable under
penalties established herein;
(2) Failure to begin or complete, or begin and complete, an
action for which a special exception is required, within the
time limit specified when such time limit is made a part of
the terms under which the special exception is granted shall
void the special exception.
136
11-3 APPEALS TO THE BOARD
Appeals to the board and appeals from decisions of the board to circuit court must follow
set procedures. Appeals from administrative actions and decisions of zoning officials are
taken to the board of zoning appeals then to Circuit Court and finally to the Supreme
Court. An appeal on a zoning matter is never taken to the governing body. It has only a
legislative function in zoning.
11-3.1 Time Limits for Appeals:
A. Appeal to Board. A party appealing an administrative action or
decision must make an appeal within 30 days of receiving actual
notice of the action from which he is appealing.
B. Appeal to Circuit Court. A party appealing a board decision to
circuit court must file the appeal with the clerk of court within 30
days after the decision of the board is mailed. Failure to file an
appeal within the time limit deprives the court of jurisdiction to
hear the matter.
C. Appeal to Supreme Court. A party may appeal a circuit court
decision to the South Carolina Supreme Court in the same manner
as other circuit court judgments.
11-3.2 Procedure for Appeals to Board:
A. Notice of appeal. Any person displeased with an officer’s action
may appeal it to the board of zoning appeals. The person must file
a notice of appeal specifying the grounds with officer and the
board. The applicant and parties to the permitting process are
parties in interest and are entitled to notice of appeal. Citizens and
residents who are not parties to the permitting process are not
entitled to notice. The zoning administrator shall provide a form
for the appeal notice. The officer being appealed must
immediately send the board all papers constituting the record upon
which the action was taken.
B. Stay of proceedings. Filing an appeal to the board stays all legal
proceedings to enforce the appealed action unless the appealed
officer certifies that a stay would cause imminent peril to life and
property. In such cases, a board or court restraining order may stay
the action.
C. Time and notice of hearing. The board must set a reasonable time
for hearing the appeal. It must publish a 15 day notice in a general
circulation newspaper and giver notice to parties in interest,
preferably by mail.
137
D. Conduct of hearing. Any party may appear at the hearing in
person, by agent or by attorney. At the start of the hearing, the
chairperson should explain the procedures for presenting and
examining witnesses, receiving evidence, the role of attorneys and
how the board will make and serve a decision. The board may
subpoena witnesses and certify contempt to the circuit court. The
board must hold the hearing in compliance with the Freedom of
Information Act.
E. Rehearing. A rehearing may be justified by reason of newly
discovered evidence, fraud, surprise, mistake, inadvertence, or
change in conditions.
F. Board decisions. The board has the same powers as the zoning
administrator. Board members cannot vote by absentee ballots.
Members must be present to vote. The board must make all final
decisions in writing, deliver them to parties in interest by certified
mail and permanently file them as public records. The board must
separately state in decisions or orders all findings of fact and
conclusions of law. This is a critical requirement because the
board’s findings of fact are binding on the circuit court of appeal.
11-4 APPEAL TO CIRCUIT COURT
A. Petition: A party may appeal a board decision to the circuit court. He must file a
written petition with the clerk of court stating why the decision is contrary to law.
Although the statutes do not require serving the petition on the board, it is
advisable. The clerk of court is required to give immediate notice of the appeal to
the secretary of the board. The filing does not stay or supersede the decision of
the board, but the circuit judge may grant a supersedeas upon reasonable terms.
B. Transcript: Within 30 days after notice from the clerk of court, the secretary of
the board must file with the clerk of court a certified copy of the proceedings, a
transcript of testimony, evidence and the decision including findings of fact and
conclusions. There is no requirement for the board to serve the certified record on
parties in interest. The attorney for the board files a return to the petition and
sends it with a copy of the certified record to the attorney for the appealing party.
C. Standards of review: The findings of fact by the board are treated in the same
manner as findings of fact by a jury. The court may not take additional It can
determine only whether the board decision is correct as a matter of law. The court
must allow the board’s decision to stand if there is any evidence in the record to
support it. If the record is insufficient for review, the circuit judge may send it
back to the board for rehearing. This is a new provision which should be helpful
in getting a complete record. Lack of a good record is the most common problem
in zoning appeals.
138
11-5 EXHAUSTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES
The courts ordinarily dismiss suits challenging zoning actions as premature if the party
fails to exhaust the provided administrative remedies. A party may not go directly tto
court when the administrative procedures and remedies are available.
Constitutional “taking” claims frequently arise when application of the zoning regulations
result in the denial of use of property. The Supreme Court has ruled that a taking claim is
premature when there was not application for a variance or exception pursuant to
administrative procedures provided by the zoning ordinance.
Until there has been a final decision regarding the application of the zoning ordinance
and subdivision regulations to property, the United States Supreme Court has held that it
is impossible to determine whether the land retains any reasonable beneficial use, or
whether expected property interests have been taken.
139
ARTICLE 12
BOARD OF ARCHTECTURAL REVIEW
12-1 A “Board of Architectural Review” is hereby established to oversee development and
redevelopment of the below described Design Overlay District. The purpose of the body
is:
1. Preservation and protection of historic and architecturally valuable districts and
neighborhoods;
2. Preservation and protection of significant or natural scenic areas; and
3. Protection or provision for the unique, special or desired character of the below
defined design overlay district.
12-1.1 Membership
The body will be composed of 5 members appointed by Town Council.
Membership shall consist of the following: one South Carolina licensed
architect or one registered landscape architect, a representative of the
Fairfield County Chamber of Commerce, a representative of the
Winnsboro real estate or development community, a member of the
Fairfield County Historical Society, a resident of the Town who has
demonstrated a knowledge, interest, and involvement in history,
archaeology, genealogy, or a similar discipline or field.
12-1.2 Organization and Operation
(1) Chairperson. The Board must elect one of its members as
chairperson. The chairperson serves for one year or until a
successor is elected and qualified. The chairperson may be
reelected.
(2) Secretary. The board must appoint a secretary. This person may
be an officer of the governing authority or the Board of
Architectural Review.
(3) Minutes. The Board must provide for minutes of its proceedings
to be taken. Minutes must record the vote of each member on each
question.
(4) Rules. The Board must adopt rules of procedure.
12-1.3 Freedom of Information Act
The Freedom of Information Act (S.C. Code 30-4-10, et seq.,) requires all
public bodies to conduct their meetings in public. Public bodies may go
into executive session only for matters such as receipt of legal advice,
140
employment matters and contract negotiations. S.C. Code 30-4-70. The
Board must give a written public notice of regular meetings at the
beginning of each calendar year. It must post regular meeting agenda at
the meeting place 24 hours before a meeting. Notices and agenda for
called, special or rescheduled meetings must be posted at least 24 hours
before meetings. The Board must notify persons, organizations and news
media that request meeting notifications. S.C. Code 30-4-80.
12-1.4 Appeals
(1) Appeal to Board
A party may appeal from the Zoning Administrator or other
administrative official actions for matters under the jurisdiction of
the Board of Architectural Review. The following are the appeal
steps:
a. The party must file notice of appeal with the officer from
whom the appeal is taken and with the Board within the
time provided by the Zoning Ordinance or rules of the
Board.
b. The officer appealed from must send the Board all
documents in the record upon which the action appealed
was taken.
c. An appeal stays all proceedings to enforce the action,
unless the officer certifies that a stay would cause imminent
peril to life and property. The Board or circuit court may
grant a restraining order.
d. The Board sets a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and
giving public notice to parties in interest. This notice must
be published and distributed to concerned parties not less
than seven (7) days prior to the hearing, and not longer than
thirty (30) days between notice and hearing.
e. A party may appear in person or be represented at the
hearing by an agent or attorney.
Although the statues do not specifically require the following
steps, they follow the Board of Appeals procedures. The Board of
Architectural Review should use these procedures also.
f. The Board will conduct the hearing following its adopted
procedural rules. The written decision will include findings
of fact and conclusions.
g. The Board will serve a copy of its decisions on parties in
interest by certified mail and keep a copy as a permanent
public record.
141
(2) Appeal of Council
There is no provision for an appeal from any administrative officer
or the Board of Architectural Review action to the Town Council.
(3) Appeal to Circuit Court
a. Petition. A person having substantial interest may make an
appeal from a Board decision to circuit court. The person
must file a written petition with the clerk of court stating
why the decision is contrary to law. Although not required,
the party should serve the petition on the Board. The clerk
of court is required to give immediate notice of the appeal
to the Board secretary. The filing of an appeal does not act
as supersedes, but the circuit judge may grant a supersedes
upon reasonable terms. S.C. Code 6-29-900.
b. Transcript. Within 30 days after notice from the clerk of
court, the Board must file with the clerk of court a certified
copy of the Board proceedings, a transcript of testimony,
evidence, and the Board decision including findings of fact
and conclusions. S.C. Code 6-29-920. There is no
requirement for the Board to serve the certified record on
parties in interest; however, the attorney should file a return
to the petition and send it with a certified record to the
counsel for appealing party.
c. Standard of Review. The Board’s findings of fact are
final and conclusive on review. The court may not take
additional evidence. The court must determine only
whether the Board decision is correct as a matter of law.
The court must allow the Board decision to stand if there is
any evidence in the record to support it. If the record is
insufficient for review, the circuit court judge must send it
back to the Board for rehearing. S.C. Code 6-29-930. See
Wells v. Finley, 260 S.C. 291, 195 S.E. 2d 623 (1973).
(4) Appeal to Supreme Court
A party may appeal a circuit court decision to the Supreme Court
in the same manner as other circuit court judgments. S.C. Code 6-
29-940. A party must serve a notice of appeal to the Supreme
Court within 30 days after receiving written notice of entry of the
order of the circuit court.
142
ARTICLE 13
LEGAL STATUS
13-1 INTERPRETATION AND VALIDITY
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance or application of a provision
under this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid,
such declaration shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any
part thereof, other than the part or application so declared to be unconstitutional or
invalid.
13-2 REPEAL OF PREVIOUS ZONING ORDINANCE
The Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Winnsboro, South Carolina adopted
February 16, 1982, together with all subsequent amendments thereto, is hereby
repealed as of the effective date of this Ordinance.
13-3 EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after November 5, 2012.
 
 
 
 
 




 


