1
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
10.01 Title of code
10.02 Rules of interpretation
10.03 Captions
10.04 Definitions
10.05 Severability
10.06 Reference to other sections
10.07 Reference to offices
10.08 Errors and omissions
10.09 Powers to enact, amend or repeal ordinances and resolutions; generally
10.10 Ordinances repealed
10.11 Ordinances unaffected
10.12 Repeal or modification of ordinance
10.13 Ordinances which amend or supplement code
10.14 Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
10.99 General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
All ordinances of a permanent and general nature, as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the “Canton Code of Ordinances,” for which designation “code of ordinances” or “codified ordinances” may be substituted. Code title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
§ 10.02 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
(A) Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
(B) Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
(1) Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized agent or deputy.
(2) Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if applicable.
(3) General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited. General terms descriptive of an officer, act, proceeding or thing shall have reference to a municipality concerned or affected.
Statutory reference:
General terms descriptive of an officer, act, proceeding and the like, see SDCL § 9-1-1
§ 10.03 CAPTIONS.
Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
General Provisions
2
§ 10.04 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning
COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time in which any act provided by this code or other ordinance is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last is a holiday and then it also is excluded. Fractions of a day are to be disregarded in computations which include more than one day, and involve no questions of priority.
COUNTY. Lincoln County, South Dakota. (SDCL § 9-1-1)
ELECTOR(S) or QUALIFIED ELECTOR(S). Voter(s). (SDCL § 9-1-1)
GOVERNING BODY. The City Commissioners of Canton, South Dakota. (SDCL § 9-1-1)
LOT. Includes PARCEL or TRACT OF LAND. (SDCL § 9-1-1)
MONTH. A calendar month.
MUNICIPALITY or MUNICIPAL COR-PORATION. The City of Canton, South Dakota. (SDCL § 9-1-1)
ORDINANCE. A permanent legislative act within the limits of its powers of the governing body of a municipality. (SDCL § 9-19-1)
OWNER. As used in this code relating to local improvements, the grantee in the last deed of conveyance of any lot or parcel of land recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of the county or counties in which the municipality is located, or his or her heirs or successors.
(SDCL § 9-1-1)
PUBLICATION. Any requirement for publication shall mean publication in the official newspaper of the municipality concerned or affected, if any; but if none, then, in a legal newspaper published in such municipality, if any; but if none, then, in any legal newspaper which serves such municipality, except as provided by SDCL § 9-13-13. Personal service either within or without the state upon the person affected thereby by delivery of a copy of a notice required to be published shall be equivalent to the required publication.
(SDCL § 9-1-1)
RESOLUTION. Any determination that, decision, or direction of the governing body of a municipality of a temporary or special character for the purpose of initiating effecting, or carrying out its administrative duties and functions. (SDCL § 9-19-1)
SDCL. South Dakota Codified Laws.
STREET. STREET includes AVENUE. (SDCL § 9-1-1)
YEAR. A calendar year.
§ 10.05 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application.
General Provisions
3
§ 10.06 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.07 REFERENCES TO OFFICES.
Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer or employee of this local government exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.08 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.09 POWERS TO ENACT, AMEND OR REPEAL ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS; GENERALLY.
Every municipality may enact, make, amend, revise or repeal all such ordinances, resolutions and regulations as may be proper and necessary to carry into effect the powers granted thereto.
§ 10.10 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.11 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED. All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.12 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF AN ORDINANCE.
(A) No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
(B) When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, the
General Provisions
4
repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
(A) If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its place.
(B) Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.14 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws. This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
(A) Municipalities are authorized to provide for the punishment of each violation of an ordinance, resolution or regulation with a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(B) A conviction shall not preclude civil liability to the city for any damages caused the city by the illegal act. Each separate violation of an ordinance shall constitute a separate offense.
(C) Each day that the violation of a city ordinance occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
(D) In case any person, firm or corporation violates any ordinance of the city, the city, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful act or to restrain, correct or abate such violation. (Prior Code, § 1.08.010) (Ord. 824, passed - -1998)
Statutory reference:
Maximum penalty, see SDCL §§ 9-19-3 and 22-6-2(2)
1
CHAPTER 30: MAYOR AND CITY COMMISSIONERS
Section
General Provisions
30.01 Qualifications of City Commissioners
30.02 Terms of office
30.03 Oath of office
30.04 Bond
30.05 Vacancies
30.06 Mayor
30.07 Absence or disability of Mayor
30.08 City Commission compelling attendance of witnesses and production of evidence; execution and service of process
30.09 Meetings of the City Commissioners and order of business
30.10 City Commission meetings open to public; journal of proceedings
30.11 Quorum of City Commission; majority vote required for action
30.12 Recording of votes of City Commissioners
30.13 Majority vote required for passage of measures; two-thirds vote for sale of real property
30.14 Areas of responsibility
Ordinances and Resolutions
30.15 Amendments
30.16 Style of ordinances; subject
30.17 Readings; passage and publications
30.18 Effective date of ordinances and resolutions
30.19 Compilation of ordinances
30.20 Continuation in force of ordinance after change in form of government
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 QUALIFICATIONS OF CITY COMMISSIONERS.
No person shall be eligible to nomination of election as a member of the City Commission unless he or she shall be a citizen of the United States and shall be a resident and voter of the city. (Prior Code, § 2.04.010)
§ 30.02 TERMS OF OFFICE.
(A) The election for mayor and the election for commissioner shall be held on the second Tuesday of April in the applicable year.
(B) The term of office for the mayor shall be for five years. A mayor shall be elected for a term of five years in the 2023 election, and for a same term every five years thereafter.
(C) The term of office for each commissioner elected at-large to office shall be for five years commencing with the commissioner election in 2019.
(1) A commissioner at-large shall be elected for a five year term in 2019 and for a same term every five years thereafter.
(2) A commissioner at-large shall be elected for a five year term in 2020 and for a same term every five years thereafter.
Mayor and City Commissioners
2
(3) A commissioner at-large shall be elected for a five year term in 2021 and for a same term every five years thereafter. 2018 S-1
(4) A commissioner at-large shall be elected for a five year term in 2022 and for a same term every five years thereafter. (Ord. 1053, passed 5-29-2018)
§ 30.03 OATH OF OFFICE.
Before entering upon the discharge of his or her duties the Mayor and each City Commissioner shall take and file an oath to support the Constitution of the United States and of the state faithfully to discharge the duties of his or her office, and that he or she is not under direct or indirect obligation to appoint or elect any person to any office, position or employment under the government of the city. (Prior Code, § 2.04.030)
§ 30.04 BOND.
Before entering upon the discharge of his or her duties the Mayor and each City Commissioner shall execute a bond payable to the city in the sum as required by statute. Such bond shall be given and executed by a surety company authorized by law to transact business in this state and filed in and remain a permanent record of the office of the Auditor. Such bond shall be conditioned that the principal thereof shall account for and pay over and deliver to his or her successor in office and to the city any and all money or property belonging to it or which shall come into his or her hands by reason of his or her office and well and faithfully perform the duties of his or her office according to the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city. (Prior Code, § 2.04.040)
§ 30.05 VACANCIES.
The resignation of the Mayor or any City Commissioner shall be in writing to the Board. The permanent removal of the Mayor or any City Commissioner shall create a vacancy in his or her office. In case of any vacancy from any cause in the office of Mayor the same shall be filled by majority vote of the remaining City Commissioners to serve until the next annual election or by special election. In the event of the resignation of a City Commissioner, the remaining City Commissioners shall appoint a replacement by majority vote to serve until the next annual election or by special election. (Prior Code, § 2.04.050) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 30.06 MAYOR.
The Mayor shall be President of the City Commission and shall have a vote upon all questions, but shall not have the right of veto. (Prior Code, § 2.04.060) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 30.07 ABSENCE OR DISABILITY OF MAYOR.
In case the Mayor is unable to perform the duties of his or her office by reason of absence or sickness, the Board shall appoint by a majority vote of all members thereof one of its members to act in his or her stead, whose official designation shall be “acting President of the Board of Commissioners.” The City Commissioner so appointed shall be invested with all the powers and shall perform all the duties of the Mayor during such absence or sickness. (Prior Code, § 2.04.070) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 30.08 CITY COMMISSION COMPELLING ATTENDANCE OF WITNESSES AND PRODUCTION OF EVIDENCE; EXECUTION AND SERVICE OF PROCESS.
The City Commissioners shall have the power to summon and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers whenever it may be necessary for the effective discharge of its duties. All process necessary to
Mayor and City Commissioners
3
nforce the powers conferred by this section and SDCL § 9-9-9 shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the Auditor, and shall be served by its police officer or by the sheriff of the county. (Prior Code, § 2.04.090)
§ 30.09 MEETINGS OF THE CITY COMMISSIONERS AND ORDER OF BUSINESS.
(A) The City Commission shall hold meetings at such day, time, and place as designated by the City Commission. Unless otherwise designated by the City Commission, the meeting shall be held on the first and third Mondays of the month in the evening at 7:00 p.m. at the Canton Depot. A regular meeting may be adjourned from day to day until all of the business of the city to be transacted at such meeting has been transacted and an adjournment of such regular meeting without definite date shall be an adjournment to the next regular meeting. (Ord. 1057, passed 11.13.18) (Ord. 1060, passed 2.19.19)
(B) Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or by any two City Commissioners at any time, to consider only such matters as shall be mentioned in the call for such meetings by written notice thereof given to each member of the City Commission then in the city.
(C) At all regular meetings after the same have been called to order, the business of the meeting shall be considered in the following order:
(1) Calling the roll;
(2) Consent calendar;
(a) Approve minutes;
(b) Set hearings;
(c) Month end reports;
(d) Warrants; and
(e) Other routine business.
(3) Old business;
(4) New business;
(5) Other business; and
(6) Executive session.
(D) Any member of the City Commission may request at the opening of the meeting that an item on the consent calendar be moved to the regular agenda. (Prior Code, § 2.04.100) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 30.10 CITY COMMISSION MEETINGS OPEN TO PUBLIC; JOURNAL OF PROCEEDINGS.
All sessions of the City Commission shall be open to the public. Any closed meetings shall be held in accordance to SDCL § 1-25-2. The City Commission shall keep a journal of its proceedings. (Prior Code, § 2.04.110)
§ 30.11 QUORUM OF CITY COMMISSION; MAJORITY VOTE REQUIRED FOR ACTION.
A majority of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absentees under such penalties as may be prescribed by ordinance. A majority of the Board is necessary to pass a measure or action. (Prior Code, § 2.04.120) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 30.12 RECORDING OF VOTES OF CITY COMMISSIONERS.
The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances and upon any proposals to create a liability against the city or for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, and in all other cases at the request of any member, and shall be entered on the journal of its proceedings. (Prior Code, § 2.04.140)
Mayor and City Commissioners
4
§ 30.13 MAJORITY VOTE REQUIRED FOR PASSAGE OF MEASURES; TWO-THIRDS VOTE FOR SALE OF REAL PROPERTY.
The concurrence of a majority of all the members of the City Commissioners shall be necessary to the passage of any such ordinance or proposal. However, the two-thirds vote of all the City Commissioners elected is required to sell any city real property. (Prior Code, § 2.04.150)
§ 30.14 AREAS OF RESPONSIBILITY.
The areas of responsibility for the Mayor and Commissioners shall be controlled by SDCL § 9-9-20 through 9-9-24.(Prior Code, § 2.04.170) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
§ 30.15 AMENDMENTS.
No ordinance shall be introduced providing for the amendment of any existing ordinance or section thereof unless the ordinance introduced shall contain the full text of the ordinance or section as proposed by the amendment. (Prior Code, § 2.04.220)
§ 30.16 STYLE OF ORDINANCES; SUBJECT.
(A) Ordinances must be in the following style:
(1) An Ordinance (Insert Title);
(2) Be it ordained by City of Canton. The substance of the ordinance follows.
(SDCL § 9-19-6)
(B) Ordinances can only embrace one subject which must be expressed in its title. (SDCL § 9-19-5)
§ 30.17 READINGS, PASSAGE AND PUBLICATION.
(A) All ordinances shall be read twice by title with at least five days between each reading. The ordinances, if passed, shall be signed by the Mayor or acting mayor or President of the City Commissioners, and filed with the Finance Officer and published once.(SDCL § 9-19-7)
(B) (1) After being signed and filed, the ordinances must be published at least once in the official newspaper. The only exception to this is that an ordinance incorporating or adopting comprehensive regulations or a code promulgated, approved, and published by a recognized and established national organization prescribing building, electrical, plumbing, safety, fire, health, or milk regulations need not be published in newspaper but upon adoption of such an ordinance the auditor or clerk shall publish a notice of the fact of adoption once a week for two successive weeks in the official newspaper, and 20 days after the completed publication of such notice, unless the referendum shall have been invoked, such ordinance shall become effective. (SDCL § 9-19-7)
(2) The vote on the second reading of all ordinances must be recorded and published. (SDCL § 9-19-9)
(C) Amendments to a planning or zoning ordinance may be published without republishing the full ordinance in the section or subsection of the ordinance containing the change is published in its entirety. (SDCL § 11-4-8)
(D) Resolutions differ from ordinances in that any resolution may be passed after only one reading. The resolution must be recorded at length either separately or in the minutes of the meeting. The votes for and against the resolution must also be published. (SDCL § 9-19-8)
Mayor and City Commissioners
5
§ 30.18 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
Unless an ordinance or resolution is drawn to take effect immediately upon passage, all ordinances and resolutions become effective on the twentieth day after passage and publication, unless suspended by operation of a referendum. (SDCL § 9-19-13)
§ 30.19 COMPILATION OF ORDINANCES.
(A) Municipalities can compile the ordinances of the municipality in book form provided that while compiling the ordinances they are not revised or amended. The Finance Officer shall furnish a free copy of the newly compiled book to the Circuit Clerk of Court and the county law library of each county in which the city is situated. (SDCL § 9-19-15)
(B) Every municipality also has the power to revise their ordinances once every five years. (SDCL § 9-19-16)
(C) (1) Upon the adoption of an ordinance which revises the ordinances of the municipality by the governing body, the auditor or clerk shall publish a notice of the adoption of the revised ordinances once in the official newspaper. Twenty days after the completed publication of the notice, unless the referendum is invoked, the ordinance shall become effective without publication in a newspaper.
(2) The governing body may publish the revised ordinances in book form. The auditor or clerk shall furnish a free copy of the book or the revised ordinances to the circuit clerk of court and the county law library of each county in which the city is situated.(SDCL § 9-19-17)
§ 30.20 CONTINUATION IN FORCE OF ORDINANCES AFTER CHANGE IN FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
Any ordinance or resolution of this city shall continue in force and effect the same as though no change of government has occurred. (SDCL § 9-11-10)
1
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS (ORD. 1062, passed 5/20/2019
Section
Officers and Employees
31.01 Appointments
31.02 Oath of office
31.03 Duties
31.04 Contracts
31.05 Municipal Employees
31.06 Employment Practices
Finance Officer
31.15 Records, warrants on treasury, expenses estimates, contracts and certificates of work; destruction of record
31.16 Financial records maintained; signature of evidences of indebtedness
31.17 Other duties
City Attorney
31.45 Duties
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 31.01 APPOINTMENTS.
The City Commission shall appoint the following:
(A) Any open terms of the Library Board of Trustees, Planning and Zoning Commission, Airport Board, and Recreation Board: and
(B) One Member of the Tree Board;
(C) and may appoint a Building Inspector. (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 31.02 OATH OF OFFICE.
All appointive officers and employees to the extent required by law shall qualify before entering upon the discharge of their duties by taking and subscribing an oath of office in the form required by the Constitution of this state and furnish an undertaking to be approved by the City Commission in such sum as it shall prescribe, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of their offices and to account, pay over and deliver all money or property coming into their hands by virtue of their office according to law.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.020)
§ 31.03 DUTIES.
The duties of the various appointive officers of the city shall be such as are ordinarily undertaken by said officers and as provided by the ordinances of the city and by the statutes of the state. Such officers shall do and perform such duties as may be assigned to them by the City Commissioners. (Prior Code, § 2.08.030)
§ 31.04 CONTRACTS.
The City Commission shall approve contracts with a City Attorney and City Engineer.
(Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
City Officials
2
§ 31.05 MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES
The City Commission shall hire personnel, professional and otherwise, required and necessary for municipal purposes, including but not limited to a Finance Officer and Chief Law Enforcement Officer. The compensation of such employees shall be set by the City Commission.
§ 31.06 EMPLOYMENT POLICIES
All policies regarding personnel regulations and benefits of the City shall be included in the Personnel Policy Manual, which shall be filed with the Finance Office. A copy shall be made available to all employees following the date of hire, following any amendment of personnel manual or upon request by city employee.
FINANCE OFFICER
§ 31.15 RECORDS, WARRANTS ON TREASURY, EXPENSES ESTIMATES, CONTRACTS AND CERTIFICATES OF WORK; DESTRUCTION OF RECORD.
The Finance Officer shall keep his or her office at such place as the governing body may direct, keep the corporate seal, all papers, and records of the municipality and a record of the proceedings of the governing body, whose meetings he or she shall attend. He or she shall draw and countersign all warrants on the treasury in pursuance of orders or resolutions of the governing body and keep a full and accurate account thereof in books provided for that purpose. He or she shall make or cause to be made estimates of the expenses of any work to be done by the municipality, countersign all contracts made on its behalf and certificates of work authorized by any committee of the governing body or by any municipal officer. However, the Finance Officer may destroy any record which a Records Destruction Board, acting pursuant to SDCL § 1-27-19 declares to have no further administrative, legal, fiscal, research or historical value. (Prior Code, § 2.12.010)
§ 31.16 FINANCIAL RECORDS MAINTAINED; SIGNATURE OF EVIDENCES OF INDEBTEDNESS.
The Finance Officer shall keep regular books of accounts in which he or she shall enter all indebtedness of the municipality, and which shall at all times show the financial condition of the municipality, the amount of bonds, warrants, certificates or other evidences of indebtedness issued by the governing body, and the amounts of all bonds, warrants, certificates or other evidences of indebtedness which have been redeemed and the amount of each outstanding. He or she shall countersign all bonds, warrants or other evidences of indebtedness of the municipality and keep accurate accounts thereof, stating to whom and for what purpose issued and the amount thereof. He or she shall keep an account with all receiving and disbursing officers of the municipality, showing the amount they have received from the different sources of revenue and the amount which they have disbursed under the direction of the governing body. (Prior Code, § 2.12.020)
§ 31.17 OTHER DUTIES
The Finance Officer shall perform all duties necessary to comply with state law and as directed by the City Commission.
CITY ATTORNEY
§ 31.45 DUTIES.
When required by the governing body or any officer of the city, the City Attorney shall furnish an opinion upon any matter relating to the affairs of the city or the official duties of such officer; conduct the prosecution of all actions or proceedings arising out of the violation of any ordinance; and perform such other professional services incident to his or her office as may be required by ordinance or directed by the governing body.
(Prior Code, § 2.16.010)
1
CHAPTER 32: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Fire Department
32.015 Expenditures
Planning and Zoning Commission
32.050 City Planning and Zoning Commission created
32.051 Membership of the Planning and Zoning Commission
32.052 Terms of members
32.053 Compensation and expenses
32.054 Organization, rules, staff and finances
32.055 Rezoning
32.056 Comprehensive Plan
32.057 Surveys and studies
32.058 Public buildings and improvements
32.059 Plats and subdivisions
32.060 Streets, parkways, parks and playgrounds
Airport Board
32.075 Airport Board created
32.076 Qualifications and term of office
32.077 Bond required
32.078 Compensation and expenses
32.079 Meetings
32.080 Officers
32.081 Authority to sign for Board
32.082 Record of proceedings
32.083 Duties of City Attorney
32.084 Officers and employees of the Board
32.085 Authority of Board
32.086 Rules and regulations of Boards
32.087 Annual estimates of expenditures
32.088 Levy of tax for airport purposes
32.089 Special fund
32.090 Report of the Board
32.091 Recommendations to governing body
Recreation Board
32.105 Membership
32.106 Bond
32.107 Officers
32.108 Authority
32.109 Meetings; quorum; records and reports
32.110 Operation of public recreation and playgrounds
32.111 Appointment of other officers and employees
32.112 Reporting requirements
32.113 Funds for operation
Celebrate Canton Board
32.201 Membership
City Organizations
2
32.202 Officers
32.203 Authority
32.204 Meetings; Quorum; Records and Reports
32.205 Reporting Requirements
32.206 Funds for Operation
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.015 EXPENDITURES.
The fire department shall submit and file an annual report with the finance officer by July 1 showing all of its receipts and expenditures for the past year so the City Commission can determine the amount of money to appropriate and budget for the department. The fire department shall advise the City Commission of any large expenditure; such as, new equipment they intend to purchase. (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
§ 32.050 CITY PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION CREATED.
There is created a City Planning and Zoning Commission for the city, with authority as provided by this subchapter and state law. (Prior Code, § 2.36.010)
§ 32.051 MEMBERSHIP OF THE PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of not less than five members. The members of this Planning and Zoning Commission shall be resident electors of the city, and may include the Mayor and elected City Commissioners. The City Commission may appoint administrative officials of the city as ex officio members of the City Commission. The City Commission shall oversee the management of the City Planning and Zoning Commission. (Prior Code, § 2.36.020) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 32.052 TERMS OF MEMBERS.
The term of each member of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be for three years, except that when such Planning and Zoning Commission is first appointed, two members shall be appointed to serve a term of one year, two members shall be appointed for a term of two years, and one member shall be appointed for three years. Thereafter appointment of each member shall be for three years so that there will be an overlapping of tenures. (Prior Code, § 2.36.030)
§ 32.053 COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES.
All members of the City Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve as such without compensation. The city agrees to pay for expenses for travel and training such as registration fees and mileage if properly approved by the entire City Commission. (Prior Code, § 2.36.040)
§ 32.054 ORGANIZATION, RULES, STAFF AND FINANCES.
Such Planning and Zoning Commission shall elect its Chairperson from among its members for a term of one year with eligibility for reelection, and may fill such other of its offices as it may create in a manner prescribed by the rules of such Commission. The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month and shall adopt rules for transaction of its business and keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations which shall be a public record. (Prior Code, § 2.36.050) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 32.055 REZONING.
City Organizations
3
All applications and proposals for changes in or amendments to the zoning ordinance shall first be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be made in writing. The City Commission shall have the authority to approve or disapprove any application recommendation or proposed recommendation made by the Planning and Zoning Commission. (Prior Code, § 2.36.060)
§ 32.056 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
(A) For the purpose of making a Comprehensive Plan for the physical development of the city, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make careful and comprehensive studies of present traffic and infrastructure uses and conditions, zoning classifications of property and future growth of the city, with due regard to its relation to the neighboring territory. The Plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city and its environs, which will, in accordance with present and future needs best promote the health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development.
(B) Before adopting a Comprehensive Plan or any part of it, or any substantial amendment thereof, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon, notice of the time of which shall be given by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, not less than 15 days before the date of hearing. The adoption of the Plan or amendment thereof shall be by resolution of the Planning and Zoning Commission carried by the affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the members of the Planning and Zoning Commission. After adoption of the Plan by the Planning and Zoning Commission, a copy thereof shall be certified to the City Commission and the City Commissioners may approve, disapprove or amend the same. The plan or amendment to the plan shall be approved or disapproved by the City Commission and as approved shall constitute the official comprehensive plan.
(C) After the Comprehensive Plan has been adopted and approved by the City Commission, no substantial amendment or modification thereof shall be made without such proposed change first being referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its recommendation. (Prior Code, § 2.36.070)
§ 32.057 SURVEYS AND STUDIES.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have authority to make or cause to be made such surveys, studies, maps, plans or charts of the whole or any portion of the city, with prior approval of the City Commission. The Planning Commission may publish its studies and recommendations after receiving approval from the City Commission. (Prior Code, § 2.36.080) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 32.058 PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND IMPROVEMENTS.
Except as otherwise provided by law, no statuary, memorial or work of art in a public place, and no public building, bridge, viaduct, street fixtures, public structure or appurtenances, shall be located or erected, or site therefore obtained, nor shall any permit be issued by any department of the city for the erection or location thereof, until and unless the design and proposed location of any such improvement shall have been submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission and its recommendations thereon obtained, except requirements and recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for any such improvement when the Planning and Zoning Commission, after 30-days’ written notice requesting such recommendations shall have failed to file same.(Prior Code, § 2.36.090)
§ 32.059 PLATS AND SUBDIVISIONS.
All plans, plats or re-plats of subdivisions or resubdivisions of land embraced in the city or adjacent thereto, laid out in lots or plats with the streets, alleys or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to the public and the city shall first be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission and its recommendation obtained before approval of the City Commissioners. (Prior Code, § 2.36.100)
§ 32.060 STREETS, PARKWAYS, PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS.
No plan for any street, parkway, park, playground, recreation area or boulevard, traffic way, riverfront or other public improvement affecting the city plan shall be finally approved by the city, or the character or location thereof determined, unless such proposals shall first have been submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the latter shall have had 30 days within which to file its recommendations thereon.
City Organizations
4
(Prior Code, § 2.36.110)
AIRPORT BOARD
§ 32.075 AIRPORT BOARD CREATED.
The Airport Board for the city shall consist of five members. (Prior Code, § 2.40.010)
§ 32.076 QUALIFICATIONS AND TERM OF OFFICE.
Each member of the Airport Board shall be a resident and freeholder to the city. Each members shall serve a three year terms, which shall be staggered. (Prior Code, § 2.40.020) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 32.077 BOND REQUIRED.
Each member of the Airport Board before entering upon his or her official duties shall give bond to the city conditioned and in amount as may be required by the governing body, for the faithful performance of his or her duties and shall file such bond in the office of the Municipal Finance Officer together with his or her oath of office. The city shall pay any premium for bonds required to be given by the members of the Board or its officers or employees. All bonds required under provisions of this subchapter shall be approved by the City Commission. (Prior Code, § 2.40.030)
§ 32.078 COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES.
Compensation of the members of the Airport Board shall be as determined by the City Commission and set forth in the annual appropriation ordinance of the city. Members of the Airport Board shall be reimbursed their expenses incurred in the conduct of official business at the rate established by the governing body for city officials. (Prior Code, § 2.40.040)
§ 32.079 MEETINGS.
The Airport Board shall hold regular meetings at least once each month and as many special meetings as it may deem proper. Three members shall constitute a quorum. (Prior Code, § 2.40.050)
§ 32.080 OFFICERS.
The Airport Board shall elect from its number, a President, a Vice-President and a Secretary, each of whom shall serve for a term of one year or until a successor is elected and qualified. The Vice-President shall act in the absence or disability of the President. (Prior Code, § 2.40.060)
§ 32.081 AUTHORITY TO SIGN FOR BOARD.
The President to the Airport Board, and in his or her absence or disability the Vice-President, shall have authority to sign, execute and acknowledge in the name of the Board, all maps, plats, contracts or documents of any character required or authorized by this subchapter. (Prior Code, § 2.40.070)
§ 32.082 RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS.
The Secretary of the Airport Board shall keep a record of its proceedings and make such reports as may be required by the Board. In his or her absence or inability to act the Board may appoint a Secretary Pro Tempore to perform his or her duties. The records when duly certified by the Secretary shall be competent evidence of the proceedings of such
City Organizations
5
Board. (Prior Code, § 2.40.080)
§ 32.083 DUTIES OF CITY ATTORNEY.
The City Attorney shall be the legal adviser of the Airport Board and conduct proceedings in all courts. (Prior Code, § 2.40.090)
§ 32.084 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE BOARD.
The Airport Board may appoint and employ such officers and employees as may be deemed necessary and shall by resolution prescribe and fix their duties and compensation and may require a bond conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties in such amount as shall be fixed, to be filed with the Finance Officer. (Prior Code, § 2.40.100) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 32.085 AUTHORITY OF BOARD.
The Airport Board with the concurrence of the City Commission shall have the power and authority to establish, improve, care for, regulate, control, manage and operate the Canton Municipal Airport. With the approval of the governing body, the Airport Board may erect buildings and structures on the airport and acquire land for airport purposes.
(Prior Code, § 2.40.110) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 32.086 RULES AND REGULATIONS OF BOARDS.
Subject to the approval of the City Commission, the Airport Board shall make by-laws, rules and regulations for the orderly transaction and conduct of its business. It shall make and enforce contracts in the name of the city to carry out the purposes expressed in this subchapter. (Prior Code, § 2.40.120) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 32.087 ANNUAL ESTIMATES OF EXPENDITURES.
The Airport Board, on or before July 1 of each year, shall make an estimate of the moneys necessary for maintaining, establishing, improving, caring for, regulating and managing the Canton Municipal Airport and for necessary structures and buildings to be placed thereon, for the ensuing fiscal year. Such estimate shall specify the amount required therefore, and shall be certified by the Secretary of the Board to the Finance Officer on or before July 15 of each year. (Prior Code, § 2.40.130) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 32.088 LEVY OF TAX FOR AIRPORT PURPOSES.
The governing body of the city at the time of making the tax levy for the city and other purposes shall also levy the tax for airport purposes for the fiscal year next ensuing at whatever amount they may deem necessary as estimated by the Board, which tax shall not exceed two mills on the dollar of the assessed valuation of all real and personal property taxable within the city. Such levy shall be certified to the County Auditor at the same time and in the same manner as general city levies. (Prior Code, § 2.40.140)
§ 32.089 SPECIAL FUND.
The Municipal Finance Officer shall keep in a special fund all money derived from the tax levy for airport purposes and from any other source, and shall pay the same upon requisition by the President and Secretary of the Board upon warrants drawn by the proper officer of the governing body. (Prior Code, § 2.40.150)
§ 32.090 REPORT OF THE BOARD.
The Airport Board shall make an annual report to the governing body of the city of its accounts and all the expenditures, and the governing body may require a report from such Board at any time and the books, records, papers and accounts of the Board shall at all times be subject to inspection by the governing body or its officers or agents.
(Prior Code, § 2.40.160)
City Organizations
6
§ 32.091 RECOMMENDATIONS TO GOVERNING BODY.
Any recommendation by the Airport Board to the governing body shall be by resolution. (Prior Code, § 2.40.170)
RECREATION BOARD
§ 32.105 MEMBERSHIP.
The Recreation Board shall consist of five members, three of which shall reside within the city limits. Each member shall serve a three-year term, which shall be staggered. A member may be terminated by the City Commission if they fail to attend two consecutive meetings or a majority of the regular scheduled meetings. (Prior Code, § 2.44.010) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018) (Ord. 1061, passed 2.19.19)
§ 32.106 BOND.
Each member of the Recreation Board before entering upon his or her official duties shall give such bond to the city, as may be required by the governing body, for the faithful performance of his or her duties and shall take and file in the City Finance Officer’s office with any such bond the usual oath of office required from appointive officers of the city. The city shall pay any premium required to be given by the members of the Recreation Board or its officers or employees. All official bonds required by the governing body under the provisions of this subchapter shall be approved by the governing body. (Prior Code, § 2.44.020)
§ 32.107 OFFICERS.
The Recreation Board shall elect from its number a President, a Vice-President and a Secretary, each of whom shall serve for a term of one year or until his or her successor is elected and qualified. The Vice-President shall act in the absence or disability of the President. In case of death or retirement of an officer, a successor shall be elected immediately. (Prior Code, § 2.44.030)
§ 32.108 AUTHORITY.
The President shall have authority to sign, execute and acknowledge in the name of the Recreation Board all contracts or documents of any character as authorized by and to carry out the purposes of SDCL § 42-2-1, and to sign all requisitions upon the Finance Officer for warrants upon the city treasury for funds under control of and authorized to be expended by such Recreation Board. All such warrants shall be countersigned by the Secretary, and in his or her absence or disability, by some member of the Recreation Board other than the President or Vice-President. Subject to the approval of the governing body, the Board shall make by-laws, rules and regulations for the orderly transaction and conduct of its business. It shall make and enforce contracts in the name of the city to carry out the purposes of SDCL §§ 9-38-80 and 42-2-1. (Prior Code, § 2.44.040)
§ 32.109 MEETINGS; QUORUM; RECORDS AND REPORTS.
The Recreation Board shall have regular meetings to be held quarterly. Special meetings may be called by the Mayor, President or Director of Recreation. The President shall have the discretion to cancel a regular meeting if there is no business to transact at the meeting. Four members shall constitute a quorum to transact business, and a majority of those present shall be necessary to approve any action. The Secretary shall keep a record of its proceedings and make reports as required by the Board. If the Secretary is not present, the Board may appoint a Secretary Pro Tempore to take his or her place at the meeting. (Prior Code, § 2.44.050) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 32.110 OPERATION OF PUBLIC RECREATION AND PLAYGROUNDS.
The Recreation Board shall have the power to operate a system of public recreation and playgrounds within the
City Organizations
7
municipality, as provided by SDCL § 42-2-1, and for such purposes the Recreation Board is authorized to acquire, equip and maintain land, buildings or other recreational facilities, and expend its funds and money derived from the tax levy, provided further, that the acquisition of any land for such purposes by the Recreation Board shall be subject to the approval of the governing body of the city. The Recreation Board shall supply all of the supervision and management for the use of all recreation facilities. (Prior Code, § 2.44.060)
§ 32.111 APPOINTMENT OF OTHER OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
With the approval of the City Commission, the Recreation Board may appoint a Director of Recreation, who shall be the chief executive officer under the Recreation Board. He or she shall hold office at the pleasure of the Board and receive such salary as the Recreation Board may determine and shall on its behalf have charge, supervision and direction of all work and of all officers and employees under the Board. The Board may also appoint and employ other officers and employees as it may deem necessary and shall prescribe and fix their duties and compensation. The Board may require all of its officers and employees, except laborers, to give bond for the faithful performance of their duties in such sum as shall be fixed by it, which bonds shall be filed with the Finance Officer. (Prior Code, § 2.44.070) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 32.112 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
Any recommendation by the Board to the City Commission shall be by resolution. The Board shall make an annual report to the City Commission of its acts and all its expenditures, showing the condition of all affairs under its control. The City Commission may require a report from such Board at any time, and the records, books, papers and accounts of the Board shall at all times be subject to inspection by any City Commissioner, Finance Officer or any committee appointed by the City Commission for that purpose, or any citizen. (Prior Code, § 2.44.080) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
§ 32.113 FUNDS FOR OPERATION.
The Recreation Board on or before July 15 of each year shall make an estimate of the moneys necessary for the operation of a system of public recreation and playgrounds. Such estimate shall be certified by the Secretary of the Board to the Finance Officer on or before July 15 of each year. The governing body at the time of making the tax levy for city and other purposes shall also levy the tax for recreation purposes of the fiscal year next ensuing at whatever amount it may deem necessary as estimated by the Board, which estimate and tax shall not exceed in any fiscal year one mill on the dollar of the assessed valuation of all real and personal property taxable within the city. Such levy shall be certified to the County Auditor at the same time and the same manner as general city levies. (Prior Code, § 2.44.090) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
CELEBRATE CANTON BOARD
§ 32.201 MEMBERSHIP
The Celebrate Canton Board shall consist of a total of 5 board members and shall include at least one City Commissioner.
All members shall be appointed by the affirmative vote of a majority of the City Commission. Each board member shall
serve a three-year term, which shall be staggered. A board member may be terminated at any time by the majority vote of
the City Commission. (Ord. 1066, Passed 2.18.2020)
§ 32.202 OFFICERS
The Celebrate Canton Board shall annually elect from its number a President, a Vice-President, and a Secretary, each of
whom shall serve for a one-year term or until his or her successor is elected. Each officer of the board shall be qualified
and shall not be a City Commissioner. The Vice-President shall act in the absence or disability of the President. In case of
death or resignation of an officer, a successor shall be elected by a majority vote of the remaining board members at the
next regular board meeting. (Ord. 1066, Passed 2.18.2020)
§ 32.203 AUTHORITY
City Organizations
8
All contracts must be approved by the City Attorney and signed by the Mayor with the permission of the City
Commission. (Ord. 1066, Passed 2.18.2020)
§ 32.204 MEETINGS; QUORUM; RECORDS AND REPORTS
The Celebrate Canton Board shall have regular meetings to be held at least quarterly. Special meetings may be called by
the City Commissioner serving on the Board or by the President of the board. The President shall have the authority to
cancel a regular meeting if there is no business to transact at the meeting. A majority of the members shall constitute a
quorum to transact business, and a majority of the quorum present at a meeting shall be necessary to approve any board
action. The Secretary shall keep a record of its proceedings and prepare reports as requested by the Board. If the Secretary
is not present the Board may appoint a Secretary Pro Tempore to perform the duties of the Secretary at the meeting. (Ord. 1066, Passed 2.18.2020)
§ 32.205 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
Any recommendation by the Board to the City Commission shall be by resolution of the Board. The Board shall make an
annual report to the City Commission of its acts and expenditures. Such annual report shall show the condition of all
affairs under the control of the Board. The City Commission may request a report from the Board at any time. The
records, books, papers, and accounts of the Board shall at all times be available and subject to inspection by a City
Commissioner, the Finance Officer, a committee appointed by the City Commission for that purpose, or by a citizen. (Ord. 1066, Passed 2.18.2020)
§ 32.206 FUNDS FOR OPERATION
The Celebrate Canton Board, on or before July 15 of each calendar year, shall make an estimate of the moneys necessary
for the Celebrate Canton activities. Any additional insurance required shall be paid out of funds appropriated by the City
Commission. (Ord. 1066, Passed 2.18.2020)
CHAPTER 33: CODE OF CONDUCT
Section
33.01 Purpose
33.02 Application
33.03 Requirements
33.04 Remedies
' 33.01 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Code of Conduct is to ensure the efficient, fair and professional administration of federal grant funds in compliance with Federal Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-l02, Attachment O, Paragraph 7 and other applicable federal and state standards, regulations and laws.
(Prior Code, ' 2.24.010)
' 33.02 APPLICATION.
This Code of Conduct applies to all officers, employees or agents of the city engaged in the award or administration of contracts supported by federal grant funds.
(Prior Code, ' 2.24.020)
' 33.03 REQUIREMENTS.
(A) (1) No officer, employee or agent of the city shall participate in the selection, award or administration of a contract supported by federal grant funds, if a conflict of interest, real or apparent, would be involved.
(2) Such a conflict would arise when any of the following has a financial or other interest in the firm selected for award:
(a) The employee, officer or agent;
(b) Any member of his or her immediate family;
(c) His or her partner; and
(d) An organization which employs, or is about to employ any of the above.
(B) The city=s officers, employees or agents shall neither solicit nor accept gratuities, favors or anything of monetary value from contractors, potential contractors or subcontractors.
(Prior Code, ' 2.24.030)
' 33.04 REMEDIES.
To the extent permitted by federal, state or local laws or regulations, violations of these standards may cause penalties, sanctions or other disciplinary actions to be taken against the city=s officers, employees or agents, or the contractors, potential contractors, subcontractors or their agents.
(Prior Code, ' 2.24.040)
CHAPTER 34: ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS
Section
34.01 Administrative portions to be governed by
34.02 Retirement system
34.03 Notice requirements
' 34.01 ADMINISTRATIVE PORTIONS TO BE GOVERNED BY.
All administrative procedures and regulations of the city shall be governed by the ordinances of the city and the statutes of the state.
(Prior Code, ' 2.52.010)
' 34.02 RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
The city is a participating member of the state retirement system.
(Prior Code, ' 2.52.020)
' 34.03 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Whenever any ordinance of the city requires notice to be given, the notice, unless otherwise required by ordinance or state law, shall be given as provided in this section.
(B) Such notice may be served personally by the Police Department or authorized representative of the city, by prepaid first class mail, certified mail, registered mail or by posting a copy of such notice upon the premises where the nuisance exists, and such notice is deemed given at the time it is personally served, mailed or posted and said period to reply or abate begins to run at such time of giving notice.
(Prior Code, ' 2.52.030)
Administrative Code Enforcement
1
CHAPTER 35: ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT
Section
35.01 Statement of purpose and intent
35.02 Definitions
35.03 General enforcement authority
35.04 Authority to inspect
35.05 Administrative citations
35.06 Administrative citation procedures
35.07 Appeal
35.08 Administrative citation penalties assessed
35.09 Failure to appeal or pay administrative citation penalties
35.10 Remedies not exclusive
35.99 Penalty
' 35.01 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The city has determined that the enforcement of the city=s code is an important public service and is vital to the protection of the public=s health, safety and welfare. The city has determined that there is a need for alternative methods of comprehensive code enforcement using both administrative and judicial remedies. The city has also determined that because life-safety issues may be regulated through an administrative enforcement process, penalties for violation should be enhanced.
(Prior Code, ' 2.60.010)
' 35.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES. Administrative citations and civil penalties as contained in this article.
CIVIL PENALTY. The administrative civil penalty assessed and all costs incurred by the city from the first discovery of the violations until compliance is achieved. It includes, but is not limited to, staff time and expense in inspecting the property, sending notices, preparing reports and files.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any city employee or agent of the city with the authority to enforce any provision of this code and issue notice of violations or administrative citations.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY. Any person or persons in charge of the premises or location, or the person or persons responsible for the event or incident, and includes any of the following:
(a) The person or persons who own the property where the violation exists;
(b) The person or persons in charge of the premises where the violation exists;
(c) The person or persons using the premises when the violation exists;
Administrative Code Enforcement
2
(d) If any of the above is a minor, a parent or guardian of such minor shall be the responsible party; and
(e) If any of the above is a business entity, the manager or onsite supervisor where the violation exists.
ROLLING 12-MONTH PERIOD. Any 12 consecutive months following a violation.
(Prior Code, ' 2.60.020)
' 35.03 GENERAL ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
For the purposes of this chapter, any code enforcement officer may issue notices of violation and administrative citations, inspect public and private property, and enforce any available administrative and judicial remedies.
(Prior Code, ' 2.60.030)
' 35.04 AUTHORITY TO INSPECT.
Code enforcement officers may enter upon any property and make any examination and surveys necessary to perform their enforcement duties. Inspections may include the taking of photographs, samples or other physical evidence. If an owner, occupant or agent refuses permission to enter to inspect, the code enforcement officer may seek an administrative inspection warrant pursuant to the procedures provided for in South Dakota Codified Laws.
(Prior Code, ' 2.60.040)
' 35.05 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this code for which a civil penalty may be assessed may be issued an administrative citation by a code enforcement officer as provided for in this chapter.
(B) A continuing violation of this code constitutes a separate and distinct violation each day that the violation exists.
(C) A civil penalty shall be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by the code enforcement officer and shall be payable directly to the city.
(D) Penalties assessed by an administrative citation shall be collected in accordance with the schedule of civil penalties.
(Prior Code, ' 2.60.050)
' 35.06 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION PROCEDURES.
(A) A code enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation to a responsible party as described in this chapter. The citation shall be on forms approved by the city.
(B) If the responsible party is not an individual, the code enforcement officer shall attempt to issue the owner an administrative citation. If the owner cannot be located, the administrative citation may be issued in the name of the entity and given to a manager or on-site supervisor. A copy of the administrative citation shall also be mailed to the owner.
(C) The responsible party shall sign the administrative citation. If the responsible party refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the citation.
Administrative Code Enforcement
3
(D) If the code enforcement officer cannot locate a responsible party, the administrative citation may be mailed to the responsible party as prescribed in division (B) above.
(E) If no one can be located at the property, the administrative citation may be posted in a conspicuous place on or near the property and a copy subsequently mailed to the responsible party as provided in division (B) above.
(F) The failure of any responsible party to receive notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter.
(Prior Code, ' 2.60.060)
' 35.07 APPEAL.
(A) Board of Appeals. In order to provide for final interpretation and to hear appeals, the City Commission shall be the Board of Appeals for administrative citations.
(B) Filing of appeal. Any person may appeal an administrative citation by filing at City Hall within ten days from the date of the citation a written appeal containing:
(1) A brief statement detailing with reasonable exactness the grounds of the appeal;
(2) The appellant=s name, address and telephone number; and
(3) A dated signature of the appellant or an agent on his or her behalf and, if signed by an agent, the name, address and telephone number of the agent.
(C) Processing of appeal. Upon receipt of any appeal filed, the Finance Officer shall inform the City Commission of the appeal at the next regular meeting of the City Commission.
(D) Scheduling and notice of appeal hearing. As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the City Commission shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given by the Finance Officer at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing to the appellant.
(E) Failure to appeal. Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this section shall constitute a waiver of his or her rights to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or any portion, thereof.
(F) Staying of order under appeal. Enforcement of any citation, notice and/or order shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed.
(Prior Code, ' 2.60.070) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 35.08 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION PENALTIES ASSESSED.
(A) Any civil penalties assessed shall be payable to the city within ten days from the date of the administrative citation.
(B) Payment of the civil penalty shall not excuse the failure to correct the violations nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city.
(C) If the responsible party fails to correct the violation, subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violations. The amount of the civil penalty shall increase at a rate specified in ordinance.
(Prior Code, ' 2.60.080)
Administrative Code Enforcement
4
' 35.09 FAILURE TO APPEAL OR PAY ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION PENALTIES.
The failure of any person to file a timely appeal or pay the civil penalties within the time specified on the citation shall constitute an irrebuttable presumption that a violation has occurred. It may result in the City Attorney filing legal proceedings in magistrate or circuit court. Alternatively, the city may pursue any other legal remedy available to collect the civil penalty or correct the violation of city ordinance.
(Prior Code, ' 2.60.090)
' 35.10 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
The procedures established in this chapter are in addition to other legal remedies established by law which may be pursued to address violations of this code. The use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city.
(Prior Code, ' 2.60.120)
' 35.99 PENALTY.
(A) Civil penalty; list. The following schedule lists the code provisions for which civil penalties may be cited under this chapter.
Code Provisions Applicable
Code Chapter No.
Description
54
Garbage collection and recycling
90
Animals
91, 92, 93, 94, 95
Health and safety
91
Abandoned vehicles
91
Nuisances
91
Mowing and discharge of mowing waste
96
Snow and ice removal
98
Street trees and shrubs
150
Lot vacation requirements
150
Property Maintenance Code
153
Canton zoning regulations
(Prior Code, ' 2.60.100)
Administrative Code Enforcement
5
(B) Civil penalty; fines. The civil penalties within any rolling 12-month period shall be as follows:
Violation
Penalty
First violation
$100
Second violation
$250
Third or subsequent violation
$500
(Prior Code, ' 2.60.110)
1
CHAPTER 36: FINANCE AND REVENUES
Section
Funds Accounting
36.001 Municipal treasury; receipts; designated funds
36.002 Finance Officer; duties; accounting
36.003 Duplicate receipts; filing with Auditor or Clerk
36.004 Assignment of delinquent accounts; uncollectible accounts; disposition
36.005 Use for personal benefit; prohibition
36.006 Depositories for municipal funds; designation
36.007 Debt service funds; investment; special assessment bonds and certificates; interest in investments
36.008 Debt service funds; investment; maturity dates of securities
36.009 Separate accounts for funds and appropriations
36.010 Special assessment money; receipt and application; cancellation of certificates
36.011 Finance Officer; reports to governing body
36.012 Annual financial report; publication; filing; extension
36.013 Bond record
36.014 Annual estimate of expenses and revenue
Audit
36.025 Annual independent audit
Municipal Retail Occupational Sales and Service Tax
36.040 Purpose
36.041 Effective date and enactment of tax
36.042 Use tax
36.043 Collection
36.044 Interpretation
36.045 Separability
36.046 Municipal gross receipts tax
Municipal Property Tax Rebate
36.050 Municipal property tax rebate
Urban and Rural Service Districts
36.060 Service districts established
36.061 Rural service district; criteria for lands included
36.062 Lands described; rural service district
36.063 Lands included in urban service district
36.064 Agricultural land annexed; limitation on mill levy and assessed value
36.065 Platting or construction in rural district
36.066 Filing ordinance amendment or order with County Auditor
36.067 Lands included in the rural service district
Funds Deposited With the City
36.080 No interest to be paid
36.081 Imposition of requirements
36.082 Interest earned to be property of city
36.999 Penalty
Finance and Revenues
2
FUNDS ACCOUNTING
' 36.001 MUNICIPAL TREASURY; RECEIPTS; DESIGNATED FUNDS.
All money belonging to the municipality derived from taxation, licenses, fines, forfeitures, the operation of waterworks or other public utility owned or operated by it, or from any other source, shall be paid into the municipal treasury, and the governing body by the annual appropriation ordinance shall designate to what fund or funds such money shall be applied.
(Prior Code, ' 3.01.010)
' 36.002 FINANCE OFFICER; DUTIES; ACCOUNTING.
The Finance Officer shall receive all moneys belonging to the municipality, including taxes, licenses, fines and income from all other sources, and shall receive special assessments as provided in SDCL ' 9-22-17 and keep accurate and detailed accounts thereof in such manner as the governing body may from time to time direct.
(Prior Code, ' 3.01.020)
' 36.003 DUPLICATE RECEIPTS; FILING WITH AUDITOR OR CLERK.
The Finance Officer shall give every person paying money into the treasury a duplicate receipt therefore, specifying the date of payment and upon what account paid.
(Prior Code, ' 3.01.030)
' 36.004 ASSIGNMENT OF DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS; UNCOLLECTIBLE ACCOUNTS; DISPOSITION.
Every municipality may assign for collection any or all delinquent accounts receivable. After reasonable collection efforts the governing body may determine that an account is uncollectible, and by formal action direct that the uncollectible amount be removed from the records and disclosed on that year=s financial report. Evidence of the debt removed from the records by the formal action of the governing body shall be retained by the municipality to support possible subsequent collection of that debt.
(Prior Code, ' 3.01.040)
' 36.005 USE FOR PERSONAL BENEFIT; PROHIBITION.
The Finance Officer shall keep all moneys in his or her hands belonging to the municipality separate and distinct from his or her own moneys. He or she shall not use, directly or indirectly, the municipality=s money or warrants in his or her custody for his or her own benefit or that of any other person.
(Prior Code, ' 3.01.050)
' 36.006 DEPOSITORIES FOR MUNICIPAL FUNDS; DESIGNATION.
The governing body shall designate the depository or depositories in which the funds belonging to the municipality shall be deposited. Such depository or depositories shall be a bank or banks within the state, unless otherwise specifically provided by law.
(Prior Code, ' 3.01.060)
Finance and Revenues
3
' 36.007 DEBT SERVICE FUNDS; INVESTMENT; SPECIAL ASSESSMENT BONDS AND CERTIFICATES; INTEREST IN INVESTMENTS.
Every municipality maintaining a debt service fund for the payment of outstanding bonds, and every municipality having outstanding revenue bonds and having accumulated Asurplus funds@ as contemplated by SDCL '' 9-40-30 and 9-40-32, and every municipality owning a public utility or public utilities and having an accumulation of earned reserve or earned surplus funds therefrom, and every municipality having sold its bonds, the proceeds from the sale of which, in the opinion of the governing body, are temporarily not required to carry out the purpose for which the bonds were issued shall keep the accumulations in such funds deposited with the lawful depositories, or invested in registered warrants or bonds of any municipal or public corporation, including those of the municipality issuing such bonds, of the state, or bonds of the United States, or bonds or securities of any kind issued by the state. Nothing herein contained, however, shall be deemed to prevent the transfer, when authorized by law, of special assessment bonds and certificates issued on account of any local improvement to the debt service fund for general obligation bonds, the proceeds of which have been used to finance such improvement. The interest accruing on such investment shall be credited to such fund from which the investment was made.
(Prior Code, ' 3.01.070)
' 36.008 DEBT SERVICE FUNDS; INVESTMENT; MATURITY DATES OF SECURITIES.
Moneys in any debt service fund shall be invested only in such of the securities named in SDCL ' 9-22-12 as will become due and payable on or before the date when the bonds for the payment of which such debt service fund was created become due and payable, except bonds of the United States or of the state. All transactions shall be by resolution of the governing body.
(Prior Code, ' 3.01.080)
' 36.009 SEPARATE ACCOUNTS FOR FUNDS AND APPROPRIATIONS.
The Finance Officer shall keep a separate account of each fund or appropriation and of the debits and credits belonging thereto.
(Prior Code, ' 3.01.090)
' 36.010 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT MONEY; RECEIPT AND APPLICATION; CANCELLATION OF CERTIFICATES.
All money received on any special assessment shall be held by the Finance Officer in its respective fund to be applied only to the payment of the improvements for which the assessment was made. All special assessment certificates received by the Finance Officer shall immediately be canceled and preserved as vouchers in his or her office.
(Prior Code, ' 3.01.100)
' 36.011 FINANCE OFFICER; REPORTS TO GOVERNING BODY.
The Finance Officer shall report to the governing body on a monthly basis, giving a full and detailed account of all receipts and expenditures since his or her last monthly report, and a statement of changes in cash balances by fund.
(Prior Code, ' 3.01.110)
' 36.012 ANNUAL FINANCIAL REPORT; PUBLICATION; FILING; EXTENSION.
The Finance Officer shall report to the governing body at the first regular meeting of March of each year, the receipts, expenses and financial condition of the municipality, including the amount of funds in the treasury at the time of
Finance and Revenues
4
making the report and where and in what amounts the funds are deposited or invested. The report shall be published within 30 days thereafter or upon completion of an annual audit in the official newspaper, or other newspaper as the governing body may direct. Immediately after the report to the governing body, the Finance Officer shall file a copy of the report with the state Department of Legislative Audit.
(Prior Code, ' 3.01.120)
' 36.013 BOND RECORD.
The Finance Officer shall make and keep a list of outstanding municipal bonds, to whom issued, for what purpose, when and where payable, and the rate of interest they respectively bear and recommend such action to the governing body as will secure the prompt payment of the principal and interest of such bonds.
(Prior Code, ' 3.01.130)
' 36.014 ANNUAL ESTIMATE OF EXPENSES AND REVENUE.
The Finance Officer shall report annually, on or before August 1, to the governing body an estimate of the expenses of the municipality and likewise the revenue necessary to be raised for the current year. The budget form shall be similar to that recommended in the municipal accounting manual provided by SDCL ' 4-11-6.
(Prior Code, ' 3.01.140) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
AUDIT
' 36.025 ANNUAL INDEPENDENT AUDIT.
The City Commission shall provide for an independent annual audit of all city accounts and may provide for more frequent audits as it deems necessary. Such audits shall be made by a certified public accountant or firm of such accountants who have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the city government or any of its officers. The City Commission may, without requiring competitive bids, designate such accountant or firm annually or for a period not exceeding three years, but the designation for any particular fiscal year shall be made no later than 120 days before the expiration of such fiscal year. If the state makes such an audit, the City Commission may accept it as satisfying the requirements of this section.
(Prior Code, ' 3.02.010)
MUNICIPAL RETAIL OCCUPATIONAL SALES AND SERVICE TAX
' 36.040 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this subchapter is to provide additional needed revenue for the municipality by imposing a municipal retail sales and use tax pursuant to the powers granted to the municipality by the state, by SDCL ' 10-52 entitled Uniform Municipal Non-Ad Valorem Tax Law, and acts amendatory thereto.
(Prior Code, ' 3.04.010)
' 36.041 EFFECTIVE DATE AND ENACTMENT OF TAX.
From and after January 1, 2004, there is imposed as a municipal retail occupational sales and service tax upon the privilege of engaging in business, a tax measured by 2% on the gross receipts of all persons engaged in business within the jurisdiction of the municipality who are subject to the South Dakota Retail Occupational Sales and Service Tax, SDCL ' 10-45 and acts amendatory thereto. (Prior Code, ' 3.04.020)
Finance and Revenues
5
' 36.042 USE TAX.
In addition, there is imposed an excise tax on the privilege of use, storage and consumption within the jurisdiction of the municipality of tangible personal property or services purchased from and after January 1, 2004, at the same rate as the municipal sales and service tax upon all transactions or use, storage and consumption which are subject to the South Dakota Use Tax Act, SDCL ' 10-46, and acts amendatory thereto.
(Prior Code, ' 3.04.030)
' 36.043 COLLECTION.
Such tax is levied pursuant to authorization granted by SDCL ' 10-52 and acts amendatory thereto, and shall be collected by the State Department of Revenue and Regulation in accordance with the same rules and regulations applicable to the state sales tax and under such additional rules and regulations as the Secretary of Revenue and Regulation of the state shall lawfully prescribe.
(Prior Code, ' 3.04.040)
' 36.044 INTERPRETATION.
It is declared to be the intention of this subchapter and the taxes levied hereunder that the same shall be interpreted and construed in the same manner as all sections of the South Dakota Retail Occupational Sales and Service Act, SDCL ' 10-45 and acts amendatory thereto and the South Dakota Use Tax, SDCL ' 10-46 and acts amendatory hereto, and that this shall be considered a similar tax except for the rate thereof to that tax.
(Prior Code, ' 3.04.050)
' 36.045 SEPARABILITY.
If any provision of this subchapter is declared unconstitutional or the application thereof to any person or circumstances held invalid, the constitutionality of the remainder of the subchapter and applicability thereof to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
(Prior Code, ' 3.04.070)
' 36.046 MUNICIPAL GROSS RECEIPTS TAX.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide additional needed revenue for the municipality by imposing a municipal gross receipts tax pursuant to the powers granted to the municipality by the state by SDCL ' 10-52A, and acts amendatory thereto.
(B) Effective date and enactment of tax. From and after July 1, 2011, there is hereby imposed a municipal gross receipts tax of 1% upon the gross receipts from the sale of leases or rentals of hotel, motel, campsites or other lodging accommodations within the municipality for periods of less than 28 consecutive days, the sale of alcoholic beverages as defined in SDCL ' 35-1-1, establishments where the public is invited to eat, dine or purchase and carry out prepared food for immediate consumption, and ticket sales or admissions to places of amusement, athletic and cultural events. The tax applies to the gross receipts of all persons engaged in business within the jurisdiction of the municipality who are subject to the
South Dakota Retail Occupational Sales and Service Tax, SDCL ' 10-45 and acts amendatory thereto.
(C) Collection. Such tax is levied pursuant to authorization granted by SDCL ' 10-52A and acts amendatory thereto, and shall be collected by the State Department of Revenue and Regulation in accordance with the same rules and regulations applicable to the state sales tax and under such additional rules and regulation as the Secretary of Revenue of the state shall lawfully prescribe.
Finance and Revenues
6
(D) Interpretation. It is declared to be the intention of this section and the taxes levied hereunder that the same shall be interpreted and construed in the same manner as all sections of the South Dakota Retail Occupational Sales Service Tax, SDCL ' 10-45 and acts amendatory thereto, and that this shall be considered a similar tax except for the rate thereof to that tax.
(E) Use of revenue. Any revenues received under this section may be used only for the purpose of land acquisition, architectural fees, construction costs, payment for civic center, auditoriums or athletic facility buildings, including the maintenance, staffing and operations of such facilities, and the promotion and advertising of the municipality, its facilities, attractions and activities.
(F) Separability. If any provision of this section is declared unconstitutional or the application thereof to any person or circumstances held invalid the constitutionality of the remainder of the ordinance and applicability thereof to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
(Prior Code, ' 3.04.010A)
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY TAX REBATE
' 36.050 MUNICIPAL PROPERTY TAX REBATE.
(A) To encourage construction of new housing in the City of Canton, a rebate of the municipal property tax is hereby established as follows:
(1) The rebate will apply to any single-family, two-family, or multi-family dwellings, other than hotels, motels, or lodging houses, that are constructed and granted a final inspection certificate for occupancy after July 1, 2016.
(2) The rebate shall be for five years, commencing the year following the issuance of the occupancy certificate.
(B) The rebate of the municipal taxes shall be paid to the owner of the real property by December 1st of each year after it has been received by the City of Canton, without an interest. The City of Canton shall have the right to withhold any or all of the rebate to offset any unpaid assessments on the real property, or any fines, judgments, or other debts owed to the City of Canton by said owner.
(Ord. 1038, passed 12-5-2016)
URBAN AND RURAL SERVICE DISTRICTS
' 36.060 SERVICE DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
Pursuant to the authority granted in SDCL Ch. 9-21A, the city is hereby divided in area into an urban service district and a rural service district constituting separate taxing districts for the purpose of levying all city ad valorem property taxes, except those levied for the payment of bonds.
(Prior Code, ' 3.05.010)
' 36.061 RURAL SERVICE DISTRICT; CRITERIA FOR LANDS INCLUDED.
The rural service district shall include only such platted or unplatted lands as in the judgment of the City Commission are rural in character, are used or usable for agriculture, and are not developed for commercial, industrial or urban residential purposes. The rural service district may include lands which are not contiguous to one another.
(Prior Code, ' 3.05.020)
Finance and Revenues
7
' 36.062 LANDS DESCRIBED; RURAL SERVICE DISTRICT.
(A) The rural service district shall consist of those platted or unplatted lands described in ' 36.067, also on file with the City Finance Officer=s office, entitled ALands Included in the Rural Service District@ and attached to this subchapter as ' 36.067 and made a part of this subchapter, all of which lands are rural in character, are used or usable for agriculture, and are not developed for commercial, industrial or urban residential purposes.
(B) The rural service district shall also include lands outside the municipality, if annexed into the city limits, which are rural in character, are used or usable for agriculture, and are not developed for commercial, industrial or urban residential purposes.
(Prior Code, ' 3.05.030)
' 36.063 LANDS INCLUDED IN URBAN SERVICE DISTRICT.
The urban service district shall include all lands within the boundaries of the city which are not included in the rural service district.
(Prior Code, ' 3.05.040)
' 36.064 AGRICULTURAL LAND ANNEXED; LIMITATION ON MILL LEVY AND ASSESSED VALUE.
The tax levy and assessed value on the agricultural land annexed shall not exceed the average tax levy and average assessed value on unannexed agricultural land in adjoining townships in the county so long as the annexed land remains rural property and is included in the rural service district.
(Prior Code, ' 3.05.050)
' 36.065 PLATTING OR CONSTRUCTION IN RURAL DISTRICT.
The City Commission or officer of the city approving such plat or building permit or having
knowledge of the change in circumstances shall report the change to the City Commission which shall make and enter an order transferring such parcel from the rural service district to the urban service district, whenever any parcel of land included within the rural service district:
(A) Is platted in whole or in part;
(B) Is the subject of an application for a permit for the construction of a commercial, industrial or urban residential development or improvement to be situated on such parcel or any part thereof; or
(C) Otherwise fails to meet the criteria as set forth in ' 36.062 of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, ' 3.05.060)
' 36.066 FILING ORDINANCE AMENDMENT OR ORDER WITH COUNTY AUDITOR.
The City Finance Officer is hereby directed to file with the appropriate County Auditor a certified copy of the ordinance codified in this subchapter, every amendment thereof and every order adopted or entered pursuant to such subchapter.
(Prior Code, ' 3.05.070)
Finance and Revenues
8
' 36.067 LANDS INCLUDED IN THE RURAL SERVICE DISTRICT.
(A) Parcel 1. The South Half of the Southwest Quarter (S1/2 SW1/4) of Section Eighteen (18), Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range Forty-eight (48) West of the 5th P.M., Except the East 60 Feet of the South 537 Feet and the West 700.70 Feet of the South 373 Feet thereof, Lincoln County, South Dakota.
(B) Parcel 2. Tract Two (2) of McCart=s Addition in the West Half of the Southeast Quarter (W1/2 SE1/4), except the East 134 feet of the South 247.25 feet thereof, all in Section Fifteen (15), Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range Forty-nine (49), West of the 5th P.M., Lincoln County, South Dakota, according to the recorded plat thereof.
(C) Parcel 3. The Northwest Quarter of the Northwest Quarter (NW 1/4 NW 1/4). (Except the South 100 feet of the North 549 feet of the East 208 feet of the West 258 feet thereof, and Except Tract 1A, Northern States Power Co. Addition to the City of Canton, and Except the SW 1/4 NW 1/4 NW 1/4, and Except the South 208 feet of the North 449 Feet of the East 208 Feet of the West 258 Feet thereof), Section Thirteen (13), Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range Forty-nine (49) West of the 5th P.M., Lincoln County, South Dakota, according to the Government Survey thereof.
(D) Parcel 4. Tract Four (4) of Canton Development Addition in the North Half of the Southwest Quarter (N 1/2 SW 1/4) of Section Fifteen (15), Township Ninety-eight (98) North, Range Forty-nine (49) West of the 5th P.M., Lincoln County, South Dakota, according to the recorded plat thereof.
(Prior Code, Exh. A)
FUNDS DEPOSITED WITH THE CITY
' 36.080 NO INTEREST TO BE PAID.
No interest shall be paid by the city on any funds deposited with the city, including, but not limited to, deposits paid as a condition for, or in connection with, the obtaining of municipal water service from the city.
(Prior Code, ' 3.08.010)
' 36.081 IMPOSITION OF REQUIREMENTS.
By resolution duly adopted by the City Commission, it may, from time to time, impose requirements for such deposits as the City Commission deems necessary, and, by such resolution, the City Commission may establish the amounts of any such deposits, and period of time for which such deposits may be held by the city, and the conditions for the refund of such deposits.
(Prior Code, ' 3.08.020)
' 36.082 INTEREST EARNED TO BE PROPERTY OF CITY.
Any interest earned on such deposits while held by the city shall be the sole and exclusive property of the city.
(Prior Code, ' 3.08.030)
' 36.999 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of ' 10.99.
40
(B) Any person failing or refusing to make reports or payments prescribed by '' 36.040 through 36.045
Finance and Revenues
9
and the rules and regulations relating to the ascertainment and collection of the tax herein levied shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not more than $200 or imprisoned in the municipal jail for 30 days or both such fine and imprisonment. In addition, all such collection remedies authorized by SDCL ' 10-45, and acts amendatory thereto, and SDCL ' 10-46, and acts amendatory thereto are authorized for the collection of these excise taxes by the Department of Revenue and Regulation.
(Prior Code, ' 3.04.060)
(C) Any person failing or refusing to make reports or payments prescribed by ' 36.046 and the rules and regulations relating to the ascertainment and collection of the tax herein levied shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not more than $200 or imprisoned in the municipal jail for 30 days or both such fine and imprisonment. In addition, all such collection remedies authorized by SDCL ' 10-45, and acts amendatory thereto, are hereby authorized for the collection of these excise taxes by the Department of Revenue.
(Prior Code, ' 3.04.010A)
1
CHAPTER 50: WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
Section
50.01 Definitions
50.02 Rules and regulations
50.03 New service permit required
50.04 Expenses for new tap and service
50.05 Water hookup fee
50.06 Water line hookup fee
50.07 Pipe size and type
50.08 Service line stop valves
50.09 Curb stop boxes and valves
50.10 Expansion loops required
50.11 Owner responsible for pipe and fixtures
50.12 Consumers must not permit others to use water
50.13 One consumer to each service
50.14 Extension of service pipes
50.15 Separation of water service from sewer service
50.16 Pipes inspected before covering
50.17 Replacing or repair of service line
50.18 Failure to repair private service line
50.19 Service line work
50.20 Meter required
50.21 Meter installation
50.22 Meters failing to register
50.23 Tampering with meters
50.24 Testing meters
50.25 Meter boxes
50.26 Valve between meter and boiler
50.27 City not responsible for damage
50.28 Cross connections
50.29 Automatic valves
50.30 May shut off to make repairs
50.31 Leave water turned off
50.32 Submit plans
50.33 Use of water for building purposes
50.34 Sprinkling
50.35 Notice to continue or discontinue required
50.36 Interfering with fire hydrants
50.37 Abandonment of service
50.38 Inspection of water mains constructed under private contract
50.39 Reimbursement to city of administrative costs of water mains constructed under private contract
50.40 Authority of department
50.41 Water shut-off expense
50.42 Interfering with or damaging property of Water Department prohibited
50.43 Contamination prohibited
50.44 Water consumers to comply with sanitary regulations
50.45 Construction of cesspool and privy
50.46 Breaking seals
50.99 Penalty
Water Service System
2
' 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
WATER DEPARTMENT. As used in this chapter, shall be construed to mean that department of the city government having charge and control of the municipal water treatment plant and water distribution system of the city.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.010)
' 50.02 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
The following rules and regulations are established for the operations of the Water Department and the control of all persons doing any plumbing work in and upon any of the mains, connections and appliances to the city water works system.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.020)
' 50.03 NEW SERVICE PERMIT REQUIRED.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make or cause to be made any connection with, attach to or tap any lateral or trunk line water service main, or make any excavations in any street, alley or public property, or under any sidewalk in the city for the purpose of making such connection, tap or attachment to any water service main without having made written application and obtained a new service permit. The permit fee in the sum of $10 shall be paid by the owner, or contractor, before any work is done. Proof of insurance or bond must be provided to the Finance Officer to protect, indemnify and save the city harmless from all damages, claims or liability arising by reason of the excavation of the streets, alleys or public property of the city for the purposes herein referred to by said person, firm or corporation.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.030) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018) Penalty, see ' 50.99
' 50.04 EXPENSES FOR NEW TAP AND SERVICE.
All expenses of a new tap and service shall be borne by the person, firm or corporation demanding water.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.040)
' 50.05 WATER HOOKUP FEE.
Any property owner who intends to hook up to a city water main shall pay to the city a hookup fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Commission. This hookup fee shall be in addition to any cost recovery fee set forth by separate resolution or ordinance for the installation of the water main.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.050)
' 50.06 WATER LINE HOOKUP FEE.
Any property owner who hooks on to the city water line on West Street north of the intersection of West Street and Highway 18 shall pay to the city, a hookup fee in the amount of $2,000 for each and every hookup attached thereto.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.060)
Water Service System
3
' 50.07 PIPE SIZE AND TYPE.
Except as hereinafter provided, copper pipe is required in making connections with the city water mains from the mains to the curb. The pipes shall be as follows: copper pipe one inch, one and one-quarter inch or two inch bore type K soft tubing to stand a minimum of 150 pounds pressure per square inch. No deviation from the sizes, weights and strength of copper pipe to be used between the main and curb as above specified will be permitted. Type K copper tubing of the best quality shall be used when installing the water service from the curb stop to the water meter. The service should be of ample size to serve all fixtures at all times. The minimum size from the main to the curb stop is one inch and from the curb stop to the meter is one inch. Copper pipe between the curb stop and the meter shall be installed with copper pipe, between the corporation stop and meter; and must be installed by use of flared connections. In the case of corrosive or adverse soil conditions, these pipe specifications may be changed by the Utilities Commissioner or engineer.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.070) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 50.08 SERVICE LINE STOP VALVES.
In all cases where water service pipes enter a building the same must be provided with stop valves placed within nine inches of the wall or floor where the pipe enters the building. The stop must have a wheel attached thereto for the purpose of turning same so that the water may be turned off in case of leaks in the building, and such shut-off must be kept accessible and workable at all times. Combination stop and waste valves and cocks shall not be installed in an underground service pipe.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.080)
' 50.09 CURB STOP BOXES AND VALVES.
All curb stop boxes and shutoff valves for controlling the supply of water to consumers shall be placed in the dedicated right-of-way inside the curb line of the street with the top of the stop box even with the grade of the sidewalk or curb, but this rule shall not apply where the water supply is controlled by a valve or valves within the street. No person shall tamper in any way with a curb valve and box or turn the water off or on except as herein provided. In the event that a valve box or valve needs to be replaced or fixed for any reason, notification shall be given to the property owner and said owner shall initiate repair within a time limit set by the Utilities Commissioner or engineer. All costs of the repair will be borne by the property owner. If no action is taken to repair the valve box or valve, the valve box or valve shall be repaired or ordered repaired by the City Water Department, with full charges made to the property owner, or discontinued service thereto for nonpayment of repairs.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.090) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 50.10 EXPANSION LOOPS REQUIRED.
All future service pipes connected to the city water mains shall be provided with a suitable expansion loop, located near the main, to ensure that no force will be exerted on the corporation cock. Such connections shall be made in accordance with the specifications prepared by and on file in the office of the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.100)
' 50.11 OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR PIPE AND FIXTURES.
The Water Department will not be responsible for pipes and fixtures. The Water Department will be responsible from the main to the curb stop, not including the curb stop. All owners must, at their own expense, keep their service pipe from and including the curb stop to their premises, and all other apparatus in good working order and properly protected from frost and other danger. No claim shall be made against the city by reason of the breaking of any service pipe or apparatus or from any other damage that may result from shutting off water for repairing or any other purpose. No reduction will be made from regular rates because of leaking pipes, fixtures or breakage. (Prior Code, ' 13.04.110)
Water Service System
4
' 50.12 CONSUMERS MUST NOT PERMIT OTHERS TO USE WATER.
No consumer shall permit the owner or occupant of other premises to use water from his or her service without special permission from the Water Department.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.120) Penalty, see ' 50.99
' 50.13 ONE CONSUMER TO EACH SERVICE.
Not more than one consumer shall be supplied from each service line. Each service line shall have a curb box and stop valve located at the curb line of the street. Owners of real property or buildings who lease or subdivide shall be responsible for all water used from the service at the point of the curb stop valve. Owners of buildings where more than one meter is used with only one shut-off at the curb line or street valve will be held responsible for all water used for the premises.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.130)
' 50.14 EXTENSION OF SERVICE PIPES.
Water service pipes must not be extended from one premises to another without special permission from the Water Department.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.140) Penalty, see ' 50.99
' 50.15 SEPARATION OF WATER SERVICE FROM SEWER SERVICE.
Water pipes must not be laid in the same trench with sewers but an entirely separate trench must be provided therefore, with at least ten feet of undisturbed or compacted earth separating the two trenches.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.150)
' 50.16 PIPES INSPECTED BEFORE COVERING.
No water pipe laid underground shall be covered and the trenches filled up until after the water has been turned into such pipes and the pipes shall have been tested by the Plumbing Inspector or an authorized employee of the Water Department and found to be water-tight and below frost line, except where otherwise specifically permitted by the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.160)
' 50.17 REPLACING OR REPAIR OF SERVICE LINE.
In the event it is necessary to replace a service pipe because of a leak in the service, the city shall be responsible for the tap and pipe up to the point of connection to the curb stop. The property owner shall be responsible for replacement of service from and including the curb stop to their premises. If a leak exists, the Water Department shall give notification to the owner and the service shall be shut off at the curb stop until the service is fixed or replaced in accordance with Water Department regulations.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.170)
' 50.18 FAILURE TO REPAIR PRIVATE SERVICE LINE.
In case of a leak, in any private service line, or if a faulty curb stop is found by the City Water Department, the property owner must initiate repair ofthe service line within a time limit set by the Utilities Commissioner or engineer. If no action is taken to repair the service line, the service line shall be repaired or ordered repaired by the City Water Department, with full charges made to the property owner, or discontinue service thereto for nonpayment of repairs.
Water Service System
5
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.180) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 50.19 SERVICE LINE WORK.
No person except a regularly license master plumber, his or her employee, a licensed digger or a regular employee of the Water Department shall be permitted to do any work on any pipes or connections to the city water mains, between the mains and the building without a service line work permit. The permit, together with a $10 permit fee, shall be filed with the Finance Officer before any work is done. All such work shall be tested and must be inspected by the Water Department or the Plumbing Inspector before it is covered and the ditch refilled.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.190) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 50.20 METER REQUIRED.
All dwellings or businesses supplied with city water service must be metered. All meters shall be of a type approved by the City Water Department and shall be installed by the Water Department. The initial cost of a five-eighths inch or one-half inch meter shall be borne by the city. Any meter larger than five-eighths inch shall be paid for and furnished by the consumer. The supply of water through each service shall be recorded by one meter only, for which one account will be rendered by the Water Billing Department. All consumers outside the city limits must pay for their meters at cost plus any handling charges. The supply of water through each service shall be recorded by one meter only, for which one account will be rendered by the Water Billing Department. The city reserves the right to read, inspect and require maintenance of any meters.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.200)
' 50.21 METER INSTALLATION.
All meters shall be installed on service pipes not to exceed two feet from the wall where such pipe enters the premises with a stop and waste valve between such meter and the wall, and such meter shall be so placed as to be easy of access and shall be kept free from all obstructions so that same may be easily read and inspected and shall be protected by the consumer from freezing and other danger. All one and one-half inch and larger meters shall have a stop valve on both the inlet and outlet side of the meter. All installations requiring a larger meter than two inches shall be served though a header that will accommodate as many as two inches or smaller meters as is required to serve the installation unless otherwise specified by the Water Department or City Engineer.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.210)
' 50.22 METERS FAILING TO REGISTER.
In cases where water meters fail to register the amount of water passing through them by being stopped up or from any cause whatever, the quantity used shall be determined and the charge based upon previous consumption or an analysis of the account during the past 12 months. If meters are damaged by freezing, hot water or otherwise, the owner or occupant must pay for such damage. The cost of ordinary maintenance will be borne by the Water Department. In case of breakage or stoppage or any other irregularity in the water meter, the owner or occupant shall notify the Water Department at once and any necessary repairs will be made by the Water Department as hereinbefore provided.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.220)
' 50.23 TAMPERING WITH METERS.
No person shall tamper in any way with a water meter or interfere with its registering. No person shall in any way by-pass the water around the meter or make any connections on the water line ahead of the water meter. In such cases the Water Department shall approximate the water bills according to information and records on file in the Water Department during the past 12 months.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.230) Penalty, see ' 50.99
Water Service System
6
' 50.24 TESTING METERS.
In case there is any doubt as to the accuracy of any meter on the part of the consumer, he or she may have the meter tested by depositing the fee hereinafter required by the Water Department and if the meter proves to be correct, the deposit shall be retained to pay for the labor in making such test. If the meter should prove to be more than 2% fast, the deposit will be refunded and proper reductions made from the bill for the preceding period. In case the meter is more than 2% slow, the property amount will be added to the bill and the deposit retained. Fees for testing meters shall be as follows:
5/8 inch meter
$20.50
3/4 inch meter
$20.50
1 inch meter
$25
1-1/2 inch meter
$40
2 inch meter
$60
3 inch meter
$85
4 inch meter
$105
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.240)
' 50.25 METER BOXES.
All meters located outside of basements must be placed in meter boxes or vaults. All such boxes or vaults must be constructed of cement or cement blocks and be not less than four feet long and three feet wide, inside measurements, and must be provided with a close-fitting cover with an opening large enough for an average size person to enter and with steps to enable one to descend into the box. Meters must be installed so that they will be above the ground water table, with a stop valve on both the inlet and outlet side of the meter.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.250)
' 50.26 VALVE BETWEEN METER AND BOILER.
When a meter is placed on a pipe connected to a boiler or other hot water apparatus, a relief valve approved by the Plumbing Inspector must be placed between such meter and the boiler or other hot water apparatus to protect such meter from back pressure of steam or hot water.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.260)
' 50.27 CITY NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR DAMAGE.
The city will not be responsible for accidents resulting from insecure boilers, or from variation in the water pressure or the ram of the water from the mains or from the collapse from any cause whatever.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.270)
' 50.28 CROSS CONNECTIONS.
No cross connection is allowed between the city water system and any other water system or water supply whatever. Water service will be discontinued immediately if protective devices are found to be defective or if cross connections are found to exist on the premises. (Prior Code, ' 13.04.280) Penalty, see ' 50.99
Water Service System
7
' 50.29 AUTOMATIC VALVES.
No licensed plumber or any other person shall connect to the water system of the city any apparatus controlled by an automatic valve without providing a proper air chamber therefore.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.290) Penalty, see ' 50.99
' 50.30 MAY SHUT OFF TO MAKE REPAIRS.
In the event of leak or other accidents to pipes or other apparatus connected with the city water works, licensed plumbers in an emergency may shut off the water to the curb stop to make the necessary repairs. Where it is necessary to disconnect a water meter, notice must be given to the Water Department. No plumber or other person shall remove any meter from any premises or change the location of any meter in any premises without first receiving permission therefore from the Water Department. When plumbers make repairs to pipes or fixtures on any premises, they shall leave the water turned on or turned off as they found it to be when they entered upon the premises to make such repairs.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.300)
' 50.31 LEAVE WATER TURNED OFF.
In no case shall any plumber or person after completion and test on any new construction plumbing work, if it be the first introduction of the service, leave the water turned on to the premises without permission from the Water Billing Department.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.310)
' 50.32 SUBMIT PLANS.
In plumbing a building where various floors are to be supplied from separate service the plumber undertaking the work shall submit his or her plans to the Plumbing Inspector for approval.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.320)
' 50.33 USE OF WATER FOR BUILDING PURPOSES.
Any person desiring to use water for building construction work must make application to the Water Department and shall pay for the water so used on the basis fixed by the Water Department either by meter or otherwise. When water is used without a meter, a meter must be ordered installed as soon as the building is completed or before the occupant moved in and before any water is used for any other purpose other than building construction. A violation of this rule will entitle the Water Department to estimate an additional water bill for water so used in violation to the owner or contractor in addition to the regular penalty clause. (Prior Code, ' 13.04.330)
' 50.34 SPRINKLING.
All water used by customers within and without the city limits for air cooling systems, streets, lawn or garden sprinkling is subordinate to domestic use or fire protection, and may be restricted by the Water Department by public notice at any time should the scarcity of water or an emergency of any kind so require. This restriction shall not apply to air cooling systems designed and used in manufacturing and industrial processing applications. Water shall not be drawn from a fire hydrant during a fire other than for firefighting purposes. The city reserves the right to terminate the water supply of any water customer who fails to comply with water use restrictions imposed by the Water Department.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.340) Penalty, see ' 50.99
Water Service System
8
' 50.35 NOTICE TO CONTINUE OR DISCONTINUE REQUIRED.
Owners or consumers desiring to continue or discontinue the use of water shall give notice to the Water Billing Department and regular rates shall be continued until such notice is given. Owners must give notice of change of tenants.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.350)
' 50.36 INTERFERING WITH FIRE HYDRANTS.
No person except as authorized by the Water Department or Fire Department shall open or take any water from any fire hydrant belonging to the Water Department, nor shall any person in any way interfere with, injure, break or deface any fire hydrant belonging to the Water Department. Any person damaging a fire hydrant or water main or any connection shall notify the Water Department or the Police Department at once, and the person responsible for the damages shall pay the cost of repairs or replacement.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.360) Penalty, see ' 50.99
' 50.37 ABANDONMENT OF SERVICE.
In case any water service pipe should have to be abandoned, the owner of the water service to be abandoned shall have a licensed plumber or contractor cut off the water service pipe at the curb stop within a time limit set by the Commissioner of Water and Sewer, or the city shall cause the same to be turned off, and the cost of turning off the service, plus a penalty of 10% of the costs, shall be assessed to the property owner. There shall be no backfilling of the trench at the point at which the water service has been turned off, until the curb stop is inspected by the Water Superintendent or his or her duly authorized agent.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.370)
' 50.38 INSPECTION OF WATER MAINS CONSTRUCTED UNDER PRIVATE CONTRACT.
When water mains are constructed under private contract, all materials, design and construction shall be inspected and approved by the City Engineer or his or her representative and shall be in accord with specifications of the city.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.380)
' 50.39 REIMBURSEMENT TO CITY OF ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS OF WATER MAINS CONSTRUCTED UNDER PRIVATE CONTRACT.
When water mains are constructed under private contract, the contractor constructing the water mains shall reimburse the city for all costs of inspection, design, blueprints, engineering and administration incurred by the city during the course of such private contract construction.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.390)
' 50.40 AUTHORITY OF DEPARTMENT.
The Utilities Commissioner, or other officers or employees of the Water Department shall be permitted to, at all reasonable hours or at any time in case of emergency, enter the premises or buildings of consumers for the purpose of reading meters and to examine water pipes and fixtures and the manner in which water is used. The Water Department shall have the right to set or remove a meter or change its location whenever it is deemed advisable to do so.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.400) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 50.41 WATER SHUT-OFF EXPENSE.
The Water Department may shut off the water to any premises when the water rental is not paid by the user in
Water Service System
9
accordance with the rules of the Department or upon violation of any of the rules and regulations of the Department or of this chapter by the use or owner of the premises served. When the water is so turned off, it shall not be turned on again until arrangements have been made with the Department for the payment of all the arrears together with the additional sum of $25 to cover the expense of shutting off and turning on the water. When a partial payment is made, the credit shall apply on the oldest item of the account. No person shall turn on the water to any premises from which the water has been turned off as herein provided without authority from the Water Department.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.410) Penalty, see ' 50.99
' 50.42 INTERFERING WITH OR DAMAGING PROPERTY OF WATER DEPARTMENT PROHIBITED.
No person shall willfully deface, damage, move, obstruct or interfere with any fire or water hydrant, main or other property of the Water Department, and for violation of this section any person convicted thereof, in addition to other penalties provided, shall be required to pay the cost of repairing the property so damaged.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.420) Penalty, see ' 50.99
' 50.43 CONTAMINATION PROHIBITED.
It is unlawful for any person or the owner or occupant of any house, barn, yard, stable or pig sty or other house or enclosure, or of any place where any animals are kept, to allow any manure, garbage, refuse or cleaning of any kind to accumulate, to be or remain on any property within the city in such manner as to contaminate or threaten contamination to any water supply. Nothing in this section shall prevent the keeping of horses or other pet animals upon such premises if the owner or person in charge thereof will each day clean all barns, cages or other places where such horses or other pet animals are kept and deposit the filth or refuse there from in concrete or other water-tight receptacles, vaults or basins or haul said refuse to the designated refuse disposal area.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.430) Penalty, see ' 50.99
' 50.44 WATER CONSUMERS TO COMPLY WITH SANITARY REGULATIONS.
All water consumers connected with the city water system must comply with the sanitary regulations of the city.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.440) Penalty, see ' 50.99
' 50.45 CONSTRUCTION OF CESSPOOL AND PRIVY.
It is unlawful for any person or the owner or occupant of any lot, house or building to maintain or use upon such property any privy or cesspool.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.450) Penalty, see ' 50.99
' 50.46 BREAKING SEALS.
No person shall break any seal upon any meter, valve, private fire hydrant or other fixtures that may be sealed by the Water Department, except that the seals on private fire hydrants and private fire protection valves may be broken in case of fire, and when so broken shall be reported to the Water Department within 24 hours.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.460) Penalty, see ' 50.99
' 50.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any master plumber or other person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, other than those rules governing consumers shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(B) Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter or failing to comply with any
Water Service System
10
of the provisions thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for a period of not to exceed 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Whenever any person such as a clerk, servant, agent or employee of any other person, or of any firm or corporation, violates any of the provisions of this chapter, he or she shall be deemed guilty as well as the principal and they shall be punished as herein provided.
(Prior Code, ' 13.04.470)
Sewer Service System
CHAPTER 51: SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM
Section
51.01 Definitions
51.02 Use of public sewers required
51.03 Private wastewater disposal
51.04 Sanitary sewers, building sewers and connections
51.05 Wastewater (sewer) hookup fee
51.06 Use of public sewers
51.07 Protection from damage
51.09 Powers and authority of Inspectors
51.99 Penalty
' 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called HOUSE CONNECTION.
COMBINED SEWER. A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or surface water.
EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system.
GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The wastewater from industrial processes, trade or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
MAY. Is permissive.
NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater.
PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group.
pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of seven and a hydrogen ion concentration
Sewer Service System
of ten.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER. A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility.
SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally.
SEWAGE. The spent water of a community. The preferred term is WASTEWATER.
SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
SHALL. Is mandatory.
SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works.
STORM DRAIN (STORM SEWER). A drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source.
SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of Wastewater Facilities of the city, or his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater and referred to as nonfilterable residue.
UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and storm water that may be present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with WASTE TREATMENT PLANT or WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT, WATER POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT or SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT.
WATERCOURSE. A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently.
(Prior Code, ' 13.08.010)
' 51.02 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage
Sewer Service System
or other objectionable waste.
(B) It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
(C) Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
(D) The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is required at the owner=s expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 60 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within 200 feet of the property line.
(Prior Code, ' 13.08.020) Penalty, see ' 51.99
' 51.03 PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
(A) Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of ' 51.02(D), the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(B) Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Utilities Commissioner or engineer. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the Municipal Finance Officer. A permit and inspection fee of $10 shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed.
(C) A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Water and Sewer Superintendent. The Water and Sewer Superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the Water and Sewer Superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 12 hours of the receipt of notice by the Water and Sewer Superintendent.
(D) The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Health or Water and Natural Resources of the state. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 20,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
(E) At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in ' 51.02, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material.
(F) The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city.
(G) No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
(Prior Code, ' 13.08.030) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018) Penalty, see ' 51.99
Sewer Service System
' 51.04 SANITARY SEWERS, BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
(A) No authorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Utilities Commissioner or engineer.
(B) There shall be two classes of new building sewer permits: for residential and commercial service, and for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Utilities Commissioner or engineer. A permit and inspection fee of $10 shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed.
(C) All costs and expenses incidental to the installment and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
(D) A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where on building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned.
(E) Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent, to meet all requirement of this chapter.
(F) The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of all sanitary sewers including building sewers, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city or the laws and regulations of the state.
(G) Whenever possible, the building sanitary sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevationbelow the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sanitary sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the sanitary sewer. All building drain connections to the public sanitary sewer, whether new or replacement construction, shall be equipped with backwater valve(s). Backwater valves shall be installed in accordance with the South Dakota State Plumbing Code, as set forth in ARSD Article 20:54.
(H) No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by the Superintendent for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage.
(I) The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the laws and regulations of the state. All deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Superintendent before installation.
(J) The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the Superintendent or representative.
(K) All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(L) All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be by open trench unless otherwise
Sewer Service System
approved by the Superintendent. No backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected by
the Superintendent. Backfill shall be compacted to a density at least equal to that of the adjacent sub-grade.
(M) In the case of work to be done on an existing sewer service line, between the building and the main, a sewer service repair permit shall be filed and a fee
of $10 paid before any work is done. All work shall be inspected and will follow all other provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, ' 13.08.040) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018) Penalty, see ' 51.99
' 51.05 WASTEWATER (SEWER) HOOKUP FEE.
Any property owner who intends to hook up to a city wastewater (sewer) main shall pay to the city a hookup fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Commission. This hookup fee shall be in addition to any cost recovery fee set forth by separate resolution or ordinance for the installation of the sewer main.
(Prior Code, ' 13.08.045)
' 51.06 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.
(A) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or cooling water to any sewer, except storm water runoff from limited areas, which storm water may be polluted at times, may be discharged to the sanitary sewer by permission of the Superintendent.
(B) Storm water other than that exempted under this section and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent and other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be discharged, on approval of the Superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet.
(C) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described water or wastes to any public sewers:
(1) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;
(2) Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge of any municipal system, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in or have an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works;
(3) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater works; and
(4) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshing, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like, either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(D) The following described substances, materials, waters or waste shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The Superintendent may set limitations lower than the limitations established in the regulations below if in his or her opinion such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability, the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject
Sewer Service System
waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of
the wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restriction on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without the approval of the Superintendent are as follows:
(1) Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150°F (65° C);
(2) Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oils or product of mineral oil origin;
(3) Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat or grease;
(4) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers;
(5) Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for such materials; and
(6) Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the Superintendent.
(E) (1) If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in division (D) above, and which in the judgment of the Superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise creates a hazard to life or constitutes a public nuisance, the Superintendent may:
(a) Reject the wastes;
(b) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
(c) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
(d) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.
(2) When considering the above alternatives the Superintendent shall give consideration to the economic impact of each alternative on the discharger. If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent.
(F) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captivated material and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review by the Superintendent. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by owner=s personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms.
(G) Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense.
Sewer Service System
(H) When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances on the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such structures, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Superintendent. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense, and shall be maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(I) The Superintendent may require a user of sewer services to provide information needed to determine compliance with this chapter. These requirements may include:
(1) Wastewaters discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period;
(2) Chemical analyses of wastewaters;
(3) Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting wastewater volume and quality;
(4) Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other materials important to sewer use control;
(5) A plot plan of sewers of the user=s property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location;
(6) Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities; and
(7) Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the municipal sewer.
(J) All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which references are made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location, times, durations and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the Superintendent.
(K) No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment.
(Prior Code, ' 13.08.050) Penalty, see ' 51.99
' 51.07 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance of equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
(Prior Code, ' 13.08.060) Penalty, see ' 51.99
' 51.08 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
(A) The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the community system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(B) The Superintendent or other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. The industry may withhold information considered confidential. The industry must establish that the revelation to the
Sewer Service System
public of the information in question might result in an advantage to competitors.
(C) While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to above, the Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liabilities claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in ' 51.06(H).
(D) The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurements, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(Prior Code, ' 13.08.070)
' 51.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except ' 51.06, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof and shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $500. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, permanently cease all violations.
(B) Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation.
(Prior Code, ' 13.08.080)
1
CHAPTER 52: WATER AND SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
Section
52.01 Water rates and services
52.02 Wastewater (sewer) rates inside the corporate limits of the city
52.03 Wastewater (sewer) rates and service outside the corporate limits of the city
52.04 Bulk water rates
52.05 Outside watering purposes
52.06 Late fees for water and wastewater (sewer) service
52.07 Effective date
' 52.01 WATER RATES AND SERVICES.
There shall be a monthly charge to all consumers of water serviced by the city. The rates to be charged for water service shall be as follows.
(A) Residential water rate. A person serviced by the city as any single-family dwelling unit in which each water service is metered independently shall be charged the following rates for water service.
0 to 100 cubic feet
$20 base charge per meter
101 cubic feet and above
$20 base charge per meter plus $2.50 per 100 cubic feet above 101 cubic feet
(B) Commercial and industrial water rate. A business or other legal entity serviced by the city.
0 to 100 cubic feet
$21.25 base charge per meter
101 to 25,000 cubic feet
$21.25 base charge per meter plus $2.30 per 100 cubic feet from 101 to 25,000 cubic feet
25,001 to 50,000 cubic feet
$21.25 base charge per meter plus $2.30 per 100 cubic feet from 101 to 25,000 plus $2.20 per 100 cubic feet above 25,001 to 50,000 cubic feet
50,001 cubic feet and above
$21.25 base charge per meter plus $2.30 per 100 cubic feet from 101 to 25,000 plus $2.20 per 100 cubic feet above 25,001 to 50,000 cubic feet plus $2.15 per 100 cubic feet above 50,000 cubic feet
(C) Reading of water meter. All water customers shall be responsible for reading the customer=s water meter and reporting the reading thereof to the Municipal Finance Officer no later than the fifteenth day of each month of each year. Failure to do so shall result in the imposition of a service charge of $20 for each failure to report the meter reading. Such charges shall be added to the customer=s account for collection in the same manner as other charges imposed in connection with the water system.
(D) Single-family residential customers. All single-family residential customers requesting water service shall first make a deposit of $100. Commercial and industrial customers shall make a deposit based on the size of the water meter as follows:
Water and Sewer Rates and Charges
2
3/4 inch
$150
1 inch to 1-1/2 inch
$200
2 inches
$250
Above 2 inches
$300
(E) Shut-off for non-payment. In the event the water is shut off for non-payment of water charges, there shall be a charge of $25 for reinstating water service.
(F) Establishment of rates. Any person, business or other legal entity located outside of the corporate limits of the city, that is connected to the city=s water system shall be charged such rate or rates as established by the city, pursuant to a duly enacted ordinance.
(Prior Code, ' 13.12.010) (Ord. 1039, passed 3-20-2017)
' 52.02 WASTEWATER (SEWER) RATES INSIDE THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE CITY.
There shall be a monthly charge to all consumers of wastewater (sewer) service within the city, and the rates to be so charged shall be as follows.
(A) Residential wastewater (sewer) rate.
(1) A person serviced by the city as a single-family dwelling unit in which each water service is metered independently and is serviced by the sanitary wastewater (sewer) system.
(2) The city determines that all residential wastewater (sewer) customers receiving wastewater service from the city shall be charged a residential wastewater rate based upon 100% of the total water usage as calculated from the water meter readings for each account. The fee for wastewater usage shall be as follows:
0 to 167 cubic feet
$32 base charge per meter
168 to 2,000 cubic feet
$32 base charge per meter plus $3 per 100 cubic feet to 2,000 cubic feet
2,001 cubic feet and above
Cap of $86.99
(B) Residential wastewater (sewer) rate with two water meters on one service.
(1) A person serviced by the city as any single-family dwelling unit which has two water distribution system meters on one water service and is connected to the wastewater (sewer) system.
(2) The city determines that residential wastewater (sewer) customers receiving wastewater service from the city in that manner shall be charged at a rate of 100% of the total water usage as calculated from the main water meter servicing the residential structure. The fee for wastewater usage shall be as follows:
0 to 167 cubic feet
$32 base charge per meter
168 cubic feet and above
$32 base charge per meter plus $3 per 100 cubic feet
Water and Sewer Rates and Charges
3
(C) Commercial and industrial wastewater (sewer) rate.
(1) A business or other legal entity serviced by the city and is connected to the sanitary wastewater (sewer) system.
0 to 167 cubic feet
$37 base charge per meter
168 cubic feet and above
$37 base charge per meter plus $3.75 per 100 cubic feet
(2) Commercial and industrial customer charges shall be based on 100% consumption of water in each month.
(D) Required to have water service. The city will not allow a person, business or other legal entity inside the corporate limits of the city access to the city=s wastewater (sewer) system or accept any residential or commercial wastewater without being serviced by the city=s water system.
(E) Commercial or industrial customers.
(1) Commercial or industrial customers shall have the yearly option to base their wastewater charges on actual metered wastewater usage in lieu of metered water usage. The option must be exercised in writing by the commercial or industrial customer on or before October 1 of each calendar year. The cost of such meter and installation shall be borne by the commercial user.
(2) The commercial or industrial customer who has exercised their option to have their wastewater discharge charges based on metered flow shall be responsible to monitor and report to the city total flow for each month. The customer shall read the wastewater meter and report the reading thereof to the Finance Officer no later than the fifteenth day of each month. Failure to do so shall result in the imposition of a service charge of $20 for each failure to report the wastewater meter reading. Such charges shall be added to the customer=s account for collection of the same in the same manner as other charges imposed in connection with the wastewater system. Flows must be monitored continuously by the commercial or industrial customer using a totalizing flow meter. The meter(s) shall be installed, calibrated and maintained to ensure its accuracy is consistent with accepted engineering standards and capabilities. All metering devices and the manner of installation must be approved by the city in writing.
(F) Calibration; metering equipment. The metering equipment shall be calibrated whenever requested by either party. The expense of the calibration shall be paid by the customer unless the meter is determined to over register in excess of 3% of the correct volume, in which event the cost of calibration shall be paid by the city. A meter registering not more than 2% above or below the test result shall be deemed to be accurate. The previous readings of any meter disclosed by test to be inaccurate shall be corrected for one-half the time from the last calibration in accordance with the percentage of inaccuracy found by such tests. If any meter fails to register for any period, the amount of wastewater treatment discharged during such period shall be based on consumption of water used during that same period as if no wastewater meter had been installed. An appropriate official of the city shall have access to the meter at all reasonable times for the purpose of verifying its readings.
(G) Establishment of rates. Any person, business or other legal entity located inside of the corporate limits of the city that is connected to the city=s wastewater (sewer) system shall be charged such rate or rates as established by the city, pursuant to a duly enacted ordinance.
(Prior Code, ' 13.12.030) (Ord. 1039, passed 3-20-2017)
Water and Sewer Rates and Charges
4
' 52.03 WASTEWATER (SEWER) RATES AND SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE CITY.
There shall be a monthly charge to all consumers of wastewater (sewer) service outside the city and the rates to be so charged shall be as follows.
(A) Residential wastewater (sewer) rate.
(1) A person serviced by the city as any single-family dwelling unit in which each water service is metered independently.
(2) The city determines that all residential wastewater (sewer) customers receiving wastewater service from the city shall be charged at a rate of 100% of the total water usage as calculated from the water meter readings for each account.
0 to 167 cubic feet
$42 base charge per meter
168 to 2,000 cubic feet
$42 base charge per meter plus $4.50 per 100 cubic feet to 2,000 cubic feet
2,001 cubic feet and above
Cap of $124.49
(3) Residential wastewater (sewer) rates shall be based on consumption of water in each month and shall be adjusted to reflect any changes in usage.
(B) Residential wastewater (sewer) rate with two water meters on one service.
(1) A person serviced by the city as any single-family dwelling unit which has two water distribution system meters on one water system and is connected to the wastewater (sewer) system.
(2) The city determines that residential wastewater (sewer) customers receiving wastewater service from the city in that manner shall be charged at a rate of 100% of the total water usage as calculated from the main water meter servicing the residential structure. The fee for wastewater usage shall be as follows:
0 to 167 cubic feet
$48 base charge per meter
168 cubic feet and above
$48 base charge per meter plus $4.50 per 100 cubic feet
Water and Sewer Rates and Charges
5
(C) Commercial and industrial wastewater (sewer) rate.
(1) A business or other legal entity serviced by the city and is connected to the sanitary wastewater (sewer) system.
0 to 167 cubic feet
$55.50 base charge per meter
168 to 50,000 cubic feet
$55.50 base charge per meter plus $5.60 per 100 cubic feet to 50,000 cubic feet
50,001 cubic feet and above
$55.50 base charge per meter plus $5.60 per 100 cubic feet to 50,000 cubic feet plus $5.60 per 100cubic feet above 50,000 cubic feet
(2) Commercial and industrial customer charges shall be based on 100% consumption of water in each month and shall be adjusted to reflect any changes in usage.
(D) Required to have water service. The city will not allow a person, business or other legal entity inside the corporate limits of the city access to the city=s wastewater (sewer) system or accept any residential or commercial wastewater without being serviced by the city=s water system.
(E) Yearly option.
(1) Commercial or industrial customers shall have the yearly option to base their wastewater charges on actual metered wastewater usage in lieu of metered water usage. The option must be exercised in writing by the commercial or industrial customer on or before October 1 of each calendar year. The cost of such meter and installation shall be borne by the commercial user.
(2) The commercial or industrial customer who has exercised their option to have their wastewater discharge charges based on metered flow shall be responsible to monitor and report to the city total flow for each month. The customer shall read the wastewater meter and report the reading thereof to the Finance Officer no later than the fifteenth day of each month. Failure to do so shall result in the imposition of a service charge of $20 for each failure to report the wastewater meter reading. Such charges shall be added to the customer=s account for collection of the same in the same manner as other charges imposed in connection with the wastewater system. Flows must be monitored continuously by the commercial or industrial customer using a totalizing flow meter. The meter(s) shall be installed, calibrated and maintained to ensure its accuracy is consistent with accepted engineering standards and capabilities. All metering devices and the manner of installation must be approved by the city in writing.
(F) Calibration; metering equipment. The metering equipment shall be calibrated whenever requested by either party. The expense of the calibration shall be paid by the customer unless the meter is determined to over register in excess of 3% of the correct volume, in which event the cost of calibration shall be paid by the city. A meter registering not more than 2% above or below the test result shall be deemed to be accurate. The previous readings of any meter disclosed by test to be inaccurate shall be corrected for one-half the time from the last calibration in accordance with the percentage of inaccuracy found by such tests. If any meter fails to register for any period, the amount of wastewater treatment discharged during such period shall be based on consumption of water used during that same period as if no waste water meter had been installed. An appropriate official of the city shall have access to the meter at all reasonable times for the purpose of verifying its readings.
(G) Establishment of rates. Any person, business or other legal entity located inside of the corporate limits of the city that is connected to the city=s wastewater (sewer) system shall be charged such rate or rates as established by the city, pursuant to a duly enacted ordinance.
Water and Sewer Rates and Charges
6
(Prior Code, ' 13.12.040) (Ord. 1039, passed 3-20-2017)
' 52.04 BULK WATER RATES.
The charges for bulk water sales shall be as follows:
(A) Bulk water station located at 335 East Ninth Street (Canton Public Works): 25 cents per 75 gallons of water.
(B) Bulk water use via water hydrant meter:
(1) Five hundred dollars advance refundable hydrant meter deposit to the city;
(2) One hundred dollars base charge per month (no usage included); and
(3) Three dollars and thirty-three cents for each 1,000 gallons of usage.
(Prior Code, ' 13.12.050)
' 52.05 OUTSIDE WATERING PURPOSES.
Any water, be it commercial or residential, that is metered through an additional meter or meters that is consumed through either an in-ground sprinkler system or outside water valve that does not go into the sanitary wastewater (sewer) system shall not bear the wastewater (sewer) rate charge. Any additional water meter hookup, for outside watering purposes only must be hooked up in accordance with the city ordinances and state plumbing codes. Systems must be inspected prior to having water turned on and the cost for the entire hookup shall be borne by the property owner, including the cost of any additional meters or curb stop. The fees for consumption and usage shall be billed and paid monthly.
(Prior Code, ' 13.12.060)
' 52.06 LATE FEES FOR WATER AND WASTEWATER (SEWER) SERVICE.
The City Commission establishes for water and wastewater (sewer) services that are delinquent past
the scheduled bill due date, a late fee to be assessed to the delinquent account. The amount of the late fee shall be 1.5% of the total water and wastewater (sewer) bill for each delinquent account or a minimum late fee of $10, whichever is greater.
(Prior Code, ' 13.12.070)
' 52.07 EFFECTIVE DATE.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be effective upon its passage and publication in accordance with SDCL ' 9-19-13. (Prior Code, ' 13.12.080)
Water and Sewer Rates and Charges
7
1
CHAPTER 53: WELLHEAD PROTECTION
Section
53.01 Short title and purpose
53.02 Definitions
53.03 Establishment of wellhead protection zone
53.04 Permitted uses
53.05 Prohibited uses
53.06 Administration
' 53.01 SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE.
(A) This chapter shall be known as the Awellhead protection ordinance.@
(B) The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by the establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells which are the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones.
(Prior Code, ' 13.16.010)
' 53.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
HAZARDOUS WASTE OR MATERIAL. Any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may:
(1) Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or
(2) Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
REGULATORY AGENCY. Any governmental agency with jurisdiction over hazardous waste as defined herein.
SANITARY LANDFILL. A disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon.
WELLHEAD. The upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments.
(Prior Code, ' 13.16.020)
' 53.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF WELLHEAD PROTECTION ZONE.
There is established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of which is 500 feet, or any part thereof which the city has jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, ' 13.16.030)
Wellhead Protection
2
' 53.04 PERMITTED USES.
The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection zones:
(A) Any use permitted within existing agricultural, single-family residential, multi-family
residential and commercial districts so long as uses conform to the rules and regulations of the regulatory agencies; and
(B) Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use.
(Prior Code, ' 13.16.040)
' 53.05 PROHIBITED USES.
The following uses or conditions shall be and are prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under ' 53.04 unless such uses are approved or permitted by state and federal regulatory agencies:
(A) Surface use or storage of hazardous material, including commercial use of agricultural pesticides;
(B) Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto;
(C) Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings, and streets, parking lots, driveways and walks serving buildings permitted under ' 53.04;
(D) Sanitary landfills;
(E) Hazardous waste disposal sites;
(F) Storm water infiltration basins;
(G) Underground storage tanks; and
(H) Sanitary sewer lines within 100 feet of a wellhead.
(Prior Code, ' 13.16.050)
' 53.06 ADMINISTRATION.
The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this chapter, including without limitation those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinances for the city, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended.
(Prior Code, ' 13.16.060)
1
CHAPTER 54: GARBAGE AND RECYCLING
Section
54.01 Definitions
54.02 License for collection and hauling of garbage
54.03 Revocation of license
54.04 Hearing; revocation; appeal
54.05 Vehicles used for collecting
54.06 Loading of vehicles
54.07 Yard waste collection
54.08 Garbage containers
54.09 Littering prohibited
54.10 Burning garbage
54.11 Customer information
Statutory reference:
Municipal garbage disposal systems, see SDCL ' 9-32-11
' 54.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ANIMAL WASTE. Any accumulation of manure or straw which has been used for the transportation, housing or penning of animals.
GARBAGE. All refuse or accumulation of animal and vegetable matter which attends the preparation, transportation, cooking, eating, sale, disposal or storage of meat, fish, vegetables, fruit and all other food or food products.
HAULING UNIT. The container in which garbage is transported. It may be permanently affixedto a chassis or may be temporarily attached, such as a roll-off unit.
LITTER. Garbage, rubbish, waste material or animal waste improperly disposed of by discarding, abandoning, allowing to accumulate, scattering or depositing the same outside an approved container.
RUBBISH. All combustible refuse matter, such as contaminated or nonrecyclable paper, sweepings, rags, contaminated cardboard, and similar materials.
TRASH. All waste paper, rags, refuse, leaves, cans, other containers and all accumulations of waste not defined as garbage.
YARD WASTE. Grass clippings, garden waste, and leaves.
' 54.02 LICENSE FOR COLLECTION AND HAULING OF GARBAGE.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to engage in the business of collecting and hauling garbage or trash
Garbage and Recycling
2
from any place within the city without first having obtained a license. All applications for licenses shall be in writing and shall give the name and address of the person or firm proposing to enter into the business, together with the number and type of vehicles to be used. The application may be given to the Finance Officer, any member of the governing body or may be presented at any regular meeting in person. The city shall act on all license applications and, if any are refused, the reasons therefore shall be stated in writing. All licenses shall be annual and shall expire December 31, of each year. The annual fee for each vehicle engaged in this business shall be set by the city annually. Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 54.03 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
In addition to any penalties provided elsewhere in this code, the city may, upon a showing of sufficient cause, revoke any license granted for the collection of garbage. Conviction for violating any or the provisions of this chapter shall be sufficient cause.
' 54.04 HEARING; REVOCATION; APPEAL.
(A) (1) If the city determines that facts exist for revocation of a license, the city shall notify the licensee in writing of the intent to revoke the license, including the grounds therefor, by personal delivery, or by certified mail. The notification shall be directed to the most current business address on file with the city. Within five working days of receipt of the notice, the licensee may provide to the Finance Officer or person appointed by the city, in writing, a response that shall include a statement of reasons why the license should not be revoked. Within three days of the receipt of the licensee=s written response, the Finance Officer or person appointed by the city shall notify the licensee in writing of the hearing date on licensee=s revocation proceeding.
(2) Within ten working days of the receipt of licensee=s written response, the City Commission or person appointed by the city shall conduct a hearing at which the licensee shall have the opportunity to be represented by counsel and present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf. If a response is not received by the Finance Officer in the time stated or, if after the hearing, the City Commission or person appointed by the city finds that grounds exist for revocation, the decision shall become final five days after the City or person appointed by the city sends, by certified mail, written notice that the license has been revoked. The notice shall include a statement advising the licensee of the right to appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(3) If the City Manager or person appointed by the city finds that no grounds exist for revocation of a license, then within five days after the hearing, the City Manager or person appointed by the city shall withdraw the intent to revoke the license, and shall so notify the licensee in writing by certified mail of that action and shall contemporaneously issue the license.
(B) When a decision to revoke a license becomes final, the licensee whose license has been revoked, shall have the right to appeal the action to a court of competent jurisdiction. Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city=s enforcement of the revocation, the city shall immediately issue the licensee a provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the licensee to continue operation of the business and will expire upon the court=s entry of a judgment on the licensee=s action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city=s enforcement.
(Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
Garbage and Recycling
3
' 54.05 VEHICLES USED FOR COLLECTING.
(A) Collectors of garbage shall provide themselves with a suitable vehicle covered on the top so as to prevent the escape of odors and contents.
(B) The vehicles shall be thoroughly washed whenever necessary to prevent them from becoming dangerous or offensive to public health.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 54.06 LOADING OF VEHICLES.
Vehicles used for transporting garbage, rubbish, animal waste and waste materials shall be loaded so that no materials shall fall off or be blown off the vehicle while in transit. Loosely loaded vehicles with open boxes must be tarped. Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 54.07 YARD WASTE COLLECTION.
Yard waste shall be collected by licensed commercial garbage haulers. Yard waste shall be deposited in a proper container, a Kraft-type paper bag designated for yard waste, or a 32-gallon rigid watertight container with a tightly fitted cover, and placed at a location, other than curbside, designated for collection by the licensed commercial garbage hauler contracted to remove the same. All yard waste and containers therefore shall be kept in an inconspicuous place except when placed for collection. Yard waste shall be collected or removed at a minimum of once a week.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 54.08 GARBAGE CONTAINERS.
The occupant of every dwelling house or apartment and of every place of business and building shall provide a suitable container in which the occupants shall deposit all garbage accumulating upon the premises, which garbage containers shall be kept in an unobtrusive manner except to facilitate scheduled pickup. Garbage cans shall be provided with tightly fitting covers. The vicinity of garbage cans shall be kept free from garbage.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 54.09 LITTERING PROHIBITED.
(A) Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, cast or deposit upon any street, alley, sidewalk, lake, stream, river, pond, body of water or any yard or premises, public or private, any filth of any kind, or cans, paper, trash, paper containers, rubbish, bottles, or any form of litter or waste matter.
(B) Duty of business owners, occupants.
(1) Generally. The owner or occupant of any store or other place of business situated within the city shall exercise reasonable diligence at all times to keep his or her premises clean of wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper napkins, cartons, package containers, and other used or waste materials thrown or left on the premises, and to take reasonable measures to prevent the materials from drifting or blowing to adjoining premises.
(2) Receptacles. Garbage receptacles of sufficient size and number shall be kept accessible to
Garbage and Recycling
4
all persons on the premises where the articles may be placed.
(3) Signs. Every business establishment shall place upon its premises in a conspicuous place, in close proximity to the receptacles referred to in division (B)(2) above, a sign which shall, in essence, convey to all persons a request that they use the receptacles for the separate disposal of garbage.
(C) Duty of person. It shall be unlawful for any person going upon the premises of another to in any manner dispose of wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper napkins, cartons, package containers, and other used or waste materials except in receptacles provided for the purposes.
(D) Removal of litter by city. If the occupant, person in charge or owner of any real property within 14 days fails to remove litter from real property after notice from the city to do so, the city may cause the litter to be removed and for the purpose may enter upon any real property. The cost of removal may be assessed against the real property.
(E) Litter on sidewalk. The owner or occupant of any lot or private ground abutting upon any public sidewalk shall not allow rubbish, debris or obstruction of any kind to be or remain on the sidewalk along the abutting property.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
Statutory reference:
Arrest for violation of city litter ordinance; notice to appear; time; refusal to give written promise to appear, see SDCL ' 34A-7-15
Littering prohibited, see SDCL '' 34A-7-6 et seq.
Ordinances to regulate litter, see SDCL ' 34A-7-14
Refuse in public places and streams, SDCL ' 9-32-10
' 54.10 BURNING GARBAGE.
No garbage or other matter that gives off an offensive odor during combustion shall be burned in the city. Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 54.11 CUSTOMER INFORMATION.
All licensed garbage collectors/haulers shall at least annually provide customers with written information regarding volume of base-rate structure and garbage, and yard waste service.
Penalty, see ' 10.99
1
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
70.01 Definitions
Administration and Enforcement
70.15 Obedience to traffic ordinances, official traffic signals, signs and markings
70.16 Obedience to police
70.17 Police to direct traffic
70.18 Construction and maintenance of crossing devices
70.19 Traffic control devices; traffic engineering
70.20 Crosswalks, safety zones and traffic lanes
70.21 AU@ turns, official traffic signals and signs indicating methods of turn
70.22 No parking signs
70.23 Signs at through highways and at reduced speed intersections
70.24 Signs for one-way traffic or parking restrictions
70.25 Regulations to enforce traffic ordinances; emergency and temporary conditions
70.26 Manner of arrest
70.27 Notice to appear
70.28 Appearance
70.29 Arrest on failure to appear
70.30 Account for notices
70.99 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES. Vehicles of the Fire Department, police vehicles, ambulances and such emergency vehicles as are designated or authorized by the governing body.
BUSINESS DISTRICT. That area defined as a business and industrial district in this code.
CROSSWALK. That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation of curb and property lines at intersections, whether or not marked, or any other portion of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
CURB. The extreme edge or lateral boundary of a roadway, whether marked by curbing or not so marked.
DEPARTMENT. The Police Department of the city.
DOUBLE PARKING. The standing of a vehicle upon a street at the rear of another vehicle which is parked diagonally at the curb, or along the side of another vehicle which is parked parallel at the curb.
General Provisions
2
DRIVER. Every person who drives, or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral curb lines or, if none, then of the lateral boundary lines of two or more roadways which join one another at an angle, whether or not one such roadway crosses the other.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS. All signals, not inconsistent with this title, placed or erected by authority of the governing body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of directing, warning or regulating traffic.
OWNER. A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle or in the event a vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this title.
PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether attended or unattended otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading, or in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals.
PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
PERSON. Every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association or corporation.
PRIVATE ROAD or DRIVEWAY. Every road or driveway not open to the use of the public or vehicular traffic.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to a street or roadway not comprising a business district which is mainly occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use mainly for residential purposes.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the highway.
SEMI-TRAILER. Every vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used in conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and that of its own load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb lines and the adjacent property lines.
STREET or ROADWAY. That portion of a street between the regular established curb lines or that part thereof devoted to vehicular traffic.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. Any device using colored lights, or words, or any combination thereof, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
TRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying property or passengers wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
TRUCK TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks; provided that for the purpose of this title, a bicycle or a ridden animal shall be deemed a VEHICLE.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.010)
General Provisions
3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
' 70.15 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC ORDINANCES, OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS, SIGNS AND MARKINGS.
No person shall violate any rule, regulation, traffic direction, sign, signal or marking adopted, prescribed or established in accordance with the provisions of this title, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.020) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 70.16 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE.
No person shall refuse or fail to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.030) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 70.17 POLICE TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
Police officers shall direct all traffic in conformance with traffic laws, ordinances and regulations provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police or Fire Department may direct traffic as conditions may require.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.040)
' 70.18 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF CROSSING DEVICES.
No one except the city shall construct, operate or maintain upon or in any of the streets, roadways, intersection or crosswalks, any crossing signal or device of any kind or character to regulate or direct motor vehicle traffic upon the streets or roadways except upon authority given by the city by resolution. All such signals or devices shall be so constructed that the based or standard supporting such signal or device shall be at the right side of the street and to one side of the paved, graveled or graded portion thereof, so as not to interfere in any manner with any traffic upon such street or roadway. (Prior Code, ' 10.04.050)
' 70.19 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES; TRAFFIC ENGINEERING.
(A) The Department shall place and maintain automatic traffic control devices or signals as required under the ordinances or as approved by resolution of the governing body.
(B) In order to make effective and carry out the provisions of the traffic ordinances and laws and to guide, warn and regulate traffic, the Department may maintain such additional traffic control devices, signs and markings, not including automatic traffic control devices, as may be deemed necessary.
(C) The Department shall determine the proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices, conduct engineering analyses of accidents, remedial measures, conduct engineering investigation of traffic conditions and cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions.
(D) The City Engineer shall have charge of installing automatic traffic control devices and shall cooperate with the Department at all times in traffic regulation, in conducting engineering analyses of accidents and engineering investigation of traffic conditions.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.060)
General Provisions
4
' 70.20 CROSSWALKS, SAFETY ZONES AND TRAFFIC LANES.
(A) The Department may designate and maintain, by appropriate traffic control devices signals, signs, marks or lines upon the surface of the streets or roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in its opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street or roadway, and at such other places as it may deem necessary.
(B) The Department may establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as it may deem advisable and consistent with the traffic ordinances.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.070)
' 70.21 AU@ TURNS, OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS AND SIGNS INDICATING METHODS OF TURN.
(A) No vehicle shall make or attempt to make a complete turn around or AU@ turn in any intersections of streets or roadways where official traffic signals and signs so indicate.
(B) The Department may determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or AU@ turn, including those intersections designated in division (A) above, and shall place proper signals and/or signs at such intersections.
(C) The Department may place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.080) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 70.22 NO PARKING SIGNS.
(A) The Department may erect signs indicating no parking upon one or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property or public property when such parking would in its opinion interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
(B) The Department may determine and designate by proper no parking signs located at either end of a block, or within a block, distances between which or places where the stopping or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
(C) When signs are erected as provided in division (A) or (B) above, no person shall stop or park a vehicle at such designated places.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.090) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 70.23 SIGNS AT THROUGH HIGHWAYS AND AT REDUCED SPEED INTERSECTIONS.
(A) The Department shall place and maintain a stop sign, or official traffic control signal on each and every street intersecting a designated through street.
(B) The Department may designate intersections on other than through streets where particular hazard exists, and determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such intersection, and shall erect a stop sign or official traffic control signal at every such place where a stop is required; or if the Department determines that reduced speed rather than a stop is adequate for safe operation at such intersection it may erect a Aslow@ sign, or it may determine such safe speed and erect signs upon approaches to such intersection giving notice of such speed.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.100)
General Provisions
5
' 70.24 SIGNS FOR ONE-WAY TRAFFIC OR PARKING RESTRICTIONS.
Whenever by ordinance a one-way street is prescribed or any time limit parking or no parking limit is imposed, the Department shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective until the signs are erected.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.110)
' 70.25 REGULATIONS TO ENFORCE TRAFFIC ORDINANCES; EMERGENCY AND TEMPORARY CONDITIONS.
(A) The Department may make and enforce regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances, and to make and enforce temporary regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions.
(B) The Department may make temporary rules regulating traffic or test traffic control devices under actual conditions of traffic. No such experimental rule or test shall remain in effect for more than 90 days.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.120)
' 70.26 MANNER OF ARREST.
Except when reasonably necessary to secure appearance, a person charged with violation of a traffic ordinance of the city by a police officer need not be arrested in the regular manner, but may first be given an opportunity, after notice, to appear voluntarily to answer for such traffic violation. This procedure shall not apply to any person arrested and charged with an offense causing or contributing to an accident resulting in injury or death to any person, not to any person charged with reckless driving, not to any person charged with driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.130)
' 70.27 NOTICE TO APPEAR.
A person charged with violation of a traffic ordinance by notice shall be given a notice to appear before the magistrate court within 24 hours from the time stated in such notice, and stating that in the event of failure to do so a warrant will be issued for his or her arrest. The notice shall state the time, place and nature of the offense and shall also describe the vehicle involved by trade name and by license number. The nature of the offense may be stated by marking an AX@ in a blank opposite the word or words employed to designate the nature of the offense. The notice shall be signed or initialed by the police officer executing it, who shall also put thereon his or her badge number. The notice shall be made in duplicate, one copy to be given to the owner or the driver charged with the offense or to be left in or upon the automobile involved in the violation and the other copy be filed with the Department.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.140)
' 70.28 APPEARANCE.
A person who has received a notice of traffic violation through the police shall, within the time specified in such notice, appear at the magistrate court to answer the charge set forth therein.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.150)
' 70.29 ARREST ON FAILURE TO APPEAR.
Upon failure of a person to appear in response to a notice of traffic violation as herein provided, he or she shall be subjected to arrest in the manner otherwise provided by law. (Prior Code, ' 10.04.160) Penalty, see ' 70.99
General Provisions
6
' 70.30 ACCOUNT FOR NOTICES.
The Department shall take a receipt for each set of blank notices of traffic violations issued to a police officer. The police officer to whom such blank notices are issued shall account for each set of notices issued to him or her by return thereof with copies in blank to the Department, or by filing a copy thereof with the Department charging a person named therein with a traffic violation. For failure of a police officer to so account for each set of notices issued to him or her, he or she shall be subject to disciplinary action.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.170)
' 70.99 PENALTY.
Except as otherwise specifically provided, any person violating any of the provisions of this title, or failing to comply with any of the provisions thereof, shall upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.180)
1
CHAPTER 71: DRIVING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
71.01 Restricted minor=s permit
71.02 Driving or operating a motor vehicle without a permit
71.03 Signaling intention to turn, stop or decrease speed
71.04 Restricted left turns
71.05 AU@ turns and traveling on left side
71.06 Turning at intersections
71.07 Keep to the right
71.08 Overtaking and passing
71.09 Backing
71.10 Overtaken vehicle; slow driving
71.11 Proceeding without safe passage
71.12 Right-of-way
71.13 Exceptions to right-of-way rule
71.14 Emerging from alley or driveway; stop before entering
71.15 Traffic control signal legend
71.16 Yield signs
71.17 Railroad signals
71.18 Crossing sidewalk
71.19 Unnecessary driving adjacent to school property
71.20 Coaster, roller skates and similar devices
71.21 Clinging to a moving vehicle
71.22 Riding on outside prohibited
71.23 Parades and processions
71.24 Funeral processions; operation of vehicles
71.25 Funeral processions; stops
71.26 Careless driving
71.27 Reckless driving
71.28 Exhibition driving
71.29 Tractor with lugs
71.30 One-way streets authorized
71.31 Speed limits designated
71.32 Texting prohibited
Accidents
71.45 Duty of stop in case of accident
71.46 Duty upon striking unattended vehicle
71.47 Duty to report accidents
71.48 Garage keeper to report damaged vehicle
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Driving Regulations
2
' 71.01 RESTRICTED MINOR=S PERMIT.
No person under the age of 16 years shall operate or drive motor vehicles upon the streets unless they have a restricted minor=s permit. Any person with a restricted minor=s permit shall not drive between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless the minor=s parent or guardian is occupying a seat beside the minor in the vehicle.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.190) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.02 DRIVING OR OPERATING A MOTOR VEHICLE WITHOUT A PERMIT.
No person who is a resident of the state shall drive or operate a motor vehicle upon the streets of the city without first having secured and having in present, physical possession a permit as required by SDCL ' 32-12-22.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.200) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.03 SIGNALING INTENTION TO TURN, STOP OR DECREASE SPEED.
(A) The driver of a vehicle shall give timely warning by signaling with the hand or mechanical directional signal device indicating the intention to slow up, turn or stop, which signal must be plainly visible from the rear and front of such vehicle.
(B) Whenever the signal is given by means of the hand and arm, the driver shall indicate his or her intention by extending the hand and arm from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner; and such signals shall be indicated as follows:
(1) Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally;
(2) Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward; and
(3) Stop or decrease speed. Hand and arm extended downward.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.210) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.04 RESTRICTED LEFT TURNS.
The driver or operator of any vehicle shall not make a left hand turn at the intersection of one street with another when there is erected or placed at such intersection a signal or sign, or stationed at such intersection a police officer, indicating that no left hand turn shall be made. The Department may designate the intersections at which and the time during which left hand turns shall not be made and cause to be erected or placed a signal or sign or station a police officer to indicate that no left hand turn shall be made.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.220) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.05 AU@ TURNS AND TRAVELING ON LEFT SIDE.
No vehicle shall cross over from the right side of the street to the left side of the street or make a complete turn around or turn of 180 degrees upon any street except on the intersection of one street with another. No vehicle shall be permitted to make a complete turn around or turn of 180 degrees at the intersection with other streets where official traffic signs indicate such is prohibited or stop and go signals are erected and placed or may hereafter be erected or placed.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.230) Penalty, see ' 70.99
Driving Regulations
3
' 71.06 TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
The driver of any vehicle, intending to turn to the right at an intersection shall approach the intersection in the lane for traffic nearest to the right hand side of the street, and turning shall keep as closely as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the street; and when intending to turn to the left shall approach the intersection in the lane for traffic to the right of and nearest to the centerline of the street and in turning shall pass to the left of the center of the intersection passing as closely as practicable to the right thereof so as to complete the turn so that such vehicle shall pass into such cross street in the lane of traffic to the right of the center of the cross street at the intersection of such streets. For the purpose of this section, the CENTER OF THE INTERSECTION shall mean the meeting point of the medial lines of the streets intersecting one another.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.240) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.07 KEEP TO THE RIGHT.
The driver of any vehicle shall keep to the right of the centerline of the street along which he or she is driving. The driver of a slowly moving vehicle shall keep as near the right hand curb as possible.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.250) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.08 OVERTAKING AND PASSING.
(A) The operator of any vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass at a safe distance to the left thereof, but only when such left side is clearly visible and is free from oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to
permit such overtaking and passing to be made in safety and shall not cut in front of the overtaken vehicle until safely clear of same.
(B) The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district shall not deviate from his or her direct line of travel without ascertaining that such movement can be made with safety to other vehicles approaching from the front and rear.
(C) The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass another vehicle upon the crest of a grade, at any railway grade or crossing, at any intersection of highways or streets, upon a curve in the highway where the driver=s view along the highway is obstructed for 500 feet, or upon any street in a Ano passing@ zone indicated either by regulatory signs adjacent to the street or by pavement markings with a yellow line to the right of the centerline. (Prior Code, ' 10.04.260) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.09 BACKING.
No vehicle shall be moved backward for a greater distance on any street or alley than is necessary to turn or move away from the curb and ample warning shall be given to avoid injury to other traffic. No vehicle shall be backed around a corner at an intersection, or into an intersection of public streets. No vehicle shall be backed without ample warning first having been given, and while backing, care must be exercised not to injure persons or vehicles or to block traffic.(Prior Code, ' 10.04.270) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.10 OVERTAKEN VEHICLE; SLOW DRIVING.
The operator of a vehicle upon a street, about to be overtaken and passed by another vehicle approaching from the rear, shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on suitable and audible signal being given by the driver of the overtaking vehicle and shall not increase the speed of his
Driving Regulations
4
or her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. No person shall drive any vehicle or motor vehicle at an unnecessarily slow rate of speed so as to hinder and retard traffic.(Prior Code, ' 10.04.280) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.11 PROCEEDING WITHOUT SAFE PASSAGE.
A standing vehicle about to start shall give moving vehicles the right-of-way and the driver thereof shall give ample warning before so starting.(Prior Code, ' 10.04.290) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.12 RIGHT-OF-WAY.
(A) When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right except as otherwise provided herein. The driver of any vehicle traveling at an unlawful speed shall forfeit any right-of-way which he or she might otherwise have hereunder.
(B) The driver of a vehicle approaching but not having entered the intersection shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle within such intersection and turning to the left across the line of travel of such first mentioned vehicle, provided the driver of the vehicle turning left has given a plainly visible signal of intention to turn as required by law.
(C) The driver of any vehicle upon a street within a business or residence district shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing such street within any clearly marked crosswalk or any regular pedestrian crossing included in the prolongation of the lateral boundary lines of the adjacent sidewalk at the end of a block, except at intersections where the movement of traffic is being regulated by traffic officers or traffic direction devices. At intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or police officers, driver of vehicles, including those making turns, shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians crossing or those who have started to cross the roadway on a Agreen@ or Ago@ signal, and in all other cases pedestrians shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully proceeding directly ahead on a Agreen@ or Ago@ signal. Every pedestrian crossing a street within a business or residence district at any point other than a pedestrian crossing, crosswalk or intersection shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles upon the street. (Prior Code, ' 10.04.300) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.13 EXCEPTIONS TO RIGHT-OF-WAY RULE.
(A) The driver of a vehicle entering a public street from an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such public street.
(B) The driver of a vehicle upon a street shall yield the right-of-way to ambulances, Police and Fire Department vehicles when operated upon official business, and the drivers of any such vehicles sound audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle. The operator of every other vehicle shall immediately drive his or her vehicle as near as possible and parallel to the right hand curb of the street clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until such emergency vehicle shall have passed, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
(C) These provisions shall not operate to relieve the driver of a Police, Fire Department vehicle or ambulance from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway or street nor shall it protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequence of an arbitrary exercise of such right-of-way.
Driving Regulations
5
(D) Street maintainers in the performance of their duties of maintaining the streets shall have the preference of right-of-way, and shall be permitted to drive upon the left hand side of the streets for the purpose of dumping materials, for repairing or smoothing the roadway, or for cleaning streets and removing snow. Such maintainers shall, at all times, display a red flag or other emblem of such dimensions and in such manner as prescribed by the State Highway Commission to indicate his or her identity. Such maintainer shall not be bound by the rules herein provided to turn to the right when meeting other vehicles or allowing them to pass when his or her work requires him or her to remain on the other side of the traveled portion of the street. Such maintainer shall be subject to the rules of travel as provided by law, except when the performance of their maintenance work requires them to do otherwise.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.310)
' 71.14 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY; STOP BEFORE ENTERING.
(A) The operator of a vehicle emerging from an alley, private driveway or building into a street, or entering a through street shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a crosswalk or crosswalk area extending across such an approach.
(B) Every vehicle driven from an alley into a street within the business district shall go straight across the street or shall turn to the right on coming out of such alley and go in the direction of traffic on such street.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.320) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.15 TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
(A) Green means go. Vehicular traffic facing a green signal may proceed straight through or may turn right or left if the traffic control signal is at an intersection, unless such turns at such place are otherwise prohibited.
(B) Yellow or amber when shown with or following the green signal. However, yellow or amber when shown with or following the green signal mean caution. Vehicular traffic facing the yellow or amber signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk except that if such stop cannot be made in safety a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the roadway, intersection or crosswalk controlled by the signal. Pedestrians facing the yellow or amber signal are thereby advised that there is not enough time to cross the roadway and shall remain on the curb line and not proceed across the roadway controlled by the signal until the next green signal appears.
(C) Red means stop. Vehicular traffic facing the red signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked and shall remain standing and shall not enter the intersection or roadway to the front until the green signal is shown. Pedestrians facing the red signal shall not proceed across the roadway to the front until the next green signal appears.
(D) A flashing red signal means stop. Vehicular traffic facing the flashing red signal shall first stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked and may then proceed with caution and with regard to the rules of right-of-way.
(E) Flashing yellow or amber signal. A flashing yellow or amber signal means caution. Vehicular traffic facing the yellow or amber flashing signal may proceed through the intersection or pass such signal only with caution.
Driving Regulations
6
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.330) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.16 YIELD SIGNS.
The driver of a vehicle approaching a AYield@ sign shall, in obedience to the sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions, or shall stop if necessary and yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian legally crossing the roadway or to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely so as to constitute an immediate hazard. If the driver is involved in a collision with a pedestrian in a crosswalk or a vehicle entered the intersection after driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision is prima facie evidence of his or her failure to yield the right-of-way.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.340) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.17 RAILROAD SIGNALS.
Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a highway or street railway crossing and a clearly visible and positive signal gives warning of the immediate approach of a railway train or car or locomotive, it is unlawful for the driver of the vehicle to fail to bring the vehicle to a complete stop before traversing such grade crossing and it shall be the duty of the driver of such vehicle to follow and obey the direction of the signal.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.350) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.18 CROSSING SIDEWALK.
(A) Manner of crossing. A vehicle shall not be allowed to cross a sidewalk except where a driveway is provided, and in crossing a sidewalk to or from an alley, a lot or building, no vehicle shall be driven at a speed greater than four mph.
(B) Warning before crossing sidewalks. Every person driving any vehicle to or from an alley, lot or building, across any sidewalk shall give ample notice and warning of his or her approach.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.360) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.19 UNNECESSARY DRIVING ADJACENT TO SCHOOL PROPERTY.
No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle so as to cause or create unnecessary traffic on streets or alleys adjacent to school property and school buildings in the city, or so as to splash or throw water, snow, mud or dirt on any person on any school property or in the vicinity of any school property in the city.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.370) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.20 COASTER, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES.
No person on roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster or toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street or crosswalk.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.380) Penalty, see ' 70.99
Driving Regulations
7
' 71.21 CLINGING TO A MOVING VEHICLE.
No person traveling upon any bicycle, coaster, sled, skis, roller skates or any other toy vehicle shall
cling to or attach himself or herself or his or her vehicle to any other moving vehicle upon any street. (Prior Code, ' 10.04.390) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.22 RIDING ON OUTSIDE PROHIBITED.
No person shall ride in or upon any motor vehicle by hanging onto the same, standing on the running board or otherwise, except by sitting in the seats provided for passengers in such vehicle. (Prior Code, ' 10.04.400) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.23 PARADES AND PROCESSIONS.
(A) Parades; permit required.
(1) No parade or procession other than a funeral procession shall be held or participated in upon the streets except with the prior consent in writing of the Chief of Police, obtained upon application filed with the Department setting forth the time of, route of, approximate number of persons and vehicles to participate in, and name and character of the group or organization sponsoring such parade or procession.
(2) The consent of the Chief of Police to the holding of such parade or procession shall be given unless it reasonably appears that the holding of the same as set out in the application would unreasonably obstruct and impede traffic or would be likely to disturb the peace and quiet of the city.
(B) Driving through procession prohibited. No driver of any vehicle shall drive through or otherwise interfere with any funeral or other authorized procession in any of the streets, and it shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle to stop when reaching a street on which such a procession is passing and wait until the procession has entirely passed before proceeding. (Prior Code, ' 10.04.410) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.24 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS; OPERATION OF VEHICLES.
It is unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle in or as part of any funeral procession without having the vehicle distinguished by illuminated headlights. The driver of every such vehicle shall keep as near the right hand edge of the roadway as practicable and following the vehicle ahead as closely as practicable and safe.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.420) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.25 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS; STOPS.
The operator of the vehicle in the lead of any funeral procession entering upon any street intersection where a full stop is required by this title shall bring the vehicle to a full stop and yield the right-of-way to vehicles on the intersected street, and where the other vehicles composing the procession are properly distinguished by illuminated headlights, they may follow the vehicle in the lead through the intersection without stopping, subject, however, to direction of any police officers stationed at the intersection.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.430) Penalty, see ' 70.99
Driving Regulations
8
' 71.26 CARELESS DRIVING.
Any person who drives a vehicle within the limits of the city carelessly in disregard to the width, grade, curves, corners, condition or customary usage of the streets or highways, or whose temporary inadvertence to the operation of such vehicle causes or is likely to cause damage to any person or property shall be guilty of careless driving.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.440) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.27 RECKLESS DRIVING.
Any person who drives any vehicle upon a street, alley or highway of this city carelessly and heedlessly
in disregard of the rights or safety of others, or without due caution and circumspection and at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property, shall be guilty of reckless driving.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.450) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.28 EXHIBITION DRIVING.
Any person, firm or corporation driving or operating a vehicle within the limits of the city in such a manner that creates or causes unnecessary engine noise or tire squeal, skid or slide upon acceleration or stopping; or that causes the vehicle to unnecessarily turn abruptly or sway, shall be guilty of exhibition driving.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.460) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.29 TRACTOR WITH LUGS.
It is unlawful for any person to pirate or move any tractor or other motor vehicle which is equipped with any kind of lug upon or across any street within the city, without first laying plank of at least two inches in thickness over the surface of such street in such a manner so as to protect such street from contact with such vehicle.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.470) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.30 ONE-WAY STREETS AUTHORIZED.
The Police Department is authorized to designate one-way traffic upon any of the streets within the city.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.480)
' 71.31 SPEED LIMITS DESIGNATED.
(A) Any person driving a vehicle upon any street or alley shall drive same at a careful and prudent speed not greater than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street or alley, and any other conditions then existing and no person shall drive any vehicle upon a street
Driving Regulations
9
or alley in the city at such a speed as to endanger the life, limb or property of any person.
(B) Unless a different speed is fixed and duly posted subject to the provisions of this section, it shall be prima facie lawful for the driver of a vehicle to drive the same at a speed not exceeding the following:
(1) Fifteen mph when approaching within 50 feet of a grade crossing at any railway when the driver=s view is obstructed. A driver=s view shall be deemed to be obstructed when at any time during the last 200 feet of his or her approach to such railway crossing he or she does not have a clear and uninterrupted view of such intersection and of any traffic on such railway for a distance of 400 feet in each direction from such crossing;
(2) Fifteen mph when passing a school during school recess or while children are going to or leaving school during opening or closing hours, or when children are present on school grounds;
(3) Fifteen mph when approaching within 50 feet and in traversing an intersection of highways when the driver=s view is obstructed. A driver=s view shall be deemed to be obstructed when at any time during the last 50 feet of his or her approach to such intersection he or she does not have a clear and uninterrupted view of such intersection and of the traffic upon all of the highways entering such intersection for a distance of 200 feet from such intersection;
(4) Fifteen mph in traversing or going around curves or traversing a grade upon a highway when the driver=s view is obstructed within a distance of 100 feet along such highway in the direction in which he or she is proceeding;
(5) Twenty-five mph on any highway in a business district as hereinafter defined, when traffic on such highway is controlled at intersections by traffic officers or stop and go signals;
(6) Fifteen mph on all other highways in a business district as hereinafter defined; and
(7) Twenty-five mph in a residence district as hereinafter defined, and in public parks.
(C) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to a highway when 50% or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to a highway not comprising a business district when the frontage on such highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is mainly occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for business.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.490) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.32 TEXTING PROHIBITED.
(A) Definitions. The words and phrases defined in this section, shall, when used in this section, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in such section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUN-ICATION DEVICE. A mobile communication device that uses short-wave analog or digital radio transmissions or satellite transmissions between the device
Driving Regulations
10
and a transmitter to permit wireless telephone communications to and from the user of the device within a specified area;
VOICE OPERATED OR HANDS FREE TECHNOLOGY. Technology that allows a user to write, send, or listen to a text-based communication without the use of either hand except to activate, deactivate, or initiate a feature or function; and
WRITE, SEND, OR READ A TEXT-BASED COMMUNICATION. Using an electronic wireless communications device to manually communicate with any person using text-based communication including communications referred to as a text message, instant message, or electronic mail.
(SDCL ' 32-26-46)
(B) Use of handheld electronic wireless communication device for text-based communication on highway
(1) Prohibited; violation as petty offense. No person may operate a motor vehicle on a highway while using a handheld electronic wireless communication device to write, send, or read a text-based communication.
(2) Exceptions. This section does not apply to a person who is using a handheld electronic wireless communication device:
(a) While the vehicle is lawfully parked;
(b) To contact any emergency public safety answering point or dispatch center;
(c) To write, read, select, or enter a telephone number or name in an electronic wireless communications device for the purpose of making or receiving a telephone call; or
(d) When using voice operated or hands free technology.
(C) Penalty. A violation of this section is a petty offense with a fine of $100.
(SDCL ' 32-26-47)
ACCIDENTS
' 71.45 DUTY OF STOP IN CASE OF ACCIDENT.
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury or death to any person or damage to property shall immediately stop and give his or her name and address and the registration number of his or her vehicle and exhibit his or her registration receipt to the person struck or the driver or occupant of any vehicle collided with, and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying of such person to a physician for medical treatment, if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or is requested by the injured person.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.640) Penalty, see ' 70.99
Driving Regulations
11
' 71.46 DUTY UPON STRIKING UNATTENDED VEHICLE.
The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle or shall leave in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a written notice giving the name and address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking, and a statement of the circumstances thereof. The driver, within 24 hours, shall notify the City Police Department of such accident.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.650) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.47 DUTY TO REPORT ACCIDENTS.
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injuries or death to any person or property damage to an apparent extent of $100 or more shall within 24 hours thereafter make a report of such accident to the City Police Department. The City Police Department shall forward a copy of every such report so filed with it to the State Motor Vehicle Department. If the State Motor Vehicle Department so requires, the City Police Department shall file supplemental reports of accidents upon forms furnished by the State Motor Vehicle Department. Such reports shall be without prejudice, shall be for the information of the City Police Department and shall not be open to public inspection. The fact that such reports have been made shall be admissible in evidence solely to prove a compliance with this section, but no such report or any part thereof or statement contained herein shall be admissible in evidence for any other purpose, and trial, civil or criminal, arising out of such accident.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.660) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 71.48 GARAGE KEEPER TO REPORT DAMAGED VEHICLE.
The person in charge of any garage, repair shop or service station to which is brought any vehicle which shows evidence of having been involved in a serious accident or struck by any bullet shall report to the Department within 24 hours after such vehicle is received, giving the kind of car and license number, and if possible the name and address of the owner or operator of such vehicle.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.670) Penalty, see ' 70.99
1
CHAPTER 72: VEHICLE STANDARDS AND EQUIPMENT
Section
General Provisions
72.01 License plates
72.02 Horns and warning devices
72.03 Muffler; smoke
72.04 Brakes and signaling device
72.05 Lights
72.06 Dimming headlights
72.07 Size and weight of vehicle and load
72.08 Use of dynamic brake device prohibited
Emergency Vehicles; Fire Regulations
72.20 Exemption to authorized emergency vehicles
72.21 Emergency vehicle exceeding speed limit to give warning of approach
72.22 Crossing fire hose
72.23 Following fire apparatus
72.99 Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 72.01 LICENSE PLATES.
No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle on the streets, roadways or alleys of the city unless such vehicle shall have a distinctive number assigned to it by the Secretary of State, and two number plates bearing such number conspicuously displayed, horizontally and in an upright position, one on the front and one on the rear of such vehicle, each securely fastened, and such plates shall at all times, as far as is reasonably possible, be kept clear and free of mud, ice and snow so as to be clearly visible. (Prior Code, ' 10.04.500) Penalty, see ' 72.99
' 72.02 HORNS AND WARNING DEVICES.
Every motor vehicle when operated upon the city streets shall be equipped with a horn in good working order capable of emitting a sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of at least 200 feet, and it is unlawful, except as otherwise provided in this section, for any vehicle to be equipped with or for any person to use upon any vehicle any siren, or any compression or spark plug whistle or any exhaust horn or whistle which does to produce a harmonious sound, or for any person at any time to use a horn otherwise than as a reasonable warning, or to make any unnecessary or unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of a horn or other warning device.(Prior Code, ' 10.04.510) Penalty, see ' 72.99
Vehicle Standards and Equipment
2
' 72.03 MUFFLER; SMOKE.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon the streets, roadways or alleys of the city unless such motor vehicle is provided with a muffler, which at all times is kept closed so that the exhaust is effectively muffled. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in such a manner as to emit unnecessary or excessive smoke from the motor of such vehicle.(Prior Code, ' 10.04.520) Penalty, see ' 72.99
' 72.04 BRAKES AND SIGNALING DEVICE.
Every motor vehicle shall be provided with adequate brakes in good working order and sufficient
to control such motor vehicle at all times when same is in use and with an adequate bell or horn or other device for signaling. (Prior Code, ' 10.04.530) Penalty, see ' 72.99
' 72.05 LIGHTS.
A motor vehicle in motion, during the period from half an hour after sunset to half an hour before sunrise, shall display at least two lighted lamps on the front of such motor vehicle, one on each side of the vehicle. Such lamps must conform to state law; provided that a motorcycle or a motor bicycle shall be required to display only one lighted lamp in front and one in the rear. (Prior Code, ' 10.04.540) Penalty, see ' 72.99
' 72.06 DIMMING HEADLIGHTS.
No person shall use headlights or side lights upon any vehicle on any street unless the same are dimmed in such a way as to prevent the lights being dazzling or blinding to persons using the streets. Whenever a motor vehicle meets another vehicle on any street it shall be mandatory to tilt the head lamps downward subject to requirement that the tilted lamps shall give sufficient illumination under normal atmospheric conditions and on a level road to render clearly discernable a person 75 feet ahead, but shall not project a glaring or dazzling light to persons in front of the vehicle. (Prior Code, ' 10.04.550) Penalty, see ' 72.99
' 72.07 SIZE AND WEIGHT OF VEHICLE AND LOAD.
No person shall drive or operate any vehicle upon any street the maximum width and length of which and the gross weight of which, including load, does not comply with the requirements of the state law governing such vehicle. The driver or operator of any vehicle in the city shall upon the verbal request of a city employee cause the vehicle to be weighed at a weigh scale located in the city. (Prior Code, ' 10.04.560) Penalty, see ' 72.99
' 72.08 USE OF DYNAMIC BRAKE DEVICE
PROHIBITED.
(A) Except as provided in this section, the use or operation of a dynamic braking device on unmuffled vehicles is hereby prohibited within this municipality
(B) A DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICE is a device used on vehicles that converts the engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes. These devices are commonly referred to as Aair brakes,@ Aengine brakes,@ Acompression brakes,@ AJacob=s Brakes,@ or AJake Brakes.@
Vehicle Standards and Equipment
3
(C) This section shall not apply to municipal emergency vehicles, whether or not responding to an emergency.
(D) As an affirmative defense to a charge of a violating of this section, the driver of the vehicle must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that:
(1) The driver of the vehicle was operating the vehicle in compliance with all applicable laws at the time the unmuffled dynamic braking device was used;
(2) The speed of vehicle was reasonable given all of the relevant circumstances; and
(3) The driver believed that the use of the unmuffled dynamic braking device was necessary to either:
(a) Avoid an imminent threat to the safety of the driver or any other person; or
(b) Avoid an imminent threat to property.
(4) The driver=s belief as to the necessity for using the unmuffled dynamic braking device was objectively reasonable. Penalty, see ' 70.99
EMERGENCY VEHICLES; FIRE REGULATIONS
' 72.20 EXEMPTION TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
The provisions of this title regulating the movement, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles while the operator of such vehicle is operating the same in an emergency in the necessary performance of public duties. This exemption shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequence of a reckless disregard of the safety of others. (Prior Code, ' 10.04.570)
' 72.21 EMERGENCY VEHICLE EXCEEDING SPEED LIMIT TO GIVE WARNING OF APPROACH.
The speed limit set out in this title shall not apply to authorized vehicles when responding to emergency calls, provided the driver thereof sounds an audible signal by siren or horn and the vehicle is equipped with two lighted red lights or a rotary red flasher which are displayed to the front. This provision shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the street nor shall it protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of a reckless disregard for the safety of others. (Prior Code, ' 10.04.580)
' 72.22 CROSSING FIRE HOSE.
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected fire hose of the Fire Department when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire without the consent of the Fire Department official in charge. (Prior Code, ' 10.04.590) Penalty, see ' 72.99
Vehicle Standards and Equipment
4
' 72.23 FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS.
It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than one on official business, to follow closer than 500 feet of any emergency vehicle, or to park or leave standing any vehicle within 400 feet of any emergency vehicle. (Prior Code, ' 10.04.600) Penalty, see ' 72.99
' 72.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of ' 70.99.
(B) A vehicle which violates state requirements concerning gross weight or gross weight loaded restrictions shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $200.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.560)
CHAPTER 73: PEDESTRIANS
Section
73.01 Use of crosswalks
73.02 Pedestrians= right-of-way
73.03 Pedestrians walking along the roadways
' 73.01 USE OF CROSSWALKS.
(A) No pedestrian shall go from one side of the street to the other except at a right angle at a regular crosswalk at the end of a block upon any street in the business section or on any through street. A pedestrian shall use the right half of the crosswalk when crossing a street.
(B) At crosswalks or intersections where traffic is directed by a police officer or traffic control signal, no pedestrian shall cross the street or roadway other than with released traffic and pedestrians shall obey all traffic signals and directions. (Prior Code, ' 10.04.610) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 73.02 PEDESTRIANS= RIGHT-OF-WAY.
The operator of any vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at the end of a block or entrance to an alley, except at intersections where the movement of traffic is being regulated by police officers or traffic control signals. Whenever any vehicle has stopped at a crosswalk or intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross a roadway the operator of any vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
(Prior Code, ' 10.04.620) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 73.03 PEDESTRIANS WALKING ALONG THE ROADWAYS.
(A) Where sidewalks are provided, it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
(B) Where sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder, facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction. (Prior Code, ' 10.04.630) Penalty, see ' 70.99
1
CHAPTER 74: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Section
74.01 Where prohibited
74.02 Vehicles standing or parking in alleys
74.03 Police parking
74.04 Temporary no parking areas for street cleaning and snow removal
74.05 Parallel and diagonal parking
74.06 Parking of trucks
74.07 Illegally parked vehicles
74.08 Parking limits
74.09 Leaving vehicle unattended with motor running
74.10 Prohibition of street parking for snow removal
74.11 Establishment of emergency snow routes
74.12 Stalled or abandoned vehicle
74.13 Special street signs for snow removal
74.14 Towing of violators
74.15 Unauthorized removal of impounded vehicles
74.99 Penalty
' 74.01 WHERE PROHIBITED.
Unless necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or unless a police officer or official traffic control device has so directed, no person may stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
(A) In front of a public or private driveway;
(B) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
(C) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
(D) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signals, stop sign, yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
(E) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance when signs are properly posted; and
(F) At any place where prohibited by an official sign or restricted curb painting.
(Prior Code, ' 10.08.010) Penalty, see ' 74.99
' 74.02 VEHICLES STANDING OR PARKING IN ALLEYS.
(A) The driver or owner of a vehicle shall not park or allow it to be parked attended or unattended, in a public alley.
(B) The driver or owner of a truck shall not park or allow it to be parked in a public alley, except for
Stopping, Standing, and Parking
2
the purpose of receiving or delivering property, and only for the period of time that is necessary to load or unload. Such trucks, when loading or unloading, park on the side of the alley as much as possible. When two or more trucks are thus parked on opposite sides of the same alley the truck last arriving shall be placed in such staggered position as to leave sufficient space between it and the first truck for the free passage of other vehicles.
(Ord. 1036, passed 11-21-2016) Penalty, see ' 74.99
' 74.03 POLICE PARKING.
The Department may, by regulation, designate parking areas for police vehicles and mark such areas with appropriate signs, and when such areas are so designated and marked, no vehicles other than police vehicles shall be parked therein. (Prior Code, ' 10.08.030) Penalty, see ' 74.99
' 74.04 TEMPORARY NO PARKING AREAS FOR STREET CLEANING AND SNOW REMOVAL.
In order to clear any given area for the purpose of street cleaning, snow removal or street repair or marking, the Department may designate such area and mark it with appropriate no parking signs and when so marked no vehicle shall be parked therein. (Prior Code, ' 10.08.040) Penalty, see ' 74.99
' 74.05 PARALLEL AND DIAGONAL PARKING.
No vehicle shall be parked on any street unless such vehicle is parked parallel to the curb headed in the direction of traffic with curbside wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the curb, and no closer than four feet to any other vehicle front or rear, except where otherwise marked by the Police Department and except upon those streets which have been designated or marked for diagonal parking. Where streets are so marked, vehicles must park within the space thus designated. (Prior Code, ' 10.08.050) Penalty, see ' 74.99
' 74.06 PARKING OF TRUCKS.
All freight, stock and gas and oil transport trucks shall be parked only at such places and in such manner as have been marked and designated by the Department. This section shall not apply to a light delivery truck delivering goods from house to house and place to place which requires a stop or parking of but a few minutes to receive or deliver merchandise. (Prior Code, ' 10.08.060) Penalty, see ' 74.99
' 74.07 ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES.
A driver or an owner shall not park or allow a vehicle, trailer, or other personal property to be parked or placed so as to be a hazard or obstruction to or interfere with traffic. (Ord. 1036, passed 11-21-2016) Penalty, see ' 74.99
' 74.08 PARKING LIMITS.
Unless otherwise authorized by the City Police Department, it is unlawful for any motor vehicle, boat, trailer, camper or other appurtenances to remain on any street, avenue, alley or other public ground for a period longer than 72 hours. (Prior Code, ' 10.08.080) Penalty, see ' 74.99
Stopping, Standing, and Parking
3
' 74.09 LEAVING VEHICLE UNATTENDED WITH MOTOR RUNNING.
No person shall leave a motor vehicle unattended while the engine is running, on any street in the city.
(Prior Code, ' 10.08.090) Penalty, see ' 74.99
' 74.10 PROHIBITION OF STREET PARKING FOR SNOW REMOVAL.
(A) An owner shall not allow any motor vehicle, trailer or other personal property to be parked or placed on the city streets whenever the United States Weather Bureau has forecasted snowfall of two inches or more for southeastern South Dakota, whenever two or more inches of snowfall has fallen in the city limits, or when the city declares a snow emergency.
(B) If the city declares a snow emergency, the city will alert residents of the streets that will be plowed and the time and snow removal operations will begin on local television and radio stations in the Sioux Falls metropolitan area and through city social media networks.
(C) Parking may resume on any city street on which snow removal operations have been completed curb to curb. (Ord. 1036, passed 11-21-2016) Penalty, see ' 74.99
' 74.11 ESTABLISHMENT OF EMERGENCY SNOW ROUTES.
(A) If the city declares a snow emergency, snow routes designated herein as emergency snow routes shall be given priority for snow removal.
(B) If a snow emergency is declared, all vehicles and other personal property parked on emergency snow routes must immediately be removed from that street. The Public Works Superintendent shall cause all snow emergency routes to be clearly posted.
(C) Any vehicle or personal property parked on emergency snow routes once a snow emergency has been declared will be fined and towed immediately.
(Ord. 1036, passed 11-21-2016) Penalty, see ' 74.99
' 74.12 STALLED OR ABANDONED VEHICLE.
No person operating a motor vehicle or other appurtenance upon the public streets shall allow such vehicle or appurtenance to become partially or wholly stalled, improperly parked or abandoned so as to impede street cleaning, snow removal or other traffic within the roadway because of the condition of the streets.
(Prior Code, ' 10.08.110) Penalty, see ' 74.99
' 74.13 SPECIAL STREET SIGNS FOR SNOW REMOVAL.
(A) For the purpose of removing snow and ice from the streets, the Chief of Police and the Superintendent of Streets may place appropriate signs upon the streets prohibiting parking thereon for
Stopping, Standing, and Parking
4
such length of time deemed necessary.
(B) Within 12 hours of placing such signs, all vehicles shall be in compliance with these signs. Within 12 hours after the removal of such signs, vehicles shall be in compliance with the non-emergency signs or traffic regulations.
(Prior Code, ' 10.08.120) Penalty, see ' 74.99
' 74.14 TOWING OF VIOLATORS.
Vehicles in violation of '' 74.10 through 74.12 may be towed. A storage charge of $8 per day shall be assessed to each vehicle until the vehicle is claimed.
(Prior Code, ' 10.08.130)
' 74.15 UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES.
No person shall remove a vehicle impounded by the city because of violation of the traffic ordinances until all fines or bonds, towing and storage fees have been paid to the city.
(Prior Code, ' 10.08.140)
' 74.99 PENALTY.
Vehicles in violation of this chapter may be towed.
(A) Any person violating a parking provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fee of $25 if paid within 72 hours. If it is not paid after 72 hours, it will automatically double to $50. If it is not paid within 30 days, the owner will be charged with a Class 2 misdemeanor and subject to a fine of $200.
(B) Each day that a parking violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be subject to additional penalties.(Ord. 1036, passed 11-21-2016).
1
CHAPTER 75: MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE CONTROL
Section
75.01 Definitions
75.02 Sound level restrictions
75.03 Applicability
75.04 Exhaust system requirements
75.05 Sound level measurement
75.06 Radios and stereo receiver restrictions
75.07 Exceptions
75.99 Penalty
' 75.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. The sound level as measured with a sound level meter using the A-weighing network. The standard notation is db(A) or dBA.
AMBIENT SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. The sound pressure level of the all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment, usually a composite of 90% of the time based on a measurement period of not less than ten minutes or more than 30 minutes.
DECIBEL. Logarithmic and dimensionless unit of measure used in describing the amplitude of sound. DECIBEL is denoted as dB.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE. A motor vehicle used in response to a public calamity or to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger.
FARM MACHINERY. Includes agricultural tractors, self-propelled agricultural machines and any implement used in connection therewith.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is self-propelled by mechanical power, including, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, truck-trailers, semi-trailers, campers, motorcycles, mini-bikes, go-carts and racing vehicles.
MUFFLER. An apparatus consisting of a series of chambers or baffle plates designed for the purpose of transmitting gases while reducing sound emanating from such apparatus.
NOISE. Any sound which is unwanted or which causes or tends to cause an adverse physiological or psychological effect on human beings.
SOUND. Mechanical energy transmitted by a cyclic series of compressions and rarefaction of molecules of the material or materials through which it passes.
SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument, including a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector and integrator or time average, output meter and/or visual display and weighing networks, used to measure sound levels. The SOUND LEVEL METER shall conform as a minimum to the requirements of ANSI S 1.4-1971 Type 2 or its successor publication; and to be set to an A-weighted response. An acoustical calibrator accurate to within plus or minus one decibel shall be used to verify the before and after calibration of the SOUND LEVEL METER on each day noise measurements are taken.
Motor Vehicle Noise Control
2
SOUND PRESSURE. The instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as produced by sound.
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. Twenty times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of 20 micropascals. The sound pressure is denoted ALp@ or ASPL.@
(Prior Code, ' 10.12.010)
' 75.02 SOUND LEVEL RESTRICTIONS.
(A) No person shall drive, move, operate, cause, or knowingly permit to be driven or moved a motor vehicle or combination of vehicles, within the city limits at any time in such a manner as to exceed the following noise limits for the category of motor vehicle shown below.
(B) The standard measurement height shall be not less than four feet above the immediate surrounding surface and the measurement distance not less than 25 feet.
(1) Motor vehicles with a manufacturer=s gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) or gross combination weight rating (GCWR) of 10,000 pounds or more, or any combination of vehicles towed by such motor vehicle with sound level dB(90);
(2) Motorcycles with sound level dB(80); and
(3) Any other motor vehicle or any combination of vehicles towed by any motor vehicle with sound level dB(80).
(Prior Code, ' 10.12.020) Penalty, see ' 75.99
' 75.03 APPLICABILITY.
The foregoing section shall apply to the total noise from a vehicle or combination of vehicles and shall not be construed as limiting or precluding the enforcement of any other provisions of this title relating to motor vehicle mufflers for noise control. (Prior Code, ' 10.12.030)
' 75.04 EXHAUST SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS.
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle within the city limits unless the exhaust system of such vehicle is:
(A) Free from defects which affect sound reduction;
(B) Equipped with a muffler or other noise dissipative device;
(C) Not equipped with any cut-out, by-pass or similar device; and
(D) Not modified in a manner which will amplify or increase the noise emitted by the motor of such vehicle above that emitted by a muffler of the type originally installed on the vehicle.
(Prior Code, ' 10.12.040) Penalty, see ' 75.99
Motor Vehicle Noise Control
3
' 75.05 SOUND LEVEL MEASUREMENT.
Sound level measurement shall be made with a sound level meter Type II or better using the AA@ weighted scale, in accordance and conforming with the standards promulgated by the American National Standards Institute.
(Prior Code, ' 10.12.050)
' 75.06 RADIOS AND STEREO RECEIVER RESTRICTIONS.
No person shall use, operate or permit the use or operation of any radio receiving set, phonograph, stereo receiver, tape deck or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day in such a manner as to be plainly audible at 50
feet from such device which is being operated from within or attached to a motor vehicle which is traveling or parked on a public right-of-way.
(Prior Code, ' 10.12.060) Penalty, see ' 75.99
' 75.07 EXCEPTIONS.
This chapter shall not apply to the operation of emergency vehicles or farm machinery.
(Prior Code, ' 10.12.070)
' 75.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter may be punished by a fine of not more than $500. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
(B) Violations of '' 75.02 through 75.07 are deemed and declared to be a nuisance and as such may be subject to summary abatement by means of a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, ' 10.12.080)
1
CHAPTER 76: TRUCK ROUTES
Section
76.01 Authority to post signs
76.02 Truck driver responsibilities
76.03 School bus routes
76.04 Temporary truck routes
76.05 Enforcement
76.06 State statutes or State Highway Department regulations
76.07 Weighing of vehicles
' 76.01 AUTHORITY TO POST SIGNS.
The Public Works Commissioner is empowered to designate, from time to time, in his or her discretion, truck routes within the city; such routes shall be plainly marked by adequate signs and may be changed from time to time as the Public Works Commissioner believes necessary and he or she shall promulgate such routes in writing and shall file the same with the city finance office. The word TRUCK means and includes truck, trailer and semi-trailer. (Prior Code, ' 10.16.010) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 76.02 TRUCK DRIVER RESPONSIBILITIES.
It shall be the duty of all truck drivers within the city limits to drive and operate trucks having a gross weight of over 6,000 pounds per axle upon the routes hereinabove designated except trucks making local delivery and service calls. (Prior Code, ' 10.16.020)
' 76.03 SCHOOL BUS ROUTES.
The Public Works Commissioner is further empowered to designate routes for the school buses of the Canton Independent School District within the city; such routes to be promulgated in writing and filed with the city. (Prior Code, ' 10.16.030) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 76.04 TEMPORARY TRUCK ROUTES.
The Public Works Commissioner is further empowered to designate in his or her discretion, from time to time, temporary truck routes within the city for any purpose which the Commissioner shall deem necessary for the public good. (Prior Code, ' 10.16.040) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 76.05 ENFORCEMENT.
The Chief of Police and all of the officers of the Police Department are authorized and directed to enforce the regulations above referred to and to direct all truck drivers, other than that hereinafter excepted, to travel upon such truck routes. (Prior Code, ' 10.16.050)
Truck Routes
2
' 76.06 STATE STATUTES OR STATE HIGHWAY DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS.
Nothing in the foregoing section shall be construed to modify or change any of the regulations of the State Highway Department or the statutes of the state with reference to the gross weight permitted upon any highways within the city. (Prior Code, ' 10.16.060)
' 76.07 WEIGHING OF VEHICLES.
The Chief of Police and all officers of the Police Department shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of any commercial vehicle to proceed to any public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining whether this chapter has been complied with. (Prior Code, ' 10.16.070)
1
CHAPTER 77: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
Bicycles
77.01 License required
77.02 Registration required
77.03 Tags and registration certificate
77.04 License fee
77.05 Tags and certificate nontransferable
77.06 Unlawful to interfere with pedestrians
77.07 Care in riding
77.08 Operation on sidewalk or crosswalk
77.09 Parking on sidewalk
77.10 Operation on roadway; riding close to right-hand curb
77.11 Turning, stopping or starting signals required
77.12 Racing
Snowmobiles
77.20 Snowmobile defined
77.21 Safety regulation
77.22 Driver=s license required
77.23 Regulations applicable at street intersections
77.24 Operation on sidewalks and parking prohibited
77.25 Lighting required
77.26 Automobile rules of the road applicable
77.27 Impoundment by Chief of Police
77.28 Towing conveyances prohibited; exceptions
BICYCLES
' 77.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall ride or use a bicycle upon any public street, highway or boulevard in the city unless the same shall have been licensed and registered as herein provided.
(Prior Code, ' 10.20.010) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 77.02 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
Every owner of a bicycle shall list and register with the Finance Officer his or her name and address, the name of the manufacturer of his or her bicycle, its number, style and general description.
(Prior Code, ' 10.20.020) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 77.03 TAGS AND REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE.
The Finance Officer shall provide and keep at police headquarters in the City Hall a suitable book and record for such purpose and shall provide a suitable metallic identification tag upon which shall be marked or stamped a distinguishing number, and for each bicycle registered, shall furnish the owner thereof one tag, the
Recreational Vehicles
2
owner shall affix and keep affixed to the bicycle for which the same is issued the original metallic tag.
(Prior Code, ' 10.20.030) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 77.04 LICENSE FEE.
The fee for such license shall be set by resolution of the City Commission and shall be paid to the City Finance Officer along with a completed registration form. A license tag shall be issued and placed on the bicycle and is valid as long as the bicycle belongs to the same owner. Upon a change of ownership of the bicycle, a new tag should be issued upon surrender of the prior license to City Hall and payment of the license fee.
(Prior Code, ' 10.20.040)
' 77.05 TAGS AND CERTIFICATE NONTRANSFERABLE.
Tags shall not be transferred from one bicycle to another and no person shall attach to any bicycle a tag not issued for use thereon.
(Prior Code, ' 10.20.050)
' 77.06 UNLAWFUL TO INTERFERE WITH PEDESTRIANS.
No person shall ride or propel any bicycle upon any public street, highway or boulevard in such a manner as to interfere with any pedestrian thereon.
(Prior Code, ' 10.20.060) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 77.07 CARE IN RIDING.
(A) No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any public street, highway or boulevard except in a careful and prudent manner and unless such person shall be capable of efficient control and operation of such bicycle, nor shall any person propel or operate a bicycle upon a public street, highway or boulevard carrying or permitting to be carried any other person upon such bicycle, except that two persons may ride upon a tandem bicycle.
(B) No bicycle shall be ridden faster than is reasonable and proper but every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard to the safety of the operator and other persons upon the streets and highways of the city.
(C) Persons riding or propelling any bicycle shall observe all traffic signs and stop at all stop signs.
(D) No bicycle shall be permitted on any street of the city unless it is equipped with a lighted lamp on the front thereof visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of at least 300 feet in front of the bicycle and equipped with a reflex mirror or lamp on the rear exhibiting a yellow or red light visible under light conditions from a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear of such bicycle during the period from one-half hour after sunset until one-half hour before sunrise or at any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernable the bicycle.
(E) No person under the age of 12 years shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any street, highway or boulevard in the city at night after the hour of 9:00 p.m.
(F) No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any public street, highway or boulevard in the city more than two abreast.
(G) Every person riding or propelling a bicycle upon any public street, highway or boulevard in the city
Recreational Vehicles
3
shall observe all traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto, and shall turn only at intersections, signaling for all turns, ride at the right hand side of the street or highway, pass to the left when passing vehicles or bicycles that are slower moving, and shall pass to the right when they meet.
(H) No person shall ride a bicycle upon the sidewalks in the business district of the city.
(Prior Code, ' 10.20.070) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 77.08 OPERATION ON SIDEWALK OR
CROSSWALK.
(A) A person operating a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk, or across a roadway upon and along a crosswalk, shall have all the rights and duties applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances, except as provided in division (B) and except that bicyclists must stop before entering a crosswalk or highway from a sidewalk or sidewalk area.
(SDCL ' 32-20B-2)
(B) A person operating a bicycle upon and along a sidewalk, or across a roadway upon and along a crosswalk, shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a pedestrian.
(SDCL ' 32-20B-3) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 77.09 PARKING ON SIDEWALK.
A person may park a bicycle on a sidewalk unless prohibited or restricted by an official traffic control device or ordinance. The parked bicycle may not impede the normal and reasonable movement of pedestrian or other traffic.
(SDCL ' 32-20B-4) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 77.10 OPERATION ON ROADWAY; RIDING
CLOSE TO RIGHT-HAND CURB.
(A) (1) Any person operating a bicycle upon a roadway at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall ride as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
(2) However, a person operating a bicycle may move from the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway to overtake and pass another bicycle or vehicle proceeding in the same direction, to prepare for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or roadway or to avoid conditions including, but not limited to, fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or substandard width lanes that make it unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or edge.
(B) For purposes of this section, a SUBSTANDARD WIDTH LANE is a lane that is too narrow for a bicycle and vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane.
(SDCL ' 32-20B-5) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 77.11 TURNING, STOPPING OR STARTING
SIGNALS REQUIRED.
A person operating a bicycle shall give a continuous signal of intention to turn right or left during the last 100 feet traveled by the bicycle before turning. The signal shall also be given while the bicycle is stopped waiting to turn. A signal by hand and arm need only be given intermittently if the hand is needed in the control
Recreational Vehicles
4
operation of the bicycle. No driver of a bicycle may overtake another vehicle on the right if the overtaken vehicle is signaling to make a right turn. Except as provided in this section, a person operating a bicycle shall comply with the provisions of SDCL '' 32-26-22 and 32-26-22.1.
(SDCL ' 32-20B-6) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 77.12 RACING.
(A) Racing in approved event authorized. Notwithstanding the provisions of SDCL ' 32-25-23, a person may race a bicycle on a highway when competing in a racing event which has been approved by the transportation commission or local authorities on a highway under their jurisdictions. Approval of a bicycle highway racing event shall be granted only under conditions which assure reasonable safety for all race participants, spectators, and other highway users, and which prevent unreasonable interference with traffic flow which would seriously inconvenience other highway users. Tests of endurance are not considered bicycle racing.
(SDCL ' 32-20B-7)
(B) Exemption from traffic laws. The municipality may exempt participants in an approved bicycle highway racing event on a highway under their jurisdiction from compliance with any traffic laws otherwise applicable thereto, provided that traffic control is adequate to assure the safety of all highway users.
(SDCL ' 32-20B-8)
SNOWMOBILES
' 77.20 SNOWMOBILE DEFINED.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
SNOWMOBILE. Any self propelled vehicle weighing less than 1,000 pounds and equipped with sled type runners or skis and endless belt type tread, or any combination thereof rather than with wheels and pneumatic tires, and which is designated for travel upon snow, land or ice.
(Prior Code, ' 10.24.010)
' 77.21 SAFETY REGULATION.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to operate a snowmobile in the city under the circumstances or in the manners following:
(1) At any time or place where there is less than an accumulation of four inches of snow, except on the regularly traveled portion of streets;
(2) At a speed greater than is reasonable or proper under all existing circumstances;
(3) At any time on public park property or recreation areas, without the express permission of the City Finance Officer, or on any public school property without the express permission of the Superintendent of Schools, or on private property without the express permission of the owner or resident;
(4) In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to be likely to endanger the person or property of another or cause injury or damage thereto;
Recreational Vehicles
5
(5) In such manner as to create any loud, or unnecessary or unusual noise likely to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of any other person;
(6) Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except when returning to the operator=s residence by the most direct route available; and(7) While under the influence of intoxicating liquors or drugs.
(B) Provided, however, the Public Safety Commissioner shall have authority to supervise and regulate events or programs conducted by the Recreation Board in which snowmobiles are used.
(Prior Code, ' 10.24.020) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 77.22 DRIVER=S LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall operate a snowmobile on a public street in the city of without having in his or her possession a valid driver=s license.
(Prior Code, ' 10.24.030) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 77.23 REGULATIONS APPLICABLE AT STREET INTERSECTIONS.
No operator of a snowmobile shall drive the same across any street except at an intersection of such street with another street or alley; and shall yield the right-of-way to all other vehicles approaching the intersection from any direction.
(Prior Code, ' 10.24.040) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 77.24 OPERATION ON SIDEWALKS AND PARKING PROHIBITED.
No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any public sidewalk nor upon the parking area within any platted street.
(Prior Code, ' 10.24.050) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 77.25 LIGHTING REQUIRED.
(A) All snowmobiles operated within the city shall be equipped with:
(1) Properly attached mufflers so designed as to minimize the noise of operation of the vehicle;
(2) Adequate brakes in good working condition;
(3) At least one headlight and one taillight; and
(4) A Adead man@ throttle in good working condition, being a device which disengages the motor from the driving track when the pressure on the accelerator or throttle is released.
(B) At all times during operation, whether during daylight or darkness, the operator of any snowmobile shall keep lighted the headlight and taillight thereon.
(Prior Code, ' 10.24.060) Penalty, see ' 70.99
Recreational Vehicles
6
' 77.26 AUTOMOBILE RULES OF THE ROAD APPLICABLE.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this subchapter, every operator of any snowmobile shall adhere to and observe all traffic signs and signals and all traffic rules and regulations imposed by statute or ordinance and applicable to other vehicles and shall obey all orders and directions of any police officer authorized to direct and regulate traffic.
(Prior Code, ' 10.24.070) Penalty, see ' 70.99
' 77.27 IMPOUNDMENT BY CHIEF OF POLICE.
The Chief of Police is authorized and directed to seize and impound, for a period of not to exceed seven days, any snowmobile operated by any person in violation of ' 77.22.
(Prior Code, ' 10.24.080)
' 77.28 TOWING CONVEYANCES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
It is unlawful for the operator of any snowmobile to tow any other vehicle, sled or conveyance except when the latter is closely and firmly attached to the snowmobile by means of a rigid towing bar or device so designed as to assure stability and control of both vehicles. (Prior Code, ' 10.24.090) Penalty, see ' 70.99
CHAPTER 78: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
I. Snow routes
SCHEDULE I. SNOW ROUTES.
The following streets in the city are designated as emergency snow routes.
Canwood Drive
From Fifth Street to Hiawatha Drive
Cedar Street
From Twelfth Street to Lynn Avenue
Dakota Street
From Fifth Street North to the city limits
Elder Street
From Cedar Street to Sanborn Street
Fifth Street
From West Industrial Road to Canwood Drive
Grant Street
From Fifth Street to Park Lane
Lincoln Street
From Ninth Street to Fifth Street
Lynn Avenue
From Dakota Street to Angel Lane
Ninth Street
From Pleasant Street to Dakota Street
Pleasant Street
From Twelfth Street to Third Street
Sanborn Street
From Elder Street to Park Lane South
Third Street
From Bridge Street to Lawler Street
West Industrial Road
From Fifth Street to West Innovation Street
(Prior Code, ' 10.08.105) (Ord. 1028, passed 2-2-2015) Penalty, see ' 74.99(B)
1
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
Animal Control Code
90.01 Licensing
90.02 Permits
90.03 Running at large
90.04 Nuisance
90.05 Animal care
90.06 Animal waste
90.07 Enforcement
90.08 Horses
90.09 Farm animals
Vicious Animals
90.20 Declaring a vicious animal
90.21 Exceptions to declaration
90.22 Notice to owner
90.23 Automatic declaration
90.24 Requirement by owner
90.25 Impoundment
90.26 Violation requirements
90.27 Exceptions to requirements
Rabies Control
90.40 Vaccination required
90.41 Report of rabies
90.42 Impoundment of animal that has bitten or attacked
90.43 Confinement of pet after attack upon person
90.44 Confinement of pet bitten by animal suspected of having rabies
90.45 Destruction of animal required
90.99 Penalty
ANIMAL CONTROL CODE
' 90.01 LICENSING.
Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having in custody of any dog or cat over three months of age within this municipality must obtain a license as herein provided.
(A) Written application for licenses shall be made to the Finance Officer which shall include name and address of applicant, description of the animal, the application fee which shall be set by resolution of the City Commission and rabies certificate.
(B) If not revoked, licenses for the keeping of dogs shall be for a period of two years, licenses for the keeping of cats shall be for a period of one year, commencing on the date the license is issued.
(C) Application for a license must be made after obtaining a dog or cat over three months of age, except
Animals
2
for nonresidents keeping a dog or cat within the municipality for no longer than 60 days.
(D) Upon acceptance of the license application and fee, the Finance Officer shall issue a durable tag with an identifying number and the year of issuance.
(E) Dogs and cats must wear identification tags at all times when off the premises of the owner.
(F) The Finance Officer shall maintain a record of identifying number of all tags issued and shall make this record available to the public.
(G) Persons who fail to obtain a license as required within the time period specified, will be subjected to a penalty of $10 to be paid in addition to any license fee.
(H) Licenses shall be issued after payment of the applicable fee as established by action of the City Commission.
(I) A duplicate tag to replace a lost or destroyed tag may be obtained by paying a fee set by resolution of the City Commission.
(J) No person may use any license for any animal other than the animal for which it was issued.
(Prior Code, ' 6.04.010) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018) Penalty, see ' 90.99
' 90.02 PERMITS.
(A) No person, partnership or corporation shall operate a commercial animal establishment or shelter without first obtaining a permit in compliance with this subchapter.
(B) The City Commission shall promulgate regulations for the issuance of permits in keeping with the provisions of this subchapter and other applicable laws.
(C) Upon showing by the applicant for a permit that he or she is willing and able to comply with the regulations promulgated by the City Commission, a permit shall be issued upon payment of the application fee.
(D) The permit period shall begin with the fiscal year and shall run for one year.
(E) If there is a change in ownership of a commercial animal establishment, the new owner may have the current permit transferred to his or her name upon payment of a $100 transfer fee.
(F) Annual permits shall be issued after payment of the applicable fee as established by the City Commission.
(G) Persons operating kennels for the breeding of dogs or cats which handle less than ten animals may elect to license such animals individually.
(H) Failure to obtain a permit before opening any facility covered in this section shall constitute a violation of this section and shall be subject to a penalty of $10 to be paid in addition to any permit fee.
(I) The City Police or his or her designated representative shall be permitted to inspect all animals and the premises where animals are kept at any time.
(J) If such inspection shows failure to comply with this section or any other sections of this subchapter, the City Commission may revoke any permit.
Animals
3
(K) Any person having had his or her permit revoked may not reapply for a period of 30 days. Each reapplication shall be accompanied by a $10 fee.
(Prior Code, ' 6.04.020) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018) Penalty, see ' 90.99
' 90.03 RUNNING AT LARGE.
(A) Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
AT LARGE.
(a) An animal when off or away from the premises and not under the control of the owner, possessor, keeper, agent, servant, or a member of its immediate family by a leash.
(b) An animal when on the premises of the owner, possessor, keeper, agent, or servant if not attended by a competent person unless that animal is chained, restrained, enclosed, or confined in a manner preventing it from leaving the premises.
(B) Generally. It is unlawful for any person to have an animal, which is owned, kept, harbored or under his, her or their control to be at large and to go in or upon the private property or premises of others or upon any public property.
(Prior Code, ' 6.04.030) Penalty, see ' 90.99
' 90.04 NUISANCE.
The following acts or omissions by an owner or custodian of an animal shall constitute a nuisance:
(A) Allowing an animal to bark, whine, howl or make loud noises excessively so as to annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health or safety of others;
(B) Allowing an animal to interfere with, obstruct or make it dangerous for persons or vehicles to travel on public rights-of-way; and
(C) Failing to keep a female animal that is in heat confined in a building, secure enclosure, veterinary hospital or boarding kennel so that it cannot attract or come into contact with another animal on public or private property except for controlled breeding purposes.
(Prior Code, ' 6.04.040) Penalty, see ' 90.99
' 90.05 ANIMAL CARE.
(A) No owner shall fail to provide his or her animals with sufficient good and wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed, and with humane care and treatment.
(B) No person shall beat, cruelly ill treat, torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight or other combat between animals or between animals and humans.
(C) No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal.
(D) No person shall crop a dog=s ears, except when a veterinarian issue a signed certificate that the
Animals
4
operation is necessary for the dog=s health and comfort, and in no event shall any person except a veterinarian perform such an operation.
(E) No person shall give away any live animal, fish, reptile or bird as a prize for, or as an inducement to enter any contest, game or other competition, or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or offer such vertebrate as an incentive to enter into any business agreement where the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade.
(F) Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible and shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal=s owner; in the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall at once report the accident to the Police Department.
(G) No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any animal, provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his or her own property common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substances.
(H) Cruelty to animals; right of entry: no person shall maltreat or abuse or neglect any animal or fowl. Any animal control officer finding an animal or fowl mistreated as described in this section shall have the power to lawfully enter the premises where the animal is kept and demand to examine such animal and to take possession of such animal when in his or her opinion requires humane treatment.
(Prior Code, ' 6.04.050) Penalty, see ' 90.99
' 90.06 ANIMAL WASTE.
The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of any excreta deposited by his or her animal(s) on public walks, recreation areas or on private property.
(Prior Code, ' 6.04.060) Penalty, see ' 90.99
' 90.07 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) The animal control officer or police officer may impound any animal found within the city in violation of any provision of this chapter. Once the owner of the animal is ascertained, the owner shall be notified of the impoundment within 24 hours.
(1) Animal control officers and police officers shall not be responsible for any injury or disease of any animal resulting from the enforcement of this chapter.
(2) Any impounded animal not claimed by the owner within five days after receiving notice shall become the property of the city and shall be placed for adoption in a suitable home or humanely euthanized.
(3) An owner reclaiming an impounded animal shall pay an impound fee, boarding fee and examination fee as set by resolution of the City Commission.
(4) Any person removing an animal from impound shall provide proof of current rabies vaccination and license before the animal will be released. In the event the animal is not vaccinated and licensed, proof of the vaccination and license must be provided to the city within 24 hours of release. If the proof is not brought in within 24 hours, the animal control officer or police officer may enter the premises where the animal is being kept and impound the animal until the above conditions are complied with.
(B) An owner of an animal who has violated a provision of this chapter shall pay a fine/fee to be set by resolution of the City Commission.
Animals
5
(C) Notice of impoundment, warning ticket or complaint may be served personally by a police officer or animal control officer, by prepaid first class mail, certified mail or by hand delivering it to the owner or custodian who was violating the provisions of this chapter, and such notice is deemed given at the time it is personally served or mailed.
(Prior Code, ' 6.04.070) Penalty, see ' 90.99
' 90.08 HORSES.
No person shall allow, bring, keep, harbor, maintain or ride any horse in or upon the city park or swimming pool area in the city, or upon any other person=s lawn or parkway other than his or her own, within the city.
(Prior Code, ' 6.04.080) Penalty, see ' 90.99
' 90.09 FARM ANIMALS.
(A) No person shall keep any live farm animals, including cattle, swine, sheep and other animals that are normally raised or kept on farms unless authorized by a conditional use permit. No person shall keep any live animals in a manner so as to cause a public nuisance within the city limits.
(B) No person shall keep any ducks, geese, turkeys, pheasants, quail, partridges, guineas, or other domestic fowl within the city limits, except for chickens kept pursuant to the provisions of this article.
(C) Definitions regarding chickens. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BROODING. The period of chicken growth when supplemental heat must be provided due to the bird=s inability to generate enough body heat.
CHICK. A baby chicken not more than six weeks old.
CHICKEN. A domesticated bird of the order of Galliformes in the genus of Galius (chickens) that serves as a source of eggs or meat.
COCKEREL. A young male chicken.
COOP. The structure for the keeping or housing of chickens permitted by the ordinance.
EXERCISE YARD. A larger fenced area that provides space for exercise and foraging for the birds when supervised.
HEN. A female chicken.
OFFICER. Any person designated by the city commission as an enforcement officer.
PULLET. A young laying chicken, less than one year old.
ROOSTER. A male chicken.
RUN. A fully enclosed and covered area attached to a coop where the chickens can roam unsupervised.
(D) Revocable permit. It is the purpose and intent of this section to permit the keeping and maintenance of
Animals
6
brooding chicks, pullets and hens for egg and meat sources in a clean and sanitary manner that is not a nuisance to or detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare of the community. The keeping and maintenance of brooding chicks, pullets and hens is permitted to all residents who apply for and obtain a permit from the city. All holders of the permit must comply with all requirements, limitations, or prohibitions of this article. Such permit may be revoked if the person holding the permit refuses or fails to comply with this chapter or with any state or local law governing cruelty to animals or the keeping of animals. Any revocation shall be effective after ten days following written notice thereof to the person or persons keeping or maintaining such chickens. Any person whose permit is revoked within ten days thereafter shall humanely dispose of all chickens being owned, kept, or harbored by such person.
(E) Investigation and enforcement. Officers designated by the City Commission shall have authority to investigate and enforce the provisions of this article, and no person shall interfere with or hinder such officer in the exercise of such powers.
(F) Limitations on the number and keeping of chickens.
(1) Chickens may be kept only within areas of the city zoned to permit single family dwellings as outlined: No more than eight hens shall be housed or kept on any one residential property. Residents may possess a like number of brooding OR pullet chicks intended for the cyclical replacement of hens, but not for the purpose of sale or resale. Once pullets reach full laying potential the flock numbers must be returned to no more than eight hens. Roosters and chicken breeding are prohibited. Cockerels must be culled from broods when identified.
(2) A separate coop is required to house the chickens together with a reasonably satisfactory exercise yard, run, or yard fencing so as to keep chickens confined at all times. Chicken facilities must be constructed and maintained to meet the following minimum standards:
(a) Must be located in the rear or side yard.
(b) Must meet the setbacks as required by the zoning district for structures on the real property. The housing of chickens on said property will require a no fee registration permit obtained at City Hall.
(3) Coop construction and materials must be adequate to prevent access by rodents. Coops must be maintained in good repair. Coops or cages housing chickens shall be kept at least 20 feet from the door or window of any dwelling of an occupied structure other than the owner=s dwelling. Coops and manure storage shall be kept 20 feet from streams, tributaries, ditches, storm water management facilities, drop inlets, or other storm drainage areas that would allow fecal matter to enter any city storm drainage system or stream. Dumping chicken manure into the city=s storm drainage system is prohibited.
(4) Chickens may not be housed in a residential house or an attached or detached garage, except for brooding purposes only.
(5) (a) All premises on which chickens are kept or maintained shall be kept clean from filth, garbage, and any substances which attract rodents. The coop and its surrounding area must be cleaned frequently enough to control odor. Manure and coop waste shall not be allowed to accumulate in a way that causes an unsanitary condition or causes odors detectible on another property.
(b) Manure and coop waste that is not composted or immediately spread as fertilizer must be secured and double bagged in solid waste bags and kept in a solid waste container. Chickens shall not be kept in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance to the occupants of adjacent property.
(6) Except for chickens properly slaughtered for consumption, dead chickens must be disposed of within 48 hours after death. Legal forms of chicken carcass disposal include off-site burial, off-site incineration or rendering. All slaughtering of chickens shall be conducted so as not to be visible to the public or adjacent property owners and occupants.
Animals
7
(7) All grain and food stored for the use of the chickens shall be kept in a rodent proof container.
(8) Chickens shall be kept so that visibility is substantially obstructed to the traveling public or surrounding property owners.
(Ord. 1054, passed 7-16-2018)
VICIOUS ANIMALS
' 90.20 DECLARING A VICIOUS ANIMAL.
An animal may be declared to be vicious by the Police or his or her designated agent, under the following guidelines:
(A) An animal which, in a vicious or terrorizing manner approaches in an apparent attitude of attack, or bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks a person or other animal upon the streets, sidewalks or any public grounds or places; or
(B) An animal which, on private property, in a vicious or terrifying manner, approaches in an apparent attitude of attack, or bites, or inflicts injury, or otherwise attacks a mail carrier, meter reader, serviceman, journeyman, delivery man or other employed person, or any person or animal who is on private property by reason of permission of the owner or occupant of such property or who is on private property by reason of a course of dealing with the owner of such private property.
(Prior Code, ' 6.05.01) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 90.21 EXCEPTIONS TO DECLARATION.
No animal may be declared vicious if the injury or damage is sustained to any person or animal who is committing a willful trespass or other tort upon premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal, or who was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or was committing or attempting to commit a crime.
(Prior Code, ' 6.05.02)
' 90.22 NOTICE TO OWNER.
When an animal is declared to be vicious, the Police or his or her designated agent shall notify the owner of such declaration in writing. Said notice shall be served either in person or by mailing such notice by certified mail.
(Prior Code, ' 6.05.03) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 90.23 AUTOMATIC DECLARATION.
Any mammal, reptile or fowl which is not naturally found in a domestic setting, and because of its size or other characteristic would constitute danger to human life or property shall automatically be deemed vicious.
(Prior Code, ' 6.04.04) Penalty, see ' 90.99
' 90.24 REQUIREMENT BY OWNER.
The owner of a vicious animal shall comply with the following:
Animals
8
(A) Register the animal as vicious with the city and present proof of rabies vaccination within five days of receiving the notice and presenting proof of rabies vaccination on or before March 1 of each and every year thereafter;
(B) Whenever the animal is outdoors and attended, the animal shall be muzzled, on a leash no longer than six feet, and under the control of a person over 18 years of age;
(C) When the animal will be outdoors and unattended, the animal must be locked in an escape-proof kennel approved by the animal control officer. Minimum standards shall include the following:
(1) Fencing materials shall not have openings with a diameter of more than two inches;
(2) Any gates within such pen or structure shall be lockable or of such design to prevent the entry of children or the escape of the animal;
(3) The required pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top. If the pen or structure has no permanent bottom secured to the sides, the sides shall be imbedded into the ground or concrete; and
(4) The pen or structure may be required to have double exterior walls to prevent the insertion of fingers, hands or other objects.
(D) A universal sign denoting a vicious animal shall be displayed on the kennel or enclosure and on a place visible from the sidewalk or road adjacent to the property where the animal is kept.
(Prior Code, ' 6.04.05) Penalty, see ' 90.99
' 90.25 IMPOUNDMENT.
The vicious animal shall be impounded by the Police or his or her designated agents at the owner=s expense until all requirements of ' 90.24 are complied with. If the requirements are not complied with within ten days after giving notice to the owner as provided in this subchapter, the animal shall be euthanized in a humane manner and proof of euthanasia filed with the city office.
(Prior Code, ' 6.04.06) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 90.26 VIOLATION REQUIREMENTS.
If a vicious animal has been running at large, or bites a person or bites another animal, the animal shall be seized by the city or its agents using such means as are necessary and summon the owner to appear in court to show cause why this animal shall not be destroyed. If the animal cannot be captured, it may be killed.
(Prior Code, ' 6.04.07)
' 90.27 EXCEPTIONS TO REQUIREMENTS.
This subchapter shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions or circuses.
(Prior Code, ' 6.04.08)
Animals
9
RABIES CONTROL
' 90.40 VACCINATION REQUIRED.
(A) Any dog, cat or other animal susceptible to rabies, held as a pet in this city, that is six months of age or older, is required to be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian or other qualified individual approved by the health authority. All subsequent rabies vaccinations as required by the health authority shall also be given at the appropriate intervals.
(B) Any owner of a dog, cat or other animal susceptible to rabies that is acquired by birth, purchase or adoption shall have that animal vaccinated within one month of such acquisition or when that animal reaches the age of six months.
' 90.41 REPORT OF RABIES.
Any person who knows of an animal infected with rabies shall report the same to the animal control officer with a description of the animal and the name and address of the owner, if known.
' 90.42 IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMAL THAT
HAS BITTEN OR ATTACKED.
(A) When an owner of an animal has been notified that animal has bitten or attacked any person, within 24 hours, that owner shall place the animal under the care and control of the animal control officer for a period of not less than ten days.
(B) At the end of the ten-day period, the animal control officer shall examine that confined animal and if cleared, the animal may be reclaimed by the owner. The owner is to pay all expenses incident to the confinement and examination.
(C) If, during confinement, the animal shows signs of rabies or it is known that animal has been exposed to rabies, then that animal may be confined in excess of the ten-day period and for as long a period as is necessary to determine a diagnosis.
(D) Any animal that has bitten or attacked and cannot be captured, may be destroyed in such a way as not to destroy the head so that it may be submitted to a laboratory for a rabies examination.
(E) (1) Within 24 hours of the bite, if an owner of the animal that has bitten or attacked can provide proof of a current rabies vaccination given within 30
days prior to the date of the bite or attack, then he or she may prevent the euthanization of the animal by order of the health authority or a veterinarian from the Board of Health.
(2) Any animal that has bitten any person may be euthanized by order or the health authority, if in its opinion and based on sound medical judgements, a greater risk is present if the animal is not euthanized. The health authority shall take into consideration the following factors:
(a) History of the animal, including its exposure to rabies;
(b) Vaccination record of the animal;
(c) Health of animal;
Animals
10
(d) Nature, seriousness and location of bite;
(e) Circumstances surrounding the bite, including whether or not the bitten animal provoked it;
(f) Tolerance of person bitten to vaccination treatments.
' 90.43 CONFINEMENT OF PET AFTER
ATTACK UPON PERSON.
The department may serve written notice upon the owner of any dog or cat which has attacked or bitten a person to confine the animal at the owner=s expense upon his or her premises or at a municipal pound or other place designated in the notice for a period of at least ten days after the animal has attacked or bitten any person. The department may examine the animal at any time within the ten-day period of confinement to determine whether such animal shows symptoms of rabies. In the case of any pet other than a dog or cat, which has attacked or bitten a person, the department may serve written notice upon the owner of such animal that the owner shall have the animal euthanized immediately and submit the brain to an approved laboratory for rabies examination.
(SDCL ' 40-12-5)
' 90.44 CONFINEMENT OF PET BITTEN BY ANIMAL SUSPECTED OF HAVING RABIES.
The department may serve written notice upon the owner of a dog or cat known to have been bitten by an animal known or suspected of being affected by rabies, requiring the owner to confine such dog or cat for a period of not less than six months. However, if such dog or cat had been properly treated with an antirabic vaccine, confinement shall be for a period of not less than three months. In the case of any pet other than a dog or cat, the department may serve written notice upon the owner of such animal that the owner shall have the animal euthanized immediately.
(SDCL ' 40-12-6)
' 90.45 DESTRUCTION OF ANIMAL
REQUIRED.
If the animal control officer determines that rabies exists in any animal, the board may kill such animal and any animal there is reason to believe an animal or person has been bitten by any animal affected with rabies.
' 90.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of ' 10.99.
(B) Any person or persons, firms or corporations violating ' 90.08 shall be punished by a fine of the maximum amount permitted by law or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period not to exceed 30 days, or by both fine and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, ' 6.04.080)
1
CHAPTER 91: NUISANCES
Section
Nuisances Generally
91.01 Prohibited and defined
91.02 Notice to abate
91.03 Noncompliance
91.04 Abatement by city; costs levied against premises
91.05 Abandoned property
91.06 Storage of firewood on residential property
91.07 Disposition of unclaimed property
Abandoned Vehicles
91.20 Definitions
91.21 Nuisance declared
91.22 Removal of motor vehicles
91.23 Vehicles on private property
Rubble Site
91.35 Schedule of operation
91.36 Employee=s responsibilities
91.37 Loads to be secured; exceptions
91.38 Prohibited items
91.39 Permitted items
91.40 Grass clippings and garden waste; commercial enterprises
91.41 Rate schedule
91.42 Terms and conditions of operation
91.43 Removal restricted
Mowing and Discharge of Mowing Waste
91.55 Mowing required
91.56 Discharge of mowing waste regulated
91.57 Notice to stop discharge
91.99 Penalty
NUISANCES GENERALLY
' 91.01 PROHIBITED AND DEFINED.
(A) No person, owner, occupant or person in charge of any house, building, lot or premises shall create, commit, maintain or permit to be created, committed or maintained any public nuisance as defined in division (B) below, or as enumerated in division (C) below.
(B) Within the meaning of this section, a public nuisance consists of doing an act without lawful authority, or omitting to perform a duty, within the corporate limit of the city, or in any public grounds, or parts belonging to the city, which act or omission either:
Nuisances
2
(1) Annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others;
(2) Offends contemporary community moral standards;
(3) Does or tends to lower the value of adjacent real estate because of unsightliness;
(4) Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct, or renders dangerous for passage any lake or river, bay, stream, canal or basin, or any public park, square, street, alley, right-of-way or highway; or
(5) In any way renders other persons insecure in life, or in the use of property and which affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood or any considerable number persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon the individuals may be unequal.
(C) Nuisances shall include, but are not limited to the following enumerations:
(1) Imperfect plumbing. Any imperfect, leaking, unclean or filthy sink, water closet, urinal or other plumbing fixture in any building used or occupied by human beings;
(2) Garbage and refuse. Depositing, maintaining or permitting to be maintained or to accumulate upon any public or private property any animal or vegetable matter which attends the processing, preparation, transportation, cooking, eating, sale or storage of meat, fish, vegetables, fruit and all other food or food products found within the city which are likely to cause or transmit disease, or which may be a hazard to health;
(3) Impure water. Any well or other supply of water used for drinking or household purposes which is polluted or which is so constructed or situated that it may become polluted;
(4) Carcasses of animals and hides. All carcasses of animals remaining exposed one hour after death, excepting legally caught and tagged game, which shall be 24 hours; and all undressed hides left deposited in any open place;
(5) Manure. The accumulation of manure or livestock waste unless it be is in a securely tied, closed, biodegradable package placed in a leak-proof, metal container with a tight fitting lid;
(6) Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes not injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation;
(7) Offensive odors. No person may permit offensive, foul odors or stenches that are dangerous or offensive to be emitted from their property;
(8) Stagnant water. Any water or liquid in which mosquito larvae exist supports the proliferation of mosquitoes;
(9) Poison ivy. Permitting poison ivy to grow upon any public or private property;
(10) Polluting river. Throwing or leaving any dead animal or decayed animal or vegetable matter or any slops or filth whatever, either solid or fluid, into any pool of water or into the Big Sioux River;
(11) Privies and cesspools. Erecting or maintaining any privy or cesspool except such sanitary privies and cesspools the plans of which are approved by the Board of Health;
(12) Garbage handling improperly. Throwing or letting fall on or permitting to remain on any street, alley or public ground any manure, garbage, rubbish, filth, fuel or wood while engaged in handling or removing any such substances;
Nuisances
3
(13) Bonfires. Burning, causing or permitting to be burned upon any private or public property any garbage, manure, rubbish, waste material, used building materials or paper without an approved incinerator. An approved incinerator is an object constructed of concrete, masonry or steel that has a completely enclosed combustion chamber and equipped with a permanently attached spark arrestor which is constructed of iron, heavy mesh wire or other noncombustible material with an opening not larger than one-half inch;
(14) Burning of garbage. Burning upon any private or public property any garbage, offal, excrement, fresh or decaying fruits, vegetables, fish, meat or bone, or any foul putrid or obnoxious liquid or substance;
(15) Private sanitary landfill. Operating or permitting the operation of a private sanitary landfill without controlling rodents, insects and litter; without compacting and covering solid waste each day; and without preventing and prohibiting burning;
(16) Rubbish. Depositing, maintaining, or permitting to be maintained or to accumulate upon any public or private property any combustible refuse matter such as papers, sweepings, rags, grass, tree branches, wood shavings, wood, magazines, cardboard and the like;
(17) Waste material. All non-combustible inorganic matter such as earth, sand, ashes, glass, stone in excess of 12 inches in diameter, concrete, mortar, metals, tin cans and similar material;
(18) Animal waste. Any accumulation of waste manure or straw resulting from the transportation, housing or confining of animals not awaiting transportation, sale or slaughter in a duly licensed stockyard, sale pavilion or hatchery;
(19) Litter. Garbage, rubbish, waste material or livestock waste improperly disposed of by discarding, abandoning, allowing to accumulate, scattering or depositing outside an approved container;
(20) Vegetation. All weeds or plants declared to be primary or secondary noxious weeds by the State Weed and Pest Control Commission, all weeds declared to be locally noxious, and all other weeds or grasses existing upon any lot or parcel of land in the city to a greater height than eight inches, or which have gone or are about to go to seed, shall be deemed noxious, dangerous and unhealthful vegetation, and are declared to be a nuisance. Fallen tree limbs, diseased or dead trees, and dead tree limbs shall also be declared dangerous and a nuisance. This shall not apply to vegetation which is not a primary or secondary noxious weed and is being grown as a crop, livestock pasture, native prairie display garden, wildflower display garden or other nature area designated by the director of parks and recreation;
(21) Appliances, fixtures and furniture. Appliances, fixtures and furniture including, but not
limited to, items such as stoves, refrigerators, freezers, sinks, cabinets and other kitchen appliances, bedroom furniture, mattresses, tables, chairs, clothes washing and drying machines, bathroom appliances and fixtures, light fixtures, washtubs, lawn mowers, tillers, chainsaws, snow blowers and garden equipment when such items are stored, collected, piled or kept and are not stored inside a building; except that patio furniture and other furniture designed for outdoor use shall not constitute a nuisance;
(22) Junk, inoperable or unlicensed motor vehicles. Junk, inoperable or unlicensed motor vehicles; motor vehicle bodies; and disassembled parts thereof; disassembled bicycles and bicycle parts, and other mechanical machines or motors or parts thereof when such items are stored, collected, accumulated or piled and are not stored inside a building. This division (C)(22) shall not apply to any motor vehicle held in a solid fenced enclosure on the licensed premises of a licensed junk dealer;
(23) Abandoned property. Any deteriorated, wrecked or derelict property in unusable condition, having no value other than nominal scrap or junk value, if any, and which has been left unprotected outside of a permanent structure from the elements, and shall include, without being so restricted, deteriorated, wrecked, inoperative or partially dismantled motor vehicles (as provided in '' 91.20 through 91.23), trailers, boats, campers, trailers, motors, machinery, water heaters, furnaces and any other similar articles in such condition;
(24) Used building materials. Used building materials and waste, including, but not limited to, such items as
Nuisances
4
lumber, lath, gypsum board, pallets, plaster, old iron or other metal, concrete, brick and tile, piles of rock, sand, dirt or gravel when not used for landscaping purposes, doors, windows, and scrap or salvage building materials, when such items are stored, collected, piled or kept and are not stored inside a building; except for building materials that are temporarily stored for work on the premises authorized by a valid building permit obtained for the premises; provided, that such used or waste building materials shall not remain on the premises more than 30 days after the expiration of the building permit; and
(25) Graffiti. Any writing, printing, marks, signs, symbols, figures, designs, inscriptions or other drawings which are scratched, scrawled, painted, drawn or otherwise placed on any exterior surface of a building, wall, fence, sidewalk, curb or other structure on public or private property and which has the effect of defacing the property.
(Prior Code, ' 8.16.010)
' 91.02 NOTICE TO ABATE.
(A) Whenever the city is informed of an alleged nuisance, the Finance Officer or his or her designee shall investigate the allegation. If the employee/agent finds that a nuisance exists, written notice shall be given to the person creating, permitting or maintaining such nuisance setting forth the type of nuisance and the date when the nuisance shall be abated.
(B) Such notice may be served personally, by prepaid first class mail or by posting a copy of such notice upon the premises where the nuisance exists, and such notice is deemed given at the time it is personally served, mailed or posted. Notice by posting may be used only when the owner or agent thereof is not known or cannot be found, and his or her post office address is unknown.
(C) The owner of record, tenant, resident or responsible party of any property found to have been in violation of health, nuisance or other code violations shall be jointly and severally liable for a civil penalty or penalties imposed by the city pursuant to the Chapter 35 of this code of ordinances. If, after due inquiry, the city is unable to determine who is the owner or responsible party for the violation(s) and related fines, the city may elect to levy the fine as a direct assessment against the subject property.
(D) (1) Any person may appeal a notice to abate by filing at City Hall within ten days from the date of the notice to abate a written appeal containing:
(a) A brief statement detailing with reasonable exactness the grounds of the appeal;
(b) The appellant=s name, address and telephone number; and
(c) A dated signature of the appellant or an agent on his or her behalf and, if signed by an agent, the name, address and telephone number of the agent.
(2) Upon receipt of any appeal filed, the Finance Officer shall inform the City Commission of the appeal at the next regular meeting of the City Commission.
(3) As soon as practicable after receiving the written appeal, the City Commission shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing of the appeal. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given by the Finance Officer at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing to the appellant.
(4) Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this section shall constitute a waiver of his or her rights to hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or any portion, thereof.
(5) Enforcement of any notice to abate and/or order shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed.
(Prior Code, ' 8.16.020) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
Nuisances
5
' 91.03 NONCOMPLIANCE.
It shall be both unlawful and cause for the issuance of a civil penalty for any person who has been provided notice to fail to abate or correct nuisance conditions or code violations under the provisions of city ordinances within the time allowed in such notice. (Prior Code, ' 8.16.030) Penalty, see ' 91.99
' 91.04 ABATEMENT BY CITY; COSTS LEVIED AGAINST PREMISES.
When there exists on private property a condition which has been determined a nuisance by a city enforcement employee, a notice will be served in the matter specified in ' 91.02. The notice shall describe the matter to be removed or corrected and require removal or correction thereof within a given time period. Any additional nuisance conditions not previously observed, or that may have been added to the property after the city=s inspection(s), must also be removed or corrected within the time frame specified in the notice of violation. If at the end of time frame specified in the notice, the nuisance has not been removed or corrected, the city shall have authority to cause the correction or removal and disposition. All costs incurred by the city for the removal and disposition of the nuisance or for correcting the nuisance shall be assessed, levied and collected as a special assessment against the premises from which it was removed, in the manner provided by law for the levy and collection of other special assessments.
(Prior Code, ' 8.16.040)
' 91.05 ABANDONED PROPERTY.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to take possession of any article or property abandoned, left or placed on any public or private property, and if the property is believed to have any value other than nominal value, to keep it and make an attempt to find the owner thereof, and to retain any such article so taken up by it. It shall be the duty of such departments to maintain a place for the keeping of any such article until the article shall be claimed or otherwise disposed of, and the city shall have a lien thereon for the reasonable expenses incurred and value or cost of the time and effort necessary in taking, removing and storing such article and for the value of the storage in keeping thereof and may retain possession until any and all such liens are discharged.
(Prior Code, ' 8.16.050)
' 91.06 STORAGE OF FIREWOOD ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.
(A) For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CORD OF WOOD. A unit of quantity for cut fuel wood, equal to 128 cubic feet in a stack measuring four feet by four feet by eight feet.
FIREWOOD. Neatly stacked burnable wood cut into lengths of approximately one to two feet that require no further cutting of the wood prior to placing it in a wood burner or fireplace.
(B) No person shall store firewood on residentially zoned property, except for use on the premises and in conformance with the following:
(1) No more than six cords of firewood shall be stored at any time, without the written approval of the Fire Department;
(2) (a) The firewood must be cut and neatly stacked and may not be stacked closer than five feet to any property line and not higher than six feet from grade; and
(b) Exception: firewood may be cut and neatly stacked on or near the lot line or against a fence, provided that it is no higher than the fence and that it is located a minimum of six feet from any structure on adjacent property.
Nuisances
6
(3) All brush, debris and refuse from processing of firewood shall be promptly removed from the premises.
(Prior Code, ' 8.16.060) Penalty, see ' 91.99
' 91.07 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.
If any abandoned article or property has been or is kept for 30 days or more without being claimed, the
article or property may be disposed of by the Police Department according to the following.
(A) If of no value or slight value, it may be destroyed.
(B) If of slight value but of use to the city, it may be turned over to the proper department and used until claimed, and the charges hereby made a lien thereon shall be regarded as a sufficient offset to the value of any such use.
(C) If of more than $200 value, it may be sold by sealed bid by such department ten days after notice of such sale has been given by one publication in a legal newspaper published in the city, and the city may be a bidder at such sale. If on any such sale an amount is bid in excess of the charges or lien of the city, such excess shall be deposited to the General Fund of the city.
(Prior Code, ' 8.16.070)
ABANDONED VEHICLES
' 91.20 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, as defined in this section, which is left unattended on any public street, alley, public place or parking lot within the city for a longer period than 24 hours without notifying the Chief of Police and making arrangements for the parking of such motor vehicle.
CITY. The City of Canton.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, as defined by this section, which does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate or plates or the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative or discarded, and this term shall also include any car bodies, wrecked cars, abandoned or unusable cars, or equipment of any type.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along the ground and shall include, but not be limited to automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf-carts, campers and trailers.
PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any real property within the city which is privately owned and which is not public property.
(Prior Code, ' 8.04.010)
' 91.21 NUISANCE DECLARED.
The presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked or partially dismantled motor vehicle or
Nuisances
7
parts thereof, on private or public property is declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter. This section shall not apply to any motor vehicle enclosed within a building on private property or to any motor vehicle held in connection with a business enterprise, lawfully licensed by the city and properly operated in the appropriate business zone, pursuant to the zoning laws of the city, or to any motor vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city or authorized by the city.
(Prior Code, ' 8.04.020)
' 91.22 REMOVAL OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked or partially dismantled motor vehicle of any kind, whether attended or not, upon any public property within the city or upon private property without permission of the landowner or tenant.
(A) Removal.
(1) Removal from public property. Whenever any police officer finds an abandoned motor vehicle or an unattended motor vehicle that is in a wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked or partially dismantled condition on public property within the city, he or she is authorized to place written notice on the vehicle that it will be removed to a garage or place of safety unless the owner removes the vehicle from public property within 24 hours of the giving of the notice. After the expiration of the 24-hour period, the vehicle may be removed by the removal agency to a garage or place of safety. Nothing in this section precludes the police from immediately removing a motor vehicle which causes an obstruction or hazard to traffic.
(2) Removal from private property. The city may remove abandoned motor vehicles from private property after obtaining consent from the landowner or tenant.
(B) Notice to owner. It shall be the duty of the city to notify, by certified mail, the registered owner, and if encumbered, the lien holder, of the removal, storage and present location of any motor vehicle removed under the provision of this subchapter and that the vehicle can be recovered by payment of costs incident to its removal and storage.
(C) Lien for costs. The city shall have a possessory lien upon any motor vehicle removed under the provisions of this subchapter for the costs in taking custody of and storing such motor vehicle.
(D) Vesting of title. If, after 30 days from the date of mailing or publishing the notice of removal and storage provided for by this section, the motor vehicle shall remain unclaimed, the title to such motor vehicle shall be vested in the city and such motor vehicle may be sold at public auction or disposed of in any manner as may be provided by the City Commission. The proceeds of any such sale shall first be applied to the cost incurred in the enforcement of
this subchapter with the balance to be deposited to the general fund of the city.
(Prior Code, ' 8.04.030) Penalty, see ' 91.99
' 91.23 VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
No person owning, in charge of or in control of any real property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked or partially dismantled motor vehicle of any kind to remain on such property longer than five days; nor shall any such person allow more vehicles than there are licensed drivers residing on such property, plus two, to remain or be stored on such property, if such property is zoned residential property, longer than five days, unless the vehicles are in an enclosed building or structure.
(A) Notice. Whenever it comes to the attention of the Police Department that any person has an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked or partially dismantled motor vehicle on his or her property, a notice in writing shall be served upon such person requesting the removal of such motor vehicle in the time specified in this chapter.
(B) Responsibility. Upon proper notice, the owner of the abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked or
Nuisances
8
partially dismantled motor vehicle and the owner or occupant of the private property on which the same is located, either or all of them, shall be responsible for its removal.
(C) Procedure. The Police Department shall give notice of removal to the owner or occupant of the private property where it is located. It shall constitute sufficient notice, when a copy of same is sent by certified mail to the owner or occupant of the private property at his or her last known address.
(D) Contents of notice. The notice shall contain the request for removal within five days after the receipt of such notice, and the notice shall advise that
failure to comply with the notice to remove shall be a violation of this section.
(Prior Code, ' 8.04.040) Penalty, see ' 91.99
RUBBLE SITE
' 91.35 SCHEDULE OF OPERATION.
The rubble site will be operated according to a schedule adopted by the City Commission. The management and operation of the rubble site is the responsibility of the Public Works Commissioner. The daily operation will be accomplished by the rubble site employee, under the direct supervision of the Director of Public Works.
(Prior Code, ' 8.20.010) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 91.36 EMPLOYEE=S RESPONSIBILITIES.
(A) The rubble site employee will be responsible for the day to day operation and collection of fees established by the City Commission.
(B) Employee will assure that only those items allowed, will be deposited in the rubble site.
(C) Employee will keep material pushed into the pit, and covered as required by the permits referred to in ' 91.42. Employee is responsible for day to day clean up of the entire site.
(D) Employee has the right to reject any arriving load at employee=s discretion, regardless of point of origin.
(Prior Code, ' 8.20.020)
' 91.37 LOADS TO BE SECURED; EXCEPTIONS.
(A) All vehicles used for transporting rubbish and other waste materials that are acceptable, shall be loaded and secured so that no materials shall fall or be blown off the vehicle while in transit.
(B) All vehicles used to transport rubbish, and other waste materials that are acceptable shall remove any covering in view of the rubble site employee so that they may be directed to the proper area for dumping.
(C) The rubble site employee shall have the authority to assess a fee in addition to the normal rubble site fee on all unsecured loads or improperly loaded vehicles in an amount established by resolution of the City Commission.
(D) Exceptions to this portion of the subchapter include concrete, steel, white goods or tires if loaded in such a manner that such items are not likely to fall or be blown from the vehicle while in transit.
(Prior Code, ' 8.20.030)
Nuisances
9
' 91.38 PROHIBITED ITEMS.
The following items are prohibited from being deposited in the rubble site:
(A) Regulated asbestos containing materials as defined in the National Emissions Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants (NESHAP) 40 C.F.R. Part 61;
(B) Petroleum products or petroleum contaminated soils;
(C) Herbicide/pesticide containers;
(D) Car batteries;
(E) Ash;
(F) Waste tires;
(G) Putrescible wastes;
(H) Yard wastes;
(I) Hazardous or special wastes, as defined by ARSD 74:27:07:01;
(J) Car bodies;
(K) Garbage of any kind;
(L) Decomposing corn, soybeans or other crops;
(M) Chemicals/ toxic waste;
(N) Animal waste;
(O) Woven or barbed wire; and
(P) Any other items prohibited by EPA statutes, rules and regulations.
(Prior Code, ' 8.20.040) Penalty, see ' 91.99
' 91.39 PERMITTED ITEMS.
(A) The following items are permitted to be deposited in the rubble site:
(1) Rubble;
(2) Trees and brush, grass and leaves in a designated composting pile;
(3) Construction/demolition debris; and
(4) Wood products.
(B) White goods, waste tires, yard waste and car batteries may be stored in a separate area for periodic removal.
(C) All permitted items must be deposited in accordance with rules and dump fee schedule adopted by the City Commission.
(Prior Code, ' 8.20.050) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
Nuisances
10
' 91.40 GRASS CLIPPINGS AND GARDEN WASTE; COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISES.
Commercial mowing and yard services are prohibited from dumping off grass at the city grass convenience station located behind the city shop adjacent to the Big Sioux River during hours of operation. All commercial operators may drop off grass and yard service waste at the city rubble site in conformance with rules and rates approved by the City Manager.
(Prior Code, ' 8.20.060) Penalty, see ' 91.99
' 91.41 RATE SCHEDULE.
The rate schedule will be reviewed and established periodically, and is on file in the office of the Finance Officer.
(Prior Code, ' 8.20.070) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 91.42 TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF OPERATION.
The rubble site shall be operated under the terms and conditions of the permits issued by the Department of Environment and Natural Resources and by state and federal law.
(Prior Code, ' 8.20.080)
' 91.43 REMOVAL RESTRICTED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to be removed from the rubble site of this city any articles or material of any kind after the articles or materials have been deposited there, with the exception of the following.
(A) The city reserves the right to enter into contracts with persons for the right of resource recovery and removal at the rubble site.
(B) The city reserves the right to enter into contracts with persons for the removal of wood and wood waste products from the rubble site.
(C) The city reserves the right to allow removal of finished compost and wood chips.
(D) The city reserves the right to recover materials for use at city facilities.
(Prior Code, ' 8.20.090) Penalty, see ' 91.99
MOWING AND DISCHARGE OF MOWING WASTE
' 91.55 MOWING REQUIRED.
All weeds and plants declared to be primary or secondary noxious weeds by the State Weed and Pest Control Commission, all weeds declared to be locally noxious and all other weeds or grasses existing upon any lot or land in the city shall be mowed on or before attaining a height greater than eight inches.
(Prior Code, ' 8.70.010) Penalty, see ' 91.99
' 91.56 DISCHARGE OF MOWING WASTE REGULATED.
It is unlawful to discharge any mowing waste on to the pavement or gutter portion of any public street.
(Prior Code, ' 8.70.020) Penalty, see ' 91.99
Nuisances
11
' 91.57 NOTICE TO STOP DISCHARGE.
(A) Whenever the city is informed of or observes a prohibited discharge into the street or gutter, an employee of the city may issue a notice of violation or a warning ticket of the violation of this section.
(B) Such notice or warning ticket may be served personally, sent by prepaid first class mail, or by posting a copy of such notice upon the premises where the violation occurred and such notice is deemed given at the time it is personally served, mailed or posted.
(C) Any notice of violation or warning ticket issued by an agent/employee of the city may be appealed to the City Commission in writing within ten days after the notice of violation was served personally, sent by prepaid first class mail, or by posting a copy of the notice upon the premises.
(Prior Code, ' 8.70.030)
' 91.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of ' 10.99.
(B) Any person, or persons, violating the provisions of '' 91.35 through 91.44, will be guilty of a Class II misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of the maximum amount permitted by law, or imprisonment in the county jail not longer than 30 days, or shall receive both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, ' 8.20.110)
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Fireworks
92.01 Possession unlawful
92.02 Discharge unlawful
92.03 Possession in a public place
92.04 Public displays; permit required
FIREWORKS
' 92.01 POSSESSION UNLAWFUL.
It is unlawful for any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or other association, to sell, possess for sale, deliver or give away, to any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or other business association, any firecrackers, blank cartridges, roman candles, rockets or other fireworks or explosives or other materials or explosives from which firecrackers, blank cartridges or other fireworks may be manufactured, except caps for toy cap pistols, at any place within the corporate limits of the city or within any property owned by the city located outside of the corporate limits of the city.
(Prior Code, ' 8.08.010) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 92.02 DISCHARGE UNLAWFUL.
It is unlawful for any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or other association to shoot, discharge or explode, or cause to be shot, discharged or exploded, any firecrackers, roman candles, rockets, blank cartridges, fireworks or other explosives used for fireworks or fire display in the city or within any property owned by the city and located outside of the corporate limits of the city. (Prior Code, ' 8.08.020) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 92.03 POSSESSION IN A PUBLIC PLACE.
It is unlawful for any individual, firm, partnership, corporation or other association to have any of such firecrackers, rockets, blank cartridges, fireworks, or other explosives used for fireworks or fire display in his or her possession in a public place in the city, except any such that are contained in a sealed original package in the condition it was shipped or transported with the wrapping and seal of the package unbroken. Such possession of any such package with the wrapping or seal broken shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, ' 8.08.030) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 92.04 PUBLIC DISPLAYS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a public display and discharge of fireworks, provided such individual, firm, partnership, corporation or other business association, planning to make a public display and discharge of fireworks shall first secure a written permit from Finance Officer upon proper written application.
(Prior Code, ' 8.08.040) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
1
CHAPTER 93: SWIMMING POOLS
Section
93.01 Compliance required
93.02 Private pool
93.04 Permit required
93.05 Drawings, plans and permits
93.06 Recirculation pools
93.07 Structural design
93.08 Fences
93.09 Outlets
93.10 Electrical requirements
93.11 Commercial pools
' 93.01 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
It is unlawful to construct, maintain, install or enlarge any swimming pool in the city except in compliance with all the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, ' 8.24.010) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 93.02 PRIVATE POOL.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
SWIMMING POOL. A receptacle for water, or an artificial pool for water having a depth at any point of more than two feet, intended for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings, and including all appurtenant equipment.
(Prior Code, ' 8.24.020)
' 93.03 LOCATION.
No portion of a swimming pool outside a building shall be located at a distance of less than stipulated by the established building codes and all pool construction shall be in compliance with the building codes. No pools shall be constructed in a front yard.
(Prior Code, ' 8.24.030) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 93.04 PERMIT REQUIRED.
(A) It is unlawful to proceed with the construction, installation, enlargement or alteration of any private residential swimming pool and appurtenances thereto within the city unless permits therefore shall have first been obtained from the city. In those zoning districts where a conditional use permit is granted for a swimming pool, the conditional use permit shall continue for so long as the swimming pool and appurtenances thereto are constructed and left in place on a permanent basis, or the conditional use permit is revoked.
(B) In those zoning districts where a conditional use permit is granted for a swimming pool that is not constructed and left in place on a permanent basis, the conditional use permit shall be effective on a year-to-year basis subject to the following requirements.
Swimming Pools
2
(1) The pool and fence are inspected on a yearly basis within one week of the pool and fence construction.
(2) The cost of the yearly inspection fee, in the amount of $25, has been paid by the party that has been granted the conditional use.
(3) In the event that the pool, in any given year, is not constructed or the yearly pool inspection fee is not paid, then in either event, the conditional use permit is automatically revoked.
(Prior Code, ' 8.24.040) Penalty, see ' 10.99' 93.05 DRAWINGS, PLANS AND PERMITS.
(A) All drawings and plans for the construction, installation, enlargement or alteration of any swimming pool and appurtenances shall first be presented to the Building Inspector for examination and approval as to proper location and construction.
(B) All plans and drawings shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one-eighth of an inch to the foot, on paper or cloth, in ink or by some process that will not fade or obliterate. All distances and dimensions shall be accurately figured and drawings made explicit and complete, showing the lot line and including information pertaining to the pool, walk and fence construction, water supply system, drainage and water disposal systems, and all appurtenances pertaining to the swimming pool. Detail plans and vertical elevations shall also be provided in accordance with the Building Code.
(C) All private residential swimming pools, appurtenances, water supply and drainage systems shall be constructed in conformity with the approved plans.
(Prior Code, ' 8.24.050) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 93.06 RECIRCULATION POOLS.
All swimming pools shall be of the recirculation type in which circulation of the water is maintained through the pool by pumps, the water drawn from the pool being clarified and disinfected before being returned to the pool. Equipment shall be provided for the disinfection of all pool water.
(Prior Code, ' 8.24.060) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 93.07 STRUCTURAL DESIGN.
Swimming pools shall be designed to withstand the pressure of the earth when the pool is empty.
(Prior Code, ' 8.24.070) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 93.08 FENCES.
All outdoor swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence. All fence openings or points of entry into pool area enclosure shall be equipped with gates. The fence and gates shall be four feet in height above the grade level and shall be constructed of a minimum number nine gauge woven wire mesh corrosion-resistant material, or non-climbable wooden fence. All gates shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices placed at the top of the gates.
(Prior Code, ' 8.24.080) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 93.09 OUTLETS.
If pools are equipped with facilities for completely emptying the pool, then the discharge of pool water shall be into the storm sewer. There shall be an air break between the pool drain and the service sewer line. Every swimming pool shall have a re-circulating system with an hourly capacity equal to the pool volume divided by eight.
(Prior Code, ' 8.24.090) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 93.10 ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS.
Swimming Pools
3
All electrical installations provided for, installed and used in conjunction with private residential swimming pools, shall be in conformance with the ordinance regulating electrical installation, and pursuant to the provisions as set forth in Article 680 of the National Electric Code of 2014 Edition, Amendments thereto.
(Prior Code, ' 8.24.100) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 93.11 COMMERCIAL POOLS.
The design of any commercial pool for public use must be submitted to the State Department of Health for approval. After obtaining written approval from the State Department of Health, an application for permit may be submitted to the city.
(Prior Code, ' 8.24.110) Penalty, see ' 10.99
1
CHAPTER 94: LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS
Section
94.01 Definition
94.02 Storage, handling, transportation and installation
94.03 Storage prohibited within corporate limits
94.04 Additional restrictions
94.05 Containers not allowed in city limits
94.06 Permit required
94.07 Dispensing and storing in unsuitable tanks; prohibited
94.08 Exceptions
' 94.01 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS (LP GAS). A material which is composed predominantly of the following hydrocarbons or mixtures of them: propane, propylene, butane and butylenes.
(Prior Code, ' 8.30.010)
' 94.02 STORAGE, HANDLING, TRANSPORTATION AND INSTALLATION.
The storage, handling and transportation of LP gas and the installation of LP gas equipment shall be in accordance with the International Fuel Gas Code and NFPA 58, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. City Hall maintains a copy of these codes for examination by the public during regular business hours.
(Prior Code, ' 8.30.020)
' 94.03 STORAGE PROHIBITED WITHIN CORPORATE LIMITS.
No storage of LP gases shall be permitted within the corporate limits of the city in containers of more than 1,000 gallons water capacity for residential uses. Bulk storage of LP gas containers up to 15,000 gallons water capacity may be permitted in I-1 zone with a conditional use permit.
(Prior Code, ' 8.30.030) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 94.04 ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS.
That in addition to the other restrictions imposed by ' 3.1.1.1 of NFPA Code 58, no LP gas containers installed outside of buildings, whether of the portable type replaced on an exchange basis, or permanently installed and refilled at the installation, shall be located no less than 25 feet from the nearest important building, group of buildings, or adjoining property lines. Exception: any 20 pounds or less tanks used for recreational purposes (portable grills and the like).
(Prior Code, ' 8.30.040)
' 94.05 CONTAINERS NOT ALLOWED IN CITY LIMITS.
Unless authorized pursuant to a conditional use permit obtained pursuant to the procedure provided for in ' 18.01 (zoning ordinance for the city), or as otherwise provided in this chapter, no liquefied petroleum gas containers shall be allowed at any time within the city limits of the city.
(Prior Code, ' 8.30.050)
Liquefied Petroleum Gas
2
' 94.06 PERMIT REQUIRED.
No liquefied petroleum gas container (unless otherwise provided in this chapter) shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered without a building permit therefore issued by the Public Safety Commissioner or designee.
(Prior Code, ' 8.30.060) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 94.07 DISPENSING AND STORING IN UNSUITABLE TANKS; PROHIBITED.
No person, firm or corporation shall introduce liquefied petroleum gas into a dispensing or storage tank in the city knowing that the dispensing or storage tank, piping or installation is unsuited to handle the product, is in an unsafe operating condition or is in violation of federal law, state law, federal or state rules and regulations or city ordinances.
(Prior Code, ' 8.30.070) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 94.08 EXCEPTIONS.
(A) Exceptions:
(1) Construction and temporary heating. Portable LP gas containers are allowed to be used in buildings or areas of buildings undergoing construction or for temporary heating as set forth in '' 3-4.3, 3-4.4, 3-4.5 and 3-4.7 of NFPA 58;
(2) Use with self-contained torch assemblies. Portable LP gas containers are allowed to be used to supply approved self-contained torch assemblies or similar appliances. Such containers shall not exceed a water capacity of two and one-half pounds (one kg); and
(3) Industrial vehicles and floor maintenance machines. Containers on industrial vehicles and floor maintenance machines shall comply with NFPA 58, ' 3-6.
(B) Any exception not specifically excepted in this chapter may be allowed if authorized by the then current edition of the NFPA 58 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code.
(Prior Code, ' 8.30.080)
1
CHAPTER 95: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Section
Sidewalk Construction
95.001 Supervision of sidewalk construction
95.002 Specifications
95.003 Safety barricades
95.004 Permit required
95.005 Construction and Repair by City
95.006 Removal of existing sidewalk
95.007 Repealed
95.008 Wheelchair curb ramps
95.009 Installation
95.010 Variance
Standards for Curbs, Gutters and Pavement
95.020 Curb and gutter
95.021 Paving
95.022 Permit required
95.023 Notice to install or replace paving, curb and gutter; procedure on failure or refusal
95.024 Removal of existing paving, curb and gutter
95.025 Wheelchair curb ramps
95.026 New subdivisions
95.027 Notice to repair curb and gutter
95.028 Removal of existing curb and gutter
95.029 Removal of existing curb and gutter and replacement
95.030 Removal of tree roots during curb and gutter repair
Excavations
95.045 Permit required
95.046 Bond and insurance proof
95.047 Application for permit
95.048 Bond or insurance
95.049 Deposit forfeited
95.050 Supervision of excavations
95.051 Guarding excavations
95.052 Interfering with barricades
95.053 Backfilling excavations
95.054 Minimum charge asphalt service cuts
95.055 Service cuts after November 15 until frost goes out in the spring
95.056 Excavations near streets
Snow and Ice Removal
95.070 Duty to Remove Snow and Ice
95.071 Notice
95.072 Disposal of Snow and Ice
95.073 City May Remove
95.074 Special Assessment for Snow and Ice Removal
95.075 Violation
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places
2
95.999 Penalty
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
' 95.001 SUPERVISION OF SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION.
The building and construction of all sidewalks within the limits of the city shall be done under the direct supervision of the Public Works Commissioner or his or her duly appointed agent or designee.
(Prior Code, ' 12.08.010) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 95.002 SPECIFICATIONS.
(A) The construction of all sidewalks, whether by assessment through the city, direct contract with the city or by contract of owner, shall be performed strictly in accordance with specifications for sidewalks adopted by the City Commission and shall be constructed and composed of SD DOT M6 mix concrete four inches thick throughout with the exception of six inches thick through driveways having a minimum 28 day compressive strength of 4,000 pounds per square inch.
(B) All sidewalks so constructed shall be a minimum of five feet in width. All new and replacement sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet in width and tapered in height in the last five-foot section to match the preexisting abutting sidewalk, unless otherwise specified by the city.
(C) All new and replacement sidewalks that abut upon a pre-existing sidewalk that is less than five feet in width shall comply with the following rules.
(1) The land owner constructing or replacing the sidewalk shall taper the last five-foot section to match the pre-existing sidewalk in height.
(2) The connection and transition to and with the adjacent pre-existing sidewalk shall be installed and constructed in form and manner as directed by the Public Works Commissioner or his or her duly appointed agent or designee.
(D) In the business district of the city, a resolution of the City Commissioners shall specify the necessity and the width of the sidewalk. All sidewalks shall be laid in conformity to the lines and grades as ordered and established under the supervision and direction and subject to the approval of the Public Works Commissioner or his or her duly appointed agent.
(Prior Code, ' 12.08.020) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018) Penalty, see ' 95.999
' 95.003 SAFETY BARRICADES.
During construction and reconstruction of a sidewalk, the entire construction or reconstruction area shall be protected by safety barricades. The suitable safety barricades, fences, signs and signals, in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, shall be approved by the city so as to prevent injury to persons, animals or vehicles on account of such work.
(Prior Code, ' 12.08.030) Penalty, see ' 95.999
' 95.004 PERMIT REQUIRED.
(A) Before any sidewalk is constructed within the limits of the city by any contractor, person for the owner of the property, or the owner, the contractor, the person performing the work for the owners of the property or the owner of the property must first secure a permit therefore from the city.
(B) Driveway approach permits will only be granted to bonded and insured contractors or individuals who provide to the city the proper bonding and insurance documentation that meets the city=s minimum requirements.
(Prior Code, ' 12.08.040)
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places
3
' 95.005 CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR BY CITY.
The city may cause a sidewalk to be constructed or repaired, and assess the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk to pay their share of the costs pursuant to state law. (ORD. 1073, Passed 7/6/2020)
' 95.006 REMOVAL OF EXISTING SIDEWALK.
An existing sidewalk shall not be removed from any property without replacing the sidewalk in accordance with the specifications set forth in this chapter. A variance may be granted from this requirement, except if the property is located in a residential, general business, or commercial district. (ORD. 1073, Passed 7/6/2020)
' 95.007 REPEALED (ORD. 1073, Passed 7/6/2020)
' 95.008 WHEELCHAIR CURB RAMPS.
Any new or replacement sidewalk, curb or gutter installed in both business and residential areas shall be installed in such a manner as to make transition from street to sidewalk easily negotiable for handicapped persons in wheelchairs in accordance with the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act, being 42 USC 1201 et seq., as amended from time to time. The property owner is responsible for the installation, maintenance and replacement of wheelchair curb ramps.
(Prior Code, ' 12.08.080)
' 95.009 INSTALLATION.
If a property does not have exiting sidewalks, the owner of the property shall construct and install sidewalks on the property adjacent to all streets when a residence or building is constructed on said property. (ORD. 1073, Passed 7/6/2020)
' 95.009 VARIANCE.
The owner of real property may apply for a variance from any of the requirements in this chapter. The city commission may grant a variance when it is not feasible or reasonable to enforce the specifications or other requirements of this chapter due to special conditions or circumstances regarding the property, and only if, granting the variance would not substantially affect the safety of the public. Any variance previously granted may be revoked or amended by the city commission if the use of the property or circumstances change in a manner that now justify enforcement of this chapter. (ORD. 1073, Passed 7/6/2020)
STANDARDS FOR CURBS, GUTTERS AND PAVEMENT
' 95.020 CURB AND GUTTER.
The construction of all paving, curb and gutter, whether done by direct contract with the city or by contract with the abutting property owner, shall be done strictly in accordance with specifications for paving, curb and gutter adopted by the City Commission and all new or replaced curb and gutter shall be of portland cement construction, not less than 3,000 psi, with curb six inches in width, and extending six inches above the gutter. Gutter shall be of six and one-half inch thickness, extending 24 inches into the street. The city may direct that curb and gutter be constructed or replaced and that the cost be assessed against any abutting property owner.
(Prior Code, ' 12.12.010) Penalty, see ' 95.999
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places
4
' 95.021 PAVING.
All streets, roads and alleys constructed or reconstructed shall be surfaced to the appropriate specifications approved by the City Commission. The city may direct that paving be constructed or replaced and that the costs be assessed against the abutting property owner(s).
(Prior Code, ' 12.12.020) Penalty, see ' 95.999
' 95.022 PERMIT REQUIRED.
Before any paving, curb and gutter is constructed within the limits of the city by any contractor or person for the owner of the abutting property, such constructor or person must first secure a permit therefore from the city.
(Prior Code, ' 12.12.030) Penalty, see ' 95.999
' 95.023 NOTICE TO INSTALL OR REPLACE PAVING, CURB AND GUTTER; PROCEDURE ON FAILURE OR REFUSAL.
When any paving, curb and gutter is not constructed or replaced by the abutting owners, in cases in which the City Commissioners have by resolution or otherwise ordained or decided that paving, curb and gutter should be constructed within a time limit set by a notice to construct from the city, then in that event the City Commissioners shall fix the day on which they will receive bids for the construction and give notice thereof by publication in an official newspaper of the city in at least two publications thereof during two consecutive weeks. Such notice shall describe the lot or lots along which paving, curb and gutter construction is to be made, the specifications thereof and the materials of which the paving, curb and gutter shall be constructed. At the time fixed for the receipt of bids, the City Commissioners shall contract with the lowest and best bidder or bidders, but the City Commissioners may reserve the right to refuse any and all bids and fix another time and may give another notice for receiving bids and entering into the contract. The cost of paving, curb and gutter as aforesaid shall be assessed against the abutting lots as a special assessment.
(Prior Code, ' 12.12.040)
' 95.024 REMOVAL OF EXISTING PAVING, CURB AND GUTTER.
It is unlawful for any person or property owner to remove an existing paving, curb and gutter without replacing the paving, curb and gutter in accordance with the specifications set forth in this chapter.
(Prior Code, ' 12.12.050) Penalty, see ' 95.999
' 95.025 WHEELCHAIR CURB RAMPS.
Any new or replacement paving, curb and gutter installed in both business and residential areas shall be installed in such a manner as to make transition from street to sidewalk easily negotiable for handicapped persons in wheelchairs in accordance with the provisions of SDCL ' 9-46-l.2 as amended.
(Prior Code, ' 12.12.060) Penalty, see ' 95.999
' 95.026 NEW SUBDIVISIONS.
Any new subdivision, within the city shall provide paving, curb and gutter which shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications established by the City Commission or city ordinance.
(Prior Code, ' 12.12.070) Penalty, see ' 95.999
' 95.027 NOTICE TO REPAIR CURB AND GUTTER.
When any curb and gutter is required to be installed by city resolution or City Commission action or is required to be replaced by city resolution or City Commission action and the owner has failed to do so within the time frame established
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places
5
by the city, the City Commission may by resolution or otherwise direct that curb and gutter be constructed or replaced within a time limit set by a notice to construct from the city. In the event the property owner fails to construct or replace the curb and gutter within the time specified, then in that event, the City Commissioners shall cause the same to be constructed as follows: the City Commissioners shall fix a day on which they will receive bids for the construction and give notice thereof by publication in an official newspaper of the city by two publications thereof during two consecutive weeks. Such notice shall describe the lot or lots along which the curb and gutter construction is to be made, the width thereof and the materials of which the curb and gutter shall be composed. At the time fixed, the City Commissioners shall contract with the lowest and best bidder or bidders, but the City Commissioners may reserve the right to refuse any and all bids and fix another time and give another notice for receiving bids and entering into contracts. The cost of curb and gutter as aforesaid shall be assessed against the abutting lots as a special assessment.
(Prior Code, ' 12.12.080) Penalty, see ' 95.999
' 95.028 REMOVAL OF EXISTING CURB AND GUTTER.
It is unlawful for any person or property owner to remove an existing curb or gutter without replacing the curb and gutter in accordance with the specifications set forth in this chapter unless otherwise authorized by the city in writing.
(Prior Code, ' 12.12.090) Penalty, see ' 95.999
' 95.029 REMOVAL OF EXISTING CURB AND GUTTER AND REPLACEMENT.
The property owner shall be responsible for the cost and expense of removing and replacing any curb and gutter that is ordered removed and replaced by the city.
(Prior Code, ' 12.12.100) Penalty, see ' 95.999
' 95.030 REMOVAL OF TREE ROOTS DURING CURB AND GUTTER REPAIR.
The property owner is responsible for replacement curb and gutter raised, pushed out of alignment or damaged by tree roots. In those instances where curb and gutter replacement is caused by tree root growth, the replacement and repair process requires the cutting and grinding of tree roots to a minimum depth of 12 inches below the bottom of the curb and gutter to allow for new root growth.
(Prior Code, ' 12.12.110) Penalty, see ' 95.999
EXCAVATIONS
' 95.045 PERMIT REQUIRED.
No person shall make or cause to be made, any excavation in or under any street, parking, sidewalk, alley or public ground, or remove any earth soil, paving, gravel or material therefrom, without first having obtained a permit therefore as hereinafter provided.
(Prior Code, ' 12.16.010) Penalty, see ' 95.999
' 95.046 BOND AND INSURANCE PROOF.
Any person or firm, doing any excavation work on property owned by the city, shall provide evidence of bonds or insurance as provided in ' 95.048. Sidewalk construction directly adjacent to the abutting property owner shall be the only work excluded from this provision.
(Prior Code, ' 12.16.020) Penalty, see ' 95.999
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places
6
' 95.047 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
Application for a permit shall be made to the Finance Officer who shall issue the permit subject to review of the Superintendent of Public Works. Fee for the application for all excavations shall be set by resolution of the City Commission. The application shall be filed and the fee paid before any work may begin.
(Prior Code, ' 12.16.030) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018) Penalty, see ' 95.999
' 95.048 BOND OR INSURANCE.
A bond or suitable insurance including:
(A) Collapse and underground coverage, frequently known as XCU coverage;
(B) Product liability and completed operations coverage for a period of three years after excavation; and
(C) Liability coverage providing a minimum of $500,000, is to be approved by the Finance Officer, and certificate thereof is to be filed with the Finance Officer. The location, reason for excavation and extent of work will be part of the permit application.
(Prior Code, ' 12.16.040)) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018) Penalty, see ' 95.999
' 95.049 DEPOSIT FORFEITED.
If, at any time within three years after the completion of excavation or work, subject to this
chapter, the engineer finds that the work for which the bond/insurance was provided, does not stand up satisfactorily, or has not been properly back filled, he or she shall notify the depositor/contractor in writing, that the work must be put in satisfactory condition within five working days or the Commission will cause such work to be done and the expense thereof will be borne by the bonded/insured contractor(s).
(Prior Code, ' 12.16.050)) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018) Penalty, see ' 95.999
' 95.050 SUPERVISION OF EXCAVATIONS.
The contractor shall notify the Superintendent of Public Works so that the Superintendent, under the general direction of the Public Works Commissioner may supervise all excavations made for any purpose in the streets, alleys or public grounds. All excavations shall be backfilled in the manner herein specified. The contractor shall contact all utilities and locate all utility lines, prior to any work being done.
(Prior Code, ' 12.16.060) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 95.051 GUARDING EXCAVATIONS.
Any person receiving a permit to make excavations, in or upon any streets, alleys, sidewalks, public thoroughfares or grounds, shall during the progress and continuance of the work, erect around the same, both day and night, suitable guards, fences, barricades, lanterns and signals, so as to prevent injury to persons, animals, or vehicles as a result of such excavations. Such lighting devices shall be kept lighted from sunset to sunrise.
(Prior Code, ' 12.16.070) Penalty, see ' 95.999
' 95.052 INTERFERING WITH BARRICADES.
No person shall move, interfere with, break, destroy or carry away any barricades, lamp/lights used by the city or contractor in guarding unsafe or dangerous places in the maintenance or repair of
streets, or, in any lawful work being carried on by the city or contractor.
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places
7
(Prior Code, ' 12.16.080) Penalty, see ' 95.999
' 95.053 BACKFILLING EXCAVATIONS.
All excavations will be backfilled with crushed gravel and be compacted with a mechanical tamper in six inch lifts to meet city compaction standards. These compaction standards are 98% compaction. If the Superintendent of Public Works or Public Works Commissioner do not feel proper compaction is being attained, a certified testing company will be called in, and, if compaction is not to city standards, trench will be re-excavated and refilled, until it meets standards. The cost of this testing and refilling will be borne by contractor. If compaction standard was reached on first attempt, by contractor, cost of testing will be borne by the city. All excess dirt, gravel, rock, rubble will be removed to a suitable disposal area designated by the city. Work is to be left in as near original condition as is possible, and will be inspected by the Superintendent of Public Works on completion of work. All backfill gravel will be provided by the city and billed back to the contractor. Backfill gravel is stockpiled at the public works yard and will be picked up by the contractor at this location. All asphalt will be provided and installed by the city and be billed to the contractor at a price per square foot agreed upon prior to start of work by contractor.
(Prior Code, ' 12.16.090) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 95.054 MINIMUM CHARGE ASPHALT SERVICE CUTS.
(A) The city will replace asphalt surface cuts at a minimum charge of $100 for cuts up to two square yards and $3 per square foot for each additional square foot.
(B) Any asphalt surface cuts that need to be made during the fall and winter months when only cold mix is available shall be charged an additional
$100 for cuts up to two square yards and an additional $3 per square foot for each additional square foot.
(Prior Code, ' 12.16.100)
' 95.055 SERVICE CUTS AFTER NOVEMBER 15 UNTIL FROST GOES OUT IN THE SPRING.
Permits during this period will be on an emergency basis only. No excavations will commence until permit receives an approval given by the Superintendent of Public Works. There will be no exceptions.
(Prior Code, ' 12.16.110)
' 95.056 EXCAVATIONS NEAR STREETS.
It is unlawful for any person, owner, or any occupant of any lot to make or cause to be made any excavation on the lot adjacent to any street, alley, public thoroughfare or grounds, or traveled road, or roadway, except the same be securely guarded so as to prevent the injury of any person or animal passing upon or along the same.
(Prior Code, ' 12.16.120) Penalty, see ' 95.999
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
§ 95.070 DUTY TO REMOVE SNOW AND ICE
(a) The owner or person in possession of any property abutting on any sidewalk shall keep the sidewalk free from snow and ice and shall remove any snow or ice from the sidewalk within 48 hours after the termination of any snow fall, snow
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places
8
or ice accumulation.
(b) The owner or person in possession of any property abutting upon any sidewalk which ends at an intersection or crosswalk shall maintain the sidewalk free from snow and ice to the edge of the street. Snow and ice deposited on the sidewalk in the street removal process shall be removed within 48 hours of being deposited. (Ordinance 1064, passed 10/7/2019)
§ 95.071 NOTICE
The city shall notify all owners or persons in possession of property abutting on sidewalks to keep the sidewalks free from snow and ice and to remove the same within 48 hours after every fall or accumulation of snow or ice. The notice need not be given personally but may be given generally through the official newspaper annually. The notice shall provide that each owner or person in possession is required to keep the sidewalk in front of the premises free and clear from snow and ice. It shall further provide that if the owner or person in possession fails to remove the snow or ice within 72 hours of the falling or accumulation hereof, that the city may cause the snow or ice to be removed and charge the cost to the abutting property. (Ordinance 1064, passed 10/7/2019)
§ 95.072 DISPOSAL OF SNOW AND ICE
The property owner, person in possession or person removing snow or ice from any sidewalk, public or private driveway, parking lot or parking area shall dispose of accumulated snow and ice upon the property as follows.
(a) Snow and ice shall not be deposited on any sidewalk or in any park.
(b) Snow and ice shall not be deposited so as to obstruct or interfere with the passage or vision of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(c) In the area designated Central Business District, snow and ice shall not be deposited upon any public street or alley that has been cleared of snow by the grading of snow away from the curb or the picking up and carrying away of snow by the city. Snow and ice may be deposited on the street until it has been cleared.
The Central Business District is defined as Cedar Street to Dakota Street and Fourth Street to Seventh Street.
(d) In all areas outside of the Central Business District, no snow may be blown, pushed, or otherwise placed on any street at any time (both before and after the street has been plowed). (Ordinance 1064, passed 10/7/2019)
§ 95.073 CITY MAY REMOVE
If the owner or person in possession of property fails to remove the snow or ice from the sidewalks within the time specified, the city may have the snow or ice removed and charge the cost thereof against the abutting property each time the snow or ice is removed. They will have the opportunity to pay the bill before it goes to the special assessment process described in 95.074. (Ordinance 1064, passed 10/7/2019)
§ 95.074 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FOR SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
(a) The cost to the city for the removal of snow and ice each year shall be certified to the city Finance Officer on or before the first day of September of each year.
(b) The Finance Officer shall prepare an estimate of the assessment against each lot for the removal of snow and ice for the preceding season including the expense of levying the special assessment against each lot. The estimates shall be submitted to the City Commission.
(c) Upon the filing of the assessment roll with the Finance Officer, the governing body shall fix a time and place of hearing upon the same, not less than 20 days from the date of filing. The Finance Officer shall than publish a notice of the time and place of hearing in the official newspaper at least one week prior to the date set for the hearing. The notice shall describe the reason why the special assessment is levied, the date of filing of the assessment roll, the time and place of the hearing thereon, and that the roll will be open for public inspection at the office of the Finance Officer, and shall refer to the special assessment roll for further particulars.
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places
9
(d) The Finance Officer shall also mail a copy of the notice, by first-class mail, to the owner or owners of any property to be assessed for the snow and ice removal, at the address as shown on the records of the assessor. The mailings shall be at least one week prior to the date set for the hearing. The owner or person in possession may appear at the hearing to protest the assessment and to give reasons why the assessment should not be levied.
(e) Pursuant to the hearing, the City Commission shall approve and file the assessment roll with the Finance Officer. After approval and filing with the Finance Officer, the assessment roll shall be a special lien against the property described and shall be collected in a like manner as for special assessments for public improvements. (Ordinance 1064, passed 10/7/2019)
§ 95.075 VIOLATION
It is unlawful to violate any provision of this subchapter. (Ordinance 1064, passed 10/7/2019)
§ 95.999 PENALTY
(a) Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of '10.99.
(b) Any owner, lessee, occupant or person in charge who shall fail, neglect or refuse to remove snow and ice as directed in ' 95.070 through '95.075, or who shall violate any of the provisions of ' 95.070 through 95.075, or who shall resist or obstruct the City or their designee, in the removal of snow and ice shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of the maximum amount permitted by law and each day on which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Prior Code, ' 12.20.070) (Ordinance 1064, passed 10/7/2019)
1
CHAPTER 96: RIGHT-OF-WAY CONSTRUCTION AND USE PERMITS
Section
Declaration of Findings and Purpose; Scope
96.001 Title
96.002 Findings and purpose
Definitions
96.015 Definitions
Right-of-Way Administration
96.030 Registration and right-of-way occupancy
96.031 No construction without registration
96.032 Grant of privilege
96.033 Registration information
96.034 Reporting obligations
96.035 Unregistered facilities
96.036 Future uses
96.037 Abandoned and unused facilities
Right-of-Way Permits
96.050 Permit requirement
96.051 Permit applications
96.052 Issuance of permit; conditions
96.053 Permit fees
96.054 Joint applications
Construction and Restoration
96.065 Location of facilities
96.066 Least disruptive technology
96.067 Special exceptions
96.068 Relocation of facilities
96.069 Right-of-way restoration
96.070 Damage to other facilities
96.071 Installation requirements
96.072 Inspection
96.073 Other obligations
Enforcement of Permit Obligation
96.085 Denial of permit
96.086 Work done without a permit
96.087 Revocation of permits
Right-of-Way Construction and Use Permits
2
Right-of-Way Bonds
96.100 Right-of-way bond
96.101 Purposes
96.102 Form
Indemnification and Liability
96.115 City does not accept liability
96.116 Registrant or permittee indemnifies city
General Provisions
96.130 Nonexclusive remedy
96.131 Reservation of regulatory and police powers
96.132 Damage caused by defects; responsibility
Cross-reference:
Park use regulations, see Ch. 99
Street trees and shrubs, see Ch. 98
Streets, sidewalks and public places, see Ch. 96
DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND PURPOSE; SCOPE
' 96.001 TITLE.
This body of regulations shall be known as the ACanton Right-of-Way Construction and Administration Ordinance.@
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.010)
' 96.002 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
(A) In order to provide for the health, safety and well being of its citizens, as well as to ensure the structural integrity of its streets and the use of the right-of-way, the city strives to keep its right-of-way in a state of good repair and free from unnecessary encumbrances. Although the general population bears the financial burden for the upkeep of the right-of-way, a primary cause for the early and excessive deterioration of its right-of-way is the frequent excavation by persons whose equipment is located therein.
(B) Right-of-way obstruction is a source of frustration for merchants, business owners and the general population, which must avoid these obstructions or change travel plans because of them. Persons whose facilities are located within the right-of-way are the primary cause of these frequent obstructions.
Right-of-Way Construction and Use Permits
3
(C) The city and other public entities have invested millions of dollars in public funds to build and maintain the right-of-way. The city recognizes that some persons, by placing their equipment in the right-of-way and charging the citizens of the city for goods and services delivered thereby, are using this property held for the public good. Although such services are often necessary or convenient for citizens, such persons receive revenue and/or profit through the use of public property.
(D) Where roads are being constructed or reconstructed to city standards, existing facilities
within the right-of-way which conflict with the proposed construction may have to be modified or relocated.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.020)
DEFINITIONS
' 96.015 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
APPLICANT. Any person requesting permission to excavate, obstruct, or construct in a right-of-way. APPLICANT does not include commercial vehicles or materials.
APPLICATION. The process by which an applicant submits a request to locate, maintain, or remove facilities in the right-of-way.
CITY COST. The direct and indirect costs, including loss of pavement life, borne by the city for pavement management, traffic management, risk management, financial management, cost recovery, infrastructure oversight, budget analysis, recordkeeping, legal assistance, systems analysis, application processing and checking, issuing permits, inspecting job sites, creating and updating mapping systems, and performing all of the other tasks required by this code, including other costs the city may incur in managing the provisions of this code.
CONSTRUCT. To excavate, install poles, install signs or install facilities, other than landscaping, on, above or under any part of the right-of-way.
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT or PERMIT. The permit which must be obtained before a person may excavate, obstruct, construct, repair or remove facilities in a right-of-way.
EMERGENCY. An occurrence, which demands immediate action to prevent significant environmental damage or loss of life, health, property or essential public services, including the re-erecting of critically needed traffic control signs or devices.
EXCAVATE. To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or penetrate any part of a right-of-way.
Right-of-Way Construction and Use Permits
4
FACILITIES. Any tangible thing located in any right-of-way, but shall not include sidewalks and private driveway approaches, water sprinkler systems, invisible dog fences, mail boxes, boulevard plantings, gardens, private sewer and water hookup or repair in the right-of-way.
IN. When used in conjunction with right-of-way, means over, above, in, within, on or under a right-of-way.
OBSTRUCT. To place any tangible object in a right-of-way so as to hinder free and open passage over that or any part of the right-of-way.
PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a permit to construct, excavate or obstruct a right-of-way has been granted by the city.
PERSON. Any natural or corporate person, business association or other business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any kind, a utility, a successor or assign of any of the foregoing, or any other legal entity.
PRIVILEGE. The legal entitlement of a person to use the right-of-way in the city for the purposes of carrying on its business. A PRIVILEGE for the purpose of this chapter does not include, and does not refer to, a license, permit or franchise. PRIVILEGE shall not include the use of the right-of-way for purposes not in furtherance of the furnishing of utility services.
PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION. The South Dakota Public Utilities Commission or any successor organization thereto.
REGISTRANT. Any person who:
(1) Has or seeks to have its facilities located in any right-of-way; or
(2) In any way occupies or uses, or seeks to occupy or use, the right-of-way or any facilities located in the right-of-way.
RESTORATION. The process by which a right-of-way is returned to a condition as good as, or better than, its condition before the construction.
RESTORATION FEE. An amount of money paid to the city by a permittee to cover the cost of restoration.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. The surface and space above and below any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to, any section line right-of-way, public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, river, tunnel, viaduct, bridge, park or any other place, area or real property owned by or under the control of the city. RIGHT-OF-WAY includes the standard ten-foot utility easement platted in the front ten feet of platted lots or any easements acquired by the city through the platting process or any other acquisition.
Right-of-Way Construction and Use Permits
5
RIGHT-OF-WAY BOND. A bond posted to ensure proper and complete construction and repair of a permitted facility pursuant to a permit.
SERVICE DROPS. Those segments of a utility system that connect the end-user of that utility to the utility distribution system. These SERVICE DROPS are normally radial in nature and serve individual sites or structures.
SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION. An application made to construct, excavate or obstruct more of the right-of-way than was allowed in the permit, or to extend a permit that had already been issued.
UNDERGROUND FACILITIES. All lines, cables, conduits, posts, tanks and any other facilities owned or operated by persons other than the city which are located wholly or partially underneath right-of-way.
UTILITY. Any water, sewer, gas, drainage or culvert pipe and any electric power, telecommunication, signal, communication or cable television conduit, fiber, wire, cable or operator thereof, other than utilities operated by the city.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.030)
RIGHT-OF-WAY ADMINISTRATION
' 96.030 REGISTRATION AND RIGHT-OF-WAY OCCUPANCY.
Each person who occupies uses or seeks to occupy or use the right-of-way for any facilities located in the right-of-way, or who has or seeks to have facilities located in any right-of-way shall register with the Finance Officer. Any person that currently maintains facilities in the right-of-way on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall register pursuant to ' 96.033 with the city within 90 days of the effective date of said ordinance. Any person whose facilities use right-of-way to connect two or more facilities which are not part of a continuous utility system shall register prior to installation of the facilities, but are not required to file an annual registration.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.040) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 96.031 NO CONSTRUCTION WITHOUT REGISTRATION.
No person may construct, install, repair, remove, relocate or perform any other work on, or use any facilities or any part thereof, located in any right-of-way without being registered with the city. Planting and maintaining vegetation in the
right-of-way is exempt from the requirements of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.050) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Right-of-Way Construction and Use Permits
6
' 96.032 GRANT OF PRIVILEGE.
(A) Any person required to register under ' 96.031, that furnishes utility services or that occupies, uses or places its facilities in the right-of-way, is granted a privilege to do so, so long as it complies with all other requirements of law.
(B) The granting of such privilege is expressly conditioned on, and is subject to, continuing compliance with all provisions of law.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.060)
' 96.033 REGISTRATION INFORMATION.
(A) The information provided to the city at the time of registration shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) The registrant=s name, address, telephone, e-mail address and facsimile number;
(2) The name, address, telephone, e-mail address and facsimile number of a local representative who shall be available at all reasonable times;
(3) (a) Proof that the registrant has secured the insurance specified below. All insurance secured by the registrant under the provisions of this section shall be issued by insurance companies acceptable to the city. The insurance specified in this section may be in a policy or policies of insurance, primary or excess. Certificates of all required insurance shall be provided to the city:
1. Worker=s compensation insurance with statutory limits of the worker=s compensation laws of the state and Coverage B: Employer=s Liability covering operations of the registrant. This shall include Aother states insurance@ so as to include all states not named on the declarations page of the insurance policy, but excepting monopolistic state fund states. The available limits for Coverage B: Employer=s Liability shall not be less than $1,000,000 each accident, $1,000,000 occupational disease - policy limits;
2. Commercial general liability insurance providing coverage not less than that of the standard commercial general liability insurance policy (Aoccurrence form@) for operations of the registrant. If the occurrence form is not available, claims made coverage shall be maintained for three years after completion of this agreement. The policy shall include contractual, personal injury, bodily injury and property damage liability coverage with total available limits not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence, not less than $2,000,000 general aggregate and $2,000,000 aggregate products and completed operations. This commercial general liability insurance policy shall name the city and its duly authorized representatives as an additional insured. The city shall be provided with a copy of the certificate and the policy endorsement prior to or upon execution of this agreement; and
3. Automobile liability insurance covering all owned, non-owned and hired automobiles, trucks and trailers. Such insurance shall provide coverage at least as broad as that found in
Right-of-Way Construction and Use Permits
7
the standard comprehensive automobile liability policy with limits of not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit each occurrence.
(b) Registrant will provide the city with at least 30-days= written notice of an insurer=s intent to cancel or not renew any of the insurance coverage;
(c) Registrant agrees to hold the city harmless from any liability, including additional premium due because of registrant=s failure to maintain the coverage limits required; and
(d) The city=s approval or acceptance of certificates of insurance does not constitute city assumption of responsibility for the validity of any insurance policies nor does the city represent that the above coverage and limits are adequate to protect any individual/group/business, its consultants= or subcontractors= interests and assumes no liability therefore.
(4) Proof that the person is a corporation, including written evidence that it is authorized to do business in the state, as recorded and certified to by the Secretary of State; and
(5) Proof that the registrant has posted the bonds required by this code.
(B) The registrant shall keep all of the information listed above current at all times by providing to the city information of changes within ten days following the date on which the registrant has knowledge of any change.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.070)
' 96.034 REPORTING OBLIGATIONS.
(A) (1) Each registrant shall, by April 1 of each year, file a construction and major maintenance plan with the city. The plan shall be submitted using a format designated by the city and shall contain the information determined by the city to be necessary to facilitate the coordination and reduction in the frequency of excavations and obstructions of right-of-way.
(2) The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
(a) The general locations and the estimated beginning and ending dates of all planned construction projects to be commenced during the next calendar year; and
(b) The tentative locations for all construction projects contemplated for the five years starting with the next calendar year. This information is not a public record and shall be governed by SDCL ' 9-34-19.
(B) Each registrant shall maintain such records of the locations of its facilities in the right-of-way within the city and such other records as the city mayreasonably require. Upon a showing of cause and upon reasonable notice, the city may require a registrant to perform a record audit at its sole expense.
(C) Each registrant shall submit a monthly list of the status of its active permits.
Right-of-Way Construction and Use Permits
8
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.080)
' 96.035 UNREGISTERED FACILITIES.
(A) One year after the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, any facilities found in a right-of-way that has not been registered shall be deemed to be a nuisance.
(B) The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to:
(1) Abating the nuisance; or
(2) Taking possession of the facilities, and/or restoring the right-of-way to a usable condition.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.090)
' 96.036 FUTURE USES.
In permitting any facilities to be placed in the right-of-way, the city is not liable for any damages caused thereby to any registrant=s facilities that are already in place.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.100)
' 96.037 ABANDONED AND UNUSED FACILITIES.
Any registrant who has abandoned facilities in any right-of-way that are interfering with construction or reconstruction projects shall remove them from the right-of-way when requested by the city.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.110)
RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS
' 96.050 PERMIT REQUIREMENT.
(A) Except as otherwise provided in this code, no person may construct in any right-of-way without first having obtained a permit.
(B) A construction permit allows the holder to construct in that part of the right-of-way described in the permit and to hinder free and open passage in the specified portion of the right-of-way by placing facilities as described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified therein.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.120)
Right-of-Way Construction and Use Permits
9
' 96.051 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
(A) No permit shall be issued unless the following information has been provided:
(1) Evidence that the applicant is a registrant or is authorized to apply for a permit on behalf of a registrant;
(2) Submission of a completed permit application in the form required by the city, including all required attachments, and dimensioned, dated drawings showing the location and area of the proposed project and the location of all existing and proposed facilities;
(3) If the applicant is proposing to rebuild or install overhead facilities, the utility shall provide evidence that surplus space is not available on existing utility poles along the proposed route;
(4) If the applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the right-of-way, information in sufficient detail to identify:
(a) The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of applicant=s facilities; and
(b) The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant=s facilities.
(5) If the applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed in right-of-way:
(a) The location, depth, size and quantity of proposed new ducts or conduits; and
(b) The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant=s facilities.
(6) A construction schedule and completion date;
(7) Payment of all money due to the city for:
(a) Prior construction permits issued to applicant;
(b) Any loss, damage or expense suffered by the city as a result of applicant=s prior construction in the right-of-way or any emergency actions taken by the city; and
(c) Any franchise or license issued to the registrant whose facilities are being constructed.
(B) No permits for service drops or minor maintenance work of short duration or limited scope shall be issued unless:
(1) Conditions of divisions (A)(1), (A)(6) and (A)(7) above are met; and
Right-of-Way Construction and Use Permits
10
(2) Street locations of service drops or minor maintenance work are transmitted or called into the city, noting if hard surface removal or street crossings are involved.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.130)
' 96.052 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.
(A) Prior to issuance of any permit, excluding permits for service drops or minor maintenance work of short duration or limited scope, the applicant shall conduct, at its expense, a subsurface utility study on the proposed route of construction or extension. The study shall include the following tasks:
(1) Secure all available as-built plans, plats and other location data indicating the existence and approximate location of all underground facilities along the proposed construction route;
(2) Visibly survey and record the location and dimensions of any above-ground features of all underground facilities along the proposed construction route, including, but not limited to, manholes, valve boxes, utility boxes, posts and visible street cut repairs; and
(3) Plot and incorporate the data obtained from completion of the tasks described in divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above on the permittee=s proposed system route maps and plan sheets. The permittee shall provide the city with this information.
(B) A permittee shall belong to the one call line location system.
(C) The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of the permit to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to ensure the structural integrity of the right-of-way, to protect the property and safety of other users of the right-of-way, and to minimize the disruption and inconvenience to the traveling public. Protective measures and devices will be employed which are consistent with the Uniform Mutual Traffic Control Devices.
(D) The requirements of this section shall apply to new construction only if the construction is located outside the area designated by the city=s design standards.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.140)
' 96.053 PERMIT FEES.
(A) The city may require prior payment of permit fees.
(B) Permit fees paid for a permit that has been revoked are not refundable.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.150)
Right-of-Way Construction and Use Permits
11
' 96.054 JOINT APPLICATIONS.
(A) Applicants who make joint application for construction permits, for which construction is not performed by the city, may share in the payment of the permit fee.
(B) Applicants who apply for permits for the same construction, which is not performed by the city, may share in the payment of the permit fee. Applicants must agree among themselves as to the portion each will pay and so indicate on their applications.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.160)
CONSTRUCTION AND RESTORATION
' 96.065 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
The city may prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional facilities within the right-of-way if it determines there is insufficient space to accommodate the facilities. Factors to be considered in determining space availability include the public interest, the conditions of the right-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the right-of-way, and future city plans for public improvements and development projects which have been determined to be in the public interest.(Prior Code, ' 12.04.170)
' 96.066 LEAST DISRUPTIVE TECHNOLOGY.
Construction or maintenance of facilities shall use all reasonable means to lessen damage and disruption of the right-of-way. A permittee may not intrude into the right-of-way without a specific written finding by the city that the permittee will use methods to lessen disruption to the right-of-way.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.180)
' 96.067 SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.
The city may grant an exception to the requirements of '' 96.065 and 96.066 if the permittee, upon application, demonstrates with written evidence that:
(A) The exception will not create any threat to the public health, safety or welfare;
(B) The increased economic burden and the potential adverse impact on the permittee=s construction schedule resulting from the strict enforcement of the requirement actually or effectively prohibits the ability of the permittee to provide utility services in the city; and
(C) The requirement unreasonably discriminates against the permittee in favor of another person.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.190)
Right-of-Way Construction and Use Permits
12
' 96.068 RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
(A) A registrant shall promptly and at its own expense, with due regard for seasonal working conditions, permanently remove and relocate its facilities in the right-of-way whenever the city requests removal and relocation, and shall restore the right-of-way. The city may make the request only when the facilities interfere with:
(1) A present or future city use of the right-of-way;
(2) Public improvement or a development project in which the city has an interest or investment; or
(3) The safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way.
(B) Unless otherwise agreed by the Public Works Commissioner or designee, if, in their reasonable judgment, a registrant fails to commence removal of its facilities within 30 days after the city=s removal order, or if a registrant fails to substantially complete the removal, including all associated repair of the right-of-way of the city, within 180 days thereafter, the city may:
(1) Declare that all rights, title and interest to the facilities belong to the city with all rights of ownership, including, but not limited to, the right to connect and use the facilities or to effect a transfer of all rights, title and interest in the facilities to another person for operation; or
(2) Authorize removal of the facilities installed by a registrant on, over or under the right-of-way, at the registrant=s cost and expense, by another person.
(C) Any portion of a registrant=s facilities on, over or under the right-of-way designated by the city for removal and not timely removed by a registrant shall belong to and become the property of the city without payment to the registrant and the registrant shall execute and deliver such documents, as the city shall request, in form and substance acceptable to the city, to evidence such ownership by the city.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.200) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 96.069 RIGHT-OF-WAY RESTORATION.
(A) The work to be done under the permit, and the restoration of the right-of-way, must be completed within the dates specified in the permit, giving due regard to seasonal working conditions. In addition to its own work, the permittee must restore the general area of the work, including the paving and its foundations, to reasonably restore it to the same
condition that existed before the commencement of the work and must inspect the area of the work and use reasonable care to maintain the same condition for 12 months thereafter.
Right-of-Way Construction and Use Permits
13
(B) In approving an application for a construction permit, the city may permit the permittee to restore the right-of-way or it may restore the right-of-way itself.
(C) If the city restores the right-of-way itself, the permittee shall pay the costs thereof within 30 days of billing. If, during the 24 months following such restoration, the pavement settles due to permittee=s improper backfilling, the permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of repairing said pavement.
(D) If the city allows the permittee to restore the right-of-way, permittee shall, at the time of application of a construction permit, post a performance bond in an amount determined by the city to be sufficient to cover the cost of restoring the right-of-way to its pre-excavation condition. If, 12 months (24 months for pavement) after completion of the restoration of the right-of-way, the city determines that the right-of-way has been properly restored, the surety on the performance bond shall be released. The bond may be in the form of an annual right-of-way bond covering all construction permits issued by the city during that year, or an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit.
(E) The permittee shall perform the work according to the standards and with the materials specified by the city. The city may prescribe the manner and extent of the restoration, and may do so in written procedures of general application or on a case-by-case basis.
(F) By restoring the right-of-way itself, the permittee guarantees its work and shall maintain it for 12 months (24 months for trench settlement) following its completion. During this period, it shall, upon notification from the city, correct all restoration work to the extent necessary using the method required by the city. The work shall be completed within 30 calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the city.
(G) If the permittee fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required by the city, or fails to satisfactorily and timely complete all repairs required by the city, the city, at its option, may do such work. The permittee shall pay to the city, within 30 days of billing, the cost of restoring the right-of-way.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.210)
' 96.070 DAMAGE TO OTHER FACILITIES.
(A) When the city performs work in the right-of-way which requires maintaining, supporting or moving a registrant=s facilities to protect them, and the registrant does not perform such work, the costs associated therewith will be billed to the registrant and shall be paid within 30 days from the date of billing.
(B) Each registrant shall pay for repairing any facilities in the right-of-way, which it or its facilities damage.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.220)
' 96.071 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
Right-of-Way Construction and Use Permits
14
The excavation, backfilling, restoration and all other work performed in the right-of-way shall be done in conformance with city specifications.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.230)
' 96.072 INSPECTION.
(A) The permittee shall notify the city in advance of the time the work under any permit hereunder is started.
(B) The permittee shall make the work site available to the city for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon the completion of the work.
(C) At the time of inspection, the Public Works Commissioner may order the immediate cessation of any work, which threatens the life, health, safety, or well being of the public.
(D) The city may issue an order to the permittee for any work, which does not conform, to the applicable standards, conditions or codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the violation will be caused for revocation of the permit. Within five days after issuance of the order, the registrant shall present proof to the Finance Officer that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the Finance Officer may revoke the permit pursuant to ' 96.087.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.240) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 96.073 OTHER OBLIGATIONS.
Obtaining a right-of-way permit does not relieve permittee of its duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses and authority and to pay all fees required by any other city, county, state or federal rules, laws or regulations.
(A) A permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable codes and established rules and regulations, and is responsible for all work done in the right-of-way pursuant to its permit, regardless of who performs the work.
(B) Except in the case of an emergency, or with the approval of the city, no right-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work.
(C) A permittee shall not so obstruct a right-of-way that the natural free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways shall be interfered with.
Right-of-Way Construction and Use Permits
15
(D) Any permittee shall contact all abutting property owners to identify any existing private facilities in the right-of-way, including, but not limited to, sprinklers and other utility lines. (Prior Code, ' 12.04.250)
ENFORCEMENT OF PERMIT OBLIGATION
' 96.085 DENIAL OF PERMIT.
(A) Mandatory denial. Except in the case of an emergency, no right-of-way permit will be granted:
(1) To any person required to be registered who has not done so;
(2) To any person as to whom there exists grounds for the revocation of a permit; and
(3) If the issuance of a permit for the particular date and/or time would cause a conflict or interfere with an exhibition, celebration, festival, or any other event. The city shall be guided by the safety and convenience of ordinary travel of the public over the right-of-way, and by considerations relating to the public health, safety and welfare.
(B) Discretionary denial.
(1) The city may deny a permit to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to prevent interference with the safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the right-of-way, or when necessary to protect the right-of-way and its users.
(2) The city, in its discretion, may consider one or more of the following factors:
(a) The extent to which the right-of-way space where the permit is sought is available;
(b) The competing demands for the particular space in the right-of-way;
(c) The availability of other locations in the right-of-way or in other rights-of-way for the facilities of the particular company;
(d) The applicability of ordinances or other regulations of the right-of-way that affect location of facilities in the right-of-way;
(e) The degree of compliance of the applicant with the terms and conditions of its franchise, this code and other applicable ordinances and regulations;
Right-of-Way Construction and Use Permits
16
(f) The degree of disruption to surrounding communities and businesses that will result from the use of that part of the right-of-way;
(g) The condition and age of the right-of-way, and whether and when it is scheduled for total or partial reconstruction;
(h) The balancing of the costs of disruption to the public and damage to the right-of-way, against the benefits to that part of the public served by the expansion into additional parts of the right-of-way; and
(i) Whether the application has, over the previous two years, complied with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.260)
' 96.086 WORK DONE WITHOUT A PERMIT.
(A) Emergency situations.
(1) Each registrant shall immediately notify the city of any emergency involving its facilities. The registrant shall take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency.
(2) If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding a registrant=s facilities, the city may attempt to contact the local representative of each registrant affected, or potentially affected, by the emergency. In any event, the city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be borne by the registrant whose facilities occasioned the emergency.
Any person who obstructs or excavates a right-of-way in an emergency shall subsequently obtain a permit.
(B) Non-emergency situations. Except in the case of an emergency, any person who obstructs or excavates a right-of-way without a permit must subsequently obtain a permit, pay double the normal permit fee, pay double all the other fees required by the code, deposit with the city the fees necessary to correct any damage to the rights-of-way and comply with all requirements of this code.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.270)
' 96.087 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
(A) Any permit may be revoked by the city following a revocation hearing held by the City Commission upon not less than ten days written notice thereof to the permittee.
(B) If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall reimburse the city for its reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys= fees incurred in connection with such revocation.(Prior Code, ' 12.04.280)
Right-of-Way Construction and Use Permits
17
RIGHT-OF-WAY BONDS
' 96.100 RIGHT-OF-WAY BOND.
Prior to beginning construction, a permittee shall deposit with the city an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit and/or surety bond equal to 100% of the anticipated costs or such other lesser amount established by the city.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.290)
' 96.101 PURPOSES.
The right-of-way bond shall serve as security for:
(A) The faithful performance by the permittee or registrant of the requirements of this code, including restoration of the right-of-way;
(B) Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the city occasioned by the permittee=s or registrant=s violation of this code or its failure to comply with all rules, regulations, orders, permits, and other directives of the city issued pursuant to this code;
(C) The payment of all compensation due to the city, including permit fees;
(D) The payment of premiums for the required liability insurance;
(E) The payment to the city of any amounts for which the permittee or registrant is liable that are not paid to city pursuant to law; and
(F) The payment of any other amounts which become due to the city pursuant to law.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.300)
' 96.102 FORM.
The right-of-way bond shall contain the following endorsement:
AIt is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled or not renewed by the surety nor the intention to cancel or not to renew be stated by the surety until 30 days after completion of construction of the facilities and, notwithstanding the foregoing, shall in no case be canceled or not renewed by the surety until at least 30-days written notice to the city of surety=s intention to cancel or not renew this bond.@
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.310)
Right-of-Way Construction and Use Permits
18
INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY
' 96.115 CITY DOES NOT ACCEPT LIABILITY.
By reason of the acceptance of a registration or the grant of a right-of-way permit the city does not assume any liability:
(A) For injuries to persons, damage to property or loss of service claims by parties other than the registrant or the city; or
(B) For claims or penalties of any sort resulting from the installation, presence, maintenance or operation of facilities by registrants or activities of registrants.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.320)
' 96.116 REGISTRANT OR PERMITTEE INDEMNIFIES CITY.
By registering with the city, a registrant agrees or by accepting a permit, a permittee is required to defend, indemnify and hold the city whole and harmless from all costs, liabilities and claims for damages of any kind arising out of the construction, presence, installation, maintenance, repair or operation of its facilities, or out of any activity undertaken in or near a right-of-way, whether any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by a right-of-way permit. It further agrees that it will not bring, nor cause to be brought, any action, suit or other proceeding claiming damages, or seeking any other relief against the city for any claim nor for any award arising out of the presence, installation, maintenance or operation of its facilities, or any activity undertaken in or near a right-of-way, whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by a right-of-way permit. The foregoing does not indemnify the city for its own negligence except for claims arising out of or alleging the city=s negligence where such negligence arises outdoors and is primarily related to the presence, installation, construction, operation,maintenance or repair of the facilities by the registrant or on the registrant=s behalf, including, but not limited to, the issuance of permits and inspection of plans or work. This section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available to the registrant or to the city; and the registrant, in defending any action on behalf of the city, shall be entitled to assert in any action every defense or immunity that the city could assert in its own behalf. (Prior Code, ' 12.04.330)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
' 96.130 NONEXCLUSIVE REMEDY.
The remedies provided in this code are not exclusive or in lieu of other rights and remedies that the city may have at law or in equity. The city may seek legal and equitable relief for actual or threatened injury to the right-of-way, including damages to the right-of-way.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.340)
Right-of-Way Construction and Use Permits
19
' 96.131 RESERVATION OF REGULATORY AND POLICE POWERS.
The city, by the granting of a permit, or by registering a person under ' 96.031, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and statutes of the state to regulate the use of the right-of-way by the permittee. The permittee, by its acceptance of a right-of-way permit, or registrant, by registration under ' 96.031, must agree that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A permittee or registrant is deemed to acknowledge that its rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to such powers.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.350)
' 96.132 DAMAGE CAUSED BY DEFECTS; RESPONSIBILITY.
This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any registrant for damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the issuance of any permits.
(Prior Code, ' 12.04.360)
1
CHAPTER 97: STREET TREES AND SHRUBS
Section
97.01 Boulevard and parking strip defined
97.02 Planting regulations
97.03 Trimming existing trees at intersections
97.04 Removal of dead or diseased trees and overhanging branches
97.05 Removal of trees in contact with utilities
97.06 Tree branches to be trimmed and cut
97.07 Accumulation of weeds and rubbish
97.08 Enforcement by the city
97.09 Failure to comply
97.10 Clearance over sidewalks
97.11 Repealed
97.12 Transportation of Ash Wood Prohibited
97.13 Planting of Ash Trees Prohibited
97.99 Penalty
' 97.01 BOULEVARD AND PARKING STRIP DEFINED.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BOULEVARD and PARKING STRIP. The space between the sidewalk and the curb line or curb.
(Prior Code, ' 12.24.010)
' 97.02 PLANTING REGULATIONS.
(A) No trees shall be planted or replaced in the boulevard unless they are in compliance with the following regulations:
(1) At least 40 feet between each tree;
(2) At least two feet from the curb line and/or sidewalk;
(3) At least 25 feet from any street corner where the curb lines intersect;
(4) At least ten feet from any fire hydrant; and
(5) At least five lateral feet from any underground water line, sewer line, gas line, transmission line or other utility.
(B) No hedge, shrub, bush, or fence more than three feet in height shall be planted or allowed within 50 feet of any street corner measured from the point of intersecting curbs or curb lines.
(C) The property owner shall remove, at the property owner=s sole expense, any tree or shrub, which was planted in violation the planting regulations and as directed by the City Commission.
Street Trees and Shrubs
2
(D) A digging permit is required by the city for any and all trees and shrubs that are planted in the city right-of-way.
(Prior Code, ' 12.24.015) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018) Penalty, see ' 97.99
' 97.03 TRIMMING EXISTING TREES AT INTERSECTIONS.
All trees and shrubs growing on the boulevards and parking strips in the city at the intersection of allstreets and avenues shall be trimmed, and so maintained, a sufficient distance from all intersections, so that such trees and shrubs do not obstruct the clear vision of travelers to approaching traffic.
(Prior Code, ' 12.24.020) Penalty, see ' 97.99
' 97.04 REMOVAL OF DEAD OR DISEASED TREES AND OVERHANGING BRANCHES.
It shall be the duty of the City Commission to require the owner or agent of any premises whereon is situated any dead trees or overhanging branches, dangerous to life, limb or property, to remove the same within a reasonable time, to be fixed by the city, in its notice to such owner or agent. The City Commission shall have the power to destroy trees in the boulevards or parking strips if infested by disease or infested by injurious insects when such destruction is necessary for the protection of other trees.
(Prior Code, ' 12.24.030) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018) Penalty, see ' 97.99
' 97.05 REMOVAL OF TREES IN CONTACT WITH UTILITIES.
The property owner is responsible for the removal of any tree or part which may come into contact with underground utilities, water lines, sewer lines, gas lines, curb and gutter, sidewalks or other public improvements, as directed by the City Commission.
(Prior Code, ' 12.24.035) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018) Penalty, see ' 97.99
' 97.06 TREE BRANCHES TO BE TRIMMED AND CUT.
(A) No person, firm, corporation or any other owner of real property within the corporate limits of the city shall permit their tree limbs or branches to become a hazard or a nuisance to street maintenance and garbage disposal equipment by permitting tree branches to grow too close to the ground or overhang into certain areas of streets and alleys. It shall be the duty, unless otherwise provided herein, of each property owner to trim and cut all tree limbs or branches of trees located upon his or her real property and upon the boulevard and alley ways which are adjacent to his or her property to a minimum height of 13 feet above ground level.
(B) It shall be the duty of each property owner to trim and cut all tree limbs or branches of trees located upon his or her real property and boulevard areas which are adjacent to the following city streets to a minimum height of 15 feet above ground level.
(1) Fifth Street (SD Highway 18);
(2) Dakota Street from the south edge of Seventh Street north to the city limits;
(3) Cedar Street from the north edge of Fifth Street south to the city limits; and
(4) Seventh Street from the west edge of Cedar Street east to the east edge of Dakota Street.
(C) All branches and limbs so cut and trimmed off of trees shall be disposed of by the property owner at his or her expense at a designated location at the city dump grounds.
(Prior Code, ' 12.24.040) Penalty, see ' 97.99
Street Trees and Shrubs
3
' 97.07 ACCUMULATION OF WEEDS AND RUBBISH.
No accumulated weeds, rubbish or other obstruction shall be allowed to accumulate on any boulevard or parking strip in the city. (Prior Code, ' 12.24.050) Penalty, see ' 97.99
' 97.08 ENFORCEMENT BY THE CITY.
The city is granted, power to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and shall also have the power and authority to cut and trim, or order limbs and branches of trees that may extend over the curb line or sidewalk line to be cut and trimmed to a height and in a manner determined by the City Commission.
(Prior Code, ' 12.24.060) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 97.09 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
Any person, who has received notice to trim, preserve or remove trees or plants and fails to comply within the time specified in the notice, the city shall remedy the condition or contract with others for such purpose and charge the cost or assess thereof to the person to whom the order was directed by sending him or her a statement of costs. The person remedying the condition shall be authorized to enter the premises for that purpose. If the owner of the property does not pay the cost of such work within 30 days after receipt of the statement thereof, such costs may be levied against the property benefitted or upon which the condition existed as a special assessment.
(Prior Code, ' 12.24.065) Penalty, see ' 97.99
' 97.10 CLEARANCE OVER SIDEWALKS.
It shall be the duty of the property owner or persons occupying property adjacent to any street, boulevard or parking strip, to keep all trees and overhanging branches trimmed to a clearance of eight feet over the sidewalk.
(Prior Code, ' 12.24.070) Penalty, see ' 97.99
' 97.11 REPEALED (ORD. 1071, PASSED 5/18/20)
§ 97.12 TRANSPORTATION OF ASH WOOD PROHIBITED
No person shall transport raw wood from any variation of Genus Fraxinus, commonly known as ash, from Memorial Day to Labor Day without a permit from the Public Works Director. (ORD. 1071, Passed 5/18/20)
§ 97.13 PLANTING OF ASH TREES PROHIBITED
No person shall plant, or allow to be planted, any variation of Genus Fraxinus, commonly known as ash, on any property. (ORD. 1071, Passed 5/18/20)
' 97.99 PENALTY.
Except as in this chapter otherwise specifically provided, any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter or failing to comply with any of the provisions thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $500.
(Prior Code, ' 12.24.080)
1
CHAPTER 98: PARK USE REGULATIONS
Section
98.01 Trespassing
98.02 Destruction of park property prohibited
98.03 Signs prohibited
98.04 Exhibitions prohibited
98.05 Defacing property
98.06 Cleaning up litter and refuse after use of facility
98.07 Metal containers, glass bottles, glass containers or glassware prohibited in swimming pool areas of public parks
98.08 Use of park waters
98.99 Penalty
' 98.01 TRESPASSING.
No persons shall go on foot or otherwise on the grass or curb of any park or parkway when any prohibitory sign is posted. Absolutely no horses shall be allowed on the grass or curb of any park or parkway. It is unlawful for any person to ride a horse on any property other than his or her own.
(Prior Code, ' 12.28.010) Penalty, see ' 98.99
' 98.02 DESTRUCTION OF PARK PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
No person shall injure or destroy any plant, shrub or tree in any park or parkway in the city.
(Prior Code, ' 12.28.020) Penalty, see ' 98.99
' 98.03 SIGNS PROHIBITED.
No person shall post, paste, paint or fix any placards, bills, notices, or signs upon any structure or thing within any park, or upon any part of any park or parkway.
(Prior Code, ' 12.28.030) Penalty, see ' 98.99
' 98.04 EXHIBITIONS PROHIBITED.
No entertainment or exhibition shall be given in any park or parkway, except those given under the direction and authority of the City Commission.
(Prior Code, ' 12.28.040) Penalty, see ' 98.99
' 98.05 DEFACING PROPERTY.
No person shall injure or deface any building or structure within any city park.
(Prior Code, ' 12.28.050) Penalty, see ' 98.99
' 98.06 CLEANING UP LITTER AND REFUSE AFTER USE OF FACILITY.
Any person, or group of persons, using any picnic areas, playground centers, or recreational facility and equipment belonging to and located upon park premises, shall be responsible for cleaning up litter and refuse, caused by their
Park Use Regulations
2
occupancy, before leaving the area.
(Prior Code, ' 12.28.060) Penalty, see ' 98.99
' 98.07 METAL CONTAINERS, GLASS BOTTLES, GLASS CONTAINERS OR GLASSWARE PROHIBITED IN SWIMMING POOL AREAS OF PUBLIC PARKS.
No metal containers, glass bottles, glass containers or glassware of any kind shall be taken by any person to any area of any public park that shall be designated by the City Commission as a swimming area.
(Prior Code, ' 12.28.070) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018) Penalty, see ' 98.99
' 98.08 USE OF PARK WATERS.
No person shall bathe, wade or swim in any park in the city; except at such time and in such place as may be specifically designated by the city. Notice of the time and place of the use of such waters shall be given by the city by appropriate signs posted in or on more conspicuous places in the park or around parks in which the waters are situated. The use of the waters situated in any park, except as permitted as to time and place by the city, is hereby forbidden. Each and every violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be considered a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, ' 12.28.080) Penalty, see ' 98.99
' 98.99 PENALTY.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or any of the provisions of any resolution passed and published pursuant to this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $500.
(Prior Code, ' 12.28.090)
1
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
Section
110.01 License required
110.02 Application for license
110.03 License expiration
110.04 Discrimination
110.05 License revocation
110.06 Issuance
110.07 Record of licenses
' 110.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
It is unlawful for any person, persons, firm or corporation to engage in any activity for which a license is required without first obtaining such license, as herein provided. The City Commissioners may at any time expand the general provisions of this title by requiring any person, persons, firm or corporation engaging in any trade, business, occupation or activity within the city which is not specified by this title to obtain a license, as deemed necessary.
(Prior Code, ' 5.04.010) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 110.02 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
Any person, persons, firm or corporation wishing to obtain a license as herein provided, shall make written application to Finance Officer stating the name of the applicant, address, purpose of the activity, the length of time for which the license is wanted, and the particular place at which the license is to be used. Fees for all licenses shall be fixed by the City Commissioners where not specified in this title and all license fees shall be paid in full at the time of application in such manner as approved by City Commissioners.
(Prior Code, ' 5.04.020) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 110.03 LICENSE EXPIRATION.
All annual licenses granted under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on the December 31 following the granting thereof, except as otherwise provided, and shall not be granted for any sum less than the annual rate, and there shall be no rebate made on the termination of the calling, vocation or kind of business for which the license was issued.
(Prior Code, ' 5.04.030)
' 110.04 DISCRIMINATION.
All licensees shall conduct their business so as not to discriminate against any person because of race, color, sex, creed, religion, ancestry, national origin, familial status or disability.
(Prior Code, ' 5.04.035)
' 110.05 LICENSE REVOCATION.
The Finance Officer has the authority at any time to suspend or revoke any license granted under the provision of this title whenever the City Commission shall be satisfied upon written complaint that such calling, vocation or kind of business for which the license was issued is in violation of the city ordinance, rule or regulation, or state law.
(Prior Code, ' 5.04.040) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
General Licensing Provisions
2
' 110.06 ISSUANCE.
Except as otherwise provided, all licenses shall be issued by the Finance Officer and the applicant shall have complied with all requirements for issuance of such license. Unless otherwise provided, all licenses shall be signed by the Finance Officer and shall have affixed thereto the official seal of the city.
(Prior Code, ' 5.04.050) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 110.07 RECORD OF LICENSES.
The Finance Officer shall keep a record of all licenses issued by the City stating when and to who issued, for what purpose and for what length of time, the amount of money paid for the license, and the place where such activity is to be earned on.
(Prior Code, ' 5.04.060) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
1
CHAPTER 111: COLLECTION OF GARBAGE AND RECYCLABLES
Section
111.01 License required
111.02 Application
111.03 Identifying name
111.04 Transfer
111.05 Expiration
111.06 Hauling unit permits
111.07 Unit inspection required
111.08 Display of permit
111.09 Denial of license
111.10 Collection of garbage and recyclable materials
111.11 Rates
111.12 Vehicles for collection of garbage and recyclables
111.13 Dumping
111.14 Insurance
111.15 Resident compliance
111.16 Customer information
111.17 City not liable
111.18 Transfer
111.19 Commercial haulers responsibilities
111.20 Termination of license
' 111.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
(A) No commercial garbage hauler shall use the streets for the collection, removal or disposal of any garbage and recyclable materials without first having obtained an annual license to perform such service from the city.
(B) The city may approve no more than two commercial haulers licenses for each 1,500 city residents. A license is in effect from January 1 through December 31 of each year.
(Prior Code, ' 5.05.010) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 111.02 APPLICATION.
Each application shall be on a form provided by the city and shall be filed with the Finance Officer and shall contain the following information:
(A) True name, address and phone number of owner of business;
(B) Proof of insurance;
(C) Proof of county license;
(D) Proposed rate structure;
(E) Payment of license fee, which shall be set by resolution of the City Commission; and
(F) Proof of ownership of a minimum of one packer truck in good working condition.
(Prior Code, ' 5.05.020) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
Collection of Garbage and Recyclables
2
' 111.03 IDENTIFYING NAME.
Each vehicle having a permit under this chapter shall permanently display the licensed commercial garbage hauler=s name in easily-legible letters at least three inches high or identifying logo. Any container belonging to a licensed commercial garbage hauler shall bear the hauler=s name or identifying logo. Recyclables containers shall also be labeled for specific materials to be placed therein.
(Prior Code, ' 5.05.030)
' 111.04 TRANSFER.
A license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be transferred after paying the city a transfer fee in the amount established by resolution of the City Commission. The transfer will be approved only to a person meeting the minimum start-up requirements for garbage hauling. Any person having a controlling interest in an existing garbage hauling operation cannot have a monetary interest in other licensed garbage hauling operations in the city. Licenses transferred upon sale of a business to a new owner may be reissued in the name of the previous owner upon payment of a reissuance fee in the amount established by resolution of the City Commission, compliance with the provision of this chapter and proof that ownership of the business has been transferred back to the previous owner.
(Prior Code, ' 5.05.040)
' 111.05 EXPIRATION.
Every license issued under the provisions of this chapter, unless renewed, shall expire on December 31 following its date of issuance. Sale of a licensed garbage hauling business to an existing licensed garbage hauling business will cause the seller=s license to expire upon transfer of responsibility for conducting or managing operations.
(Prior Code, ' 5.05.050)
' 111.06 HAULING UNIT PERMITS.
A permit fee, an amount established by resolution of the City Commission, shall be paid by each licensed hauler company.
(Prior Code, ' 5.05.060)
' 111.07 UNIT INSPECTION REQUIRED.
All hauling units permitted under this chapter shall be subject to random inspections by the city. Random inspections include inspections of vehicles, equipment and contents delivered to the landfill for deposit and weighing of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, ' 5.05.070)
' 111.08 DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
The permits issued for the hauling units under this chapter shall be permanently displayed on each unit permitted to carry garbage.
(Prior Code, ' 5.05.080)
' 111.09 DENIAL OF LICENSE.
Collection of Garbage and Recyclables
3
The Finance Officer shall have the right to deny an application if the application fails to comply all of the requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, ' 5.05.090) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 111.10 COLLECTION OF GARBAGE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
(A) Every licensed commercial hauler shall collect the garbage at least once each week and recyclables at least twice a month. Garbage collectors shall be under no obligation to remove any garbage unless the payment for the removal of such garbage as provided by contract with the customer shall have been made.
(B) Garbage, rubbish and animal waste must be transported out of the city within 48 hours after pickup. Collections are prohibited before 7:00 a.m. and after 8:00 p.m. Collection is prohibited on Sunday.
(Prior Code, ' 5.05.100)
' 111.11 RATES.
All licensed garbage haulers rates shall include the following elements:
(A) A rate to reward people who reduce their level of solid waste collection service based either upon volume or weight;
(B) A rate to provide customers with adequate options and incentives to reduce their weekly level of solid waste collection service and the amount of solid waste collected as a result of their participation in waste reduction and recycling programs; and
(C) A rate that includes the combined cost of solid waste, using the above elements, and recycling collection services.
(Prior Code, ' 5.05.110)
' 111.12 VEHICLES FOR COLLECTION OF GARBAGE AND RECYCLABLES.
Licensed commercial garbage and recyclable haulers shall provide themselves with suitable vehicles which shall be water-tight and permanently covered on top so as to prevent the escape of odors and contents and so as to hide the garbage from the public view. Such vehicle shall be thoroughly washed at such times as may be necessary to keep the vehicles in proper sanitary condition. Such vehicles when conveying garbage shall be so loaded and unloaded that the contents shall not fall or spill upon the ground. No article or thing shall be carried on such vehicle so as to drag upon the highway.
(Prior Code, ' 5.05.120)
' 111.13 DUMPING.
Commercial haulers shall transport the garbage and refuse and recyclables to the sites designated by the city and the county and will comply with all regulations in force at these sites.
(Prior Code, ' 5.05.130)
' 111.14 INSURANCE.
Haulers shall have and maintain commercial general liability insurance in the following amounts during the entire term of the license:
Collection of Garbage and Recyclables
4
(A) $1,000,000 per person;
(B) $2,000,000 general aggregate; and
(C) $100,000 property damage.
(Prior Code, ' 5.05.140)
' 111.15 RESIDENT COMPLIANCE.
All residents and businesses of the city shall comply with recyclable materials separation, storage and disposal requirements established by Lincoln County Ordinance 96-03-02, including, but not limited to, proper collection of recyclable materials.
(Prior Code, ' 5.05.150)
' 111.16 CUSTOMER INFORMATION.
All licensed garbage collectors/haulers shall at least annually provide customers with written information regarding volume of base-rate structure on garbage, recycling and yard waste service.
(Prior Code, ' 5.05.160)
' 111.17 CITY NOT LIABLE.
The city shall not be liable for any expense incurred through the failure of a licensee or his or her agents and employees, to operate and maintain collection services in a proper and efficient manner, and for any actions that may result from or be attributed to such services performed.
(Prior Code, ' 5.05.170)
' 111.18 TRANSFER.
Any transfers of the license required under this chapter shall be subject to approval by the City Commission and a request for transfer shall be submitted to the Finance Officer within 30 days of the transfer of the business.
(Prior Code, ' 5.05.180) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
111.19 COMMERCIAL HAULERS RESPONSIBILITIES.
Commercial haulers licensed by the city are responsible:
(A) To ensure the sources of waste and waste delivered;
(B) To assist the city in complying with mandated reporting requirements;
(C) To implement volume based collection rates to promote solid waste reduction and recycling;
(D) To provide recycling opportunities for their customers;
(E) To coordinate with the city in complying with environmental and statutory standards and mandates through rules or programs to provide for:
(1) Waste reduction;
Collection of Garbage and Recyclables
5
(2) Safe handling and disposal of hazardous or unacceptable waste; and
(3) Banned waste.
(F) To cooperate with the city in updating when necessary the local solid waste plan to ensure compliance with SDCL ' 34A-6 and to assert and participate in preparing all required regional solid waste plans mandated by SDCL ' 34A-6 and other regulatory directives.
(Prior Code, ' 5.05.190)
' 111.20 TERMINATION OF LICENSE.
The license issued under this chapter may be revoked by the City Commission for the violation of any provision of city ordinances, state law or federal law.
(Prior Code, ' 5.05.200) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
1
CHAPTER 112: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
112.01 License required
112.02 Application for license
112.03 Hours of operation for the sale or service of all alcoholic beverages licensees
112.03.1 Regulation of the transaction of any business in, and use and consumption, including on and off sale, of malt beverages, wine, cider, spirits, and alcoholic beverages
112.04 Possession of alcoholic beverages
112.05 Permit public location
112.06 Issuance of licenses and sale of alcoholic beverages by city
112.07 Maximum number of on- off-sale malt beverage licenses and maximum number of wine dealers being both package dealers and on-sale dealers
112.08 Full-service on-sale restaurant licenses
112.09 Sidewalk café alcoholic beverage sales and consumption regulations
112.10 Special permit licenses
112.11 Sanitation
112.12 Maximum number of on-sale and off-sale alcohol licenses
112.99 Penalty
' 112.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
(A) No person shall sell, offer for sale, keep for sale, exchange, distill, manufacture, produce, bottle, blend, or otherwise concoct, within the city any alcoholic beverage as defined by statute, without having a license therefore as required by state law.
(B) No licensed retailer may make any delivery of alcoholic beverages outside of the premises authorized by the license. No licensed retailer with any type of on-sale license shall serve alcoholic beverages outside the premises authorized by the license, unless otherwise provided herein.
(C) No license may be reissued or transferred to another entity or person until all municipal and state sales and use taxes owed by the licensee have been paid and all property taxes then due, which the licensee is liable for, have been paid or are not delinquent.
(Prior Code, ' 5.08.010) Penalty, see ' 112.99
' 112.02 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
Application for alcoholic beverage licenses shall be made in accordance with SDCL Chapter 35.
(Prior Code, ' 5.08.020)
' 112.03 HOURS OF OPERATION FOR THE SALE OR SERVICE OF ALL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES LICENSEES.
It is unlawful for any alcoholic beverage licensee to sell or serve any alcoholic beverage at any time other than as provided herein. It shall be lawful for all alcoholic beverage licensees to sell or serve alcoholic beverages between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. every day of the year. All sales or service of alcoholic beverages shall be in strict compliance with the laws of the State of South Dakota.
(Ord. 1050, passed 4-16-2018) Penalty, see ' 112.99
Alcoholic Beverages
2
' 112.03.1 REGULATION OF THE TRANSACTION OF ANY BUSINESS IN, AND USE AND CONSUMPTION, INCLUDING ON AND OFF SALE, OF MALT BEVERAGES, WINE, CIDER, SPIRITS, AND ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
The City Commission by resolution or pursuant to the terms and conditions of any operating agreement entered into by the City may regulate the transaction of business concerning the sale of malt beverages, wine, cider, spirits, and alcoholic beverages, including on-sale and off-sale thereof, and may regulate the use and consumption of malt beverages, wine, cider, spirits, and alcoholic beverages, including on-sale and off-sale use or consumption thereof.
(Ord. 1052, passed 5-7-2018)
' 112.04 POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
(A) Generally. Unless a special permit license shall have been obtained from the city pursuant to ' 112.01, it is unlawful to possess in any public place, street, alley, sidewalk, public park, place of amusement or business establishment not authorized to sell alcoholic beverages, pursuant to state law and the ordinances of the city, any bottle, whether or not containing alcoholic beverages, on which the seal has been broken and which bottle either did or does contain alcoholic beverages, or any glass, can or other container containing an alcoholic beverage.
(B) Carry out of partially consumed, sealed bottle of wine permitted under certain circumstances. A licensee that is licensed to sell wine on-sale may permit a customer to carry out the unconsumed portion of a bottle of wine if the customer purchased the bottle of wine from the licensee and consumed a portion of it with a meal that was prepared and served by the licensee at a table on the licensed premises. The licensee shall securely reseal the bottle of wine with a cork or other similar cap and place the bottle ina sealed bag or other container. The licensee shall also attach a receipt for the meal and the wine to the bag or container.
(Prior Code, ' 5.08.040) Penalty, see ' 112.99
' 112.05 PERMIT PUBLIC LOCATION.
Notwithstanding ' 112.04 a person, organization or entity may consume alcoholic beverages at a public location on terms and conditions authorized by the City Commission pursuant to a written permit. A permit fee or security deposit may at the discretion of the City Commission be charged.
(Prior Code, ' 5.08.050) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 112.06 ISSUANCE OF LICENSES AND SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BY CITY.
(A) All licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages authorized by this chapter shall be issued in accordance with the laws of the state, and all alcoholic beverages, including malt beverages, shall be purchased from the city for resale by parties having operating agreements with the city, including malt beverage retailers or malt beverage package dealers, and the price to be charged by the city for all such purchases of malt beverages shall be at a price of 5% above the city=s cost plus freight, and for such purchases of other alcoholic beverages the price to be paid shall be that which is negotiated at the time of entering into any operating agreement.
(B) The fees for all alcohol beverage licenses shall be set by resolution of the city annually on or before September 30 for the ensuing calendar year, with said fees not to exceed the maximum amount allowed by statute.
(Prior Code, ' 5.08.060) (Ord. 1023, passed 4-7-2014; Ord. 1050, passed 4-16-2018)
Alcoholic Beverages
3
' 112.07 MAXIMUM NUMBER OF ON- OFF-SALE MALT BEVERAGE LICENSES AND MAXIMUM NUMBER OF WINE DEALERS BEING BOTH PACKAGE DEALERS AND ON-SALE DEALERS.
(A) The maximum number of on- off-sale malt beverage licenses, as defined by SDCL ' 35-4-2(16), to be authorized by the city, in any given year shall not exceed the total number of 15 licenses.
(B) The maximum number of wine retailers being both package and on-sale license dealers as defined in SDCL ' 35-4-2(12) to be authorized by the city in any given year shall not exceed the total number of ten licenses. A wine retailer being both package dealers and on-sale dealers may not be licensed as a video lottery established pursuant to SDCL ' 42-7A-41. The maximum number of malt beverage and wine produced pursuant to SDCL Chapter 35-12 package dealers (SDCL ' 35-4-2(17A)), off-sale package wine dealers in table wines, sparkling wines, sacramental wine and distilled spirits produced from product provided to an artisan distiller by the respective farm winery to be operated in conjunction with a farm winery established pursuant to SDCL Chapter 35-12 (SDCL ' 35-4-2(19)), to be authorized by the city in any given year shall not exceed the total number of zero licenses.
(Prior Code, ' 5.08.070) (Ord. 1040, passed 4-3-2017)
' 112.08 FULL-SERVICE ON-SALE RESTAURANT LICENSES.
(A) Definitions of terms. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BAR. Any permanently installed counter within the restaurant area from which alcoholic beverages are regularly served to customers by a person who is tending bar or drawing or mixing alcoholic beverages.
FULL-SERVICE RESTAURANT. Any restaurant at which a waiter or waitress delivers food and drink offered from a printed food menu to patrons at tables, booths or the bar. Any restaurant that only serves fry orders or food such as sandwiches, hamburgers or salads is not a FULL-SERVICE RESTAURANT.
RESTAURANT. Any area in a building which is maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where individually priced meals are prepared and served primarily for consumption in such area and where not more than 40% of the gross revenue of the restaurant is derived from the sale of alcoholic beverages. The RESTAURANT shall have a dining room or rooms, a kitchen and the number and kinds of employees necessary for the preparing, cooking and serving of meals.
(B) License application requirements; documentation. An applicant for a full-service restaurant on-sale license shall provide sufficient documentation to the municipality with an application form provided by the municipality to prove that the primary source of revenue from the operation of the restaurant will be derived from the sale of prepared food and nonalcoholic beverages and not from the sale of alcoholic beverages. The supporting documentation concerning the primary source of revenue submitted pursuant to this section is confidential.
(C) Annual reports. The full-service restaurant on-sale licensee shall submit an annual report and supporting documentation to the city on forms provided by the city of the annual sales of the full-service restaurant, which includes an oath verifying the validity of the information provided in the report. The report and the supporting documentation submitted pursuant to this section are confidential. The report shall contain the annual gross sales of the licensee for the following two categories:
(1) Food and nonalcoholic beverage sales; and
(2) Alcoholic beverages sales.
Alcoholic Beverages
4
(D) License renewals. When renewing a full-service restaurant on-sale license, the city shall condition the license renewal upon receiving documentation that not more than 40% of gross sales from the preceding 12 months operation of the full-service restaurant is derived from the sale of alcoholic beverages.
(E) Only retail, on-sale service permitted. A full-service restaurant on-sale licensee may only serve alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption in the bar and dining room area of the restaurant.
(F) Smoking prohibited. No licensee that has a full-service restaurant on-sale license may allow smoking on the licensed premises.
(G) Full-service restaurant license fees.
(1) As there has not been a record of any sales of licenses or operating agreements between January 1, 2003, and January 1, 2008 to determine a fair market value, the license fee charged for a full-service restaurant on-sale license shall be a minimum of $1 for each person residing within the city as measured by the last preceding decennial federal census.
(2) The license fee shall be initially established by resolution within 90 days of the initial adoption of this section. Subsequent changes in the license fee shall not be made for a period of ten years from the effective date of adoption of this section unless a population growth reported by the federal decennial census requires an increase in the fee.
(H) Registry of full-service restaurant on-sale licensees. The city shall maintain a registry of each full-service on-sale restaurant license that is being offered for sale and the city shall furnish a copy of the registry to anyone who requests a new-full service restaurant on-sale license. The existing full-service restaurant on-sale licensee is responsible for registering with the city that the full-service restaurant on-sale license is for sale.
(I) Issuance of new full-service restaurant licenses restricted. The city may only issue a new license pursuant to this section if no on-sale license is on the registry or a person desiring to purchase an on-sale license listed on the registry provides documentation showing that the person is unable to purchase the on-sale license at the price established in division (G) above and on terms satisfactory to both the potential buyer and seller. The price of any on-sale license registered as Afor sale@ with the city shall be sold at the current fair market price set by the city pursuant to a resolution adopted in accordance with division (G)(2) above.
(Prior Code, ' 5.08.080) (Ord. 1029, passed 2-27-2015)
' 112.09 SIDEWALK CAFÉ ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES AND CONSUMPTION REGULATIONS.
(A) General provisions.
(1) Any holder of an on-sale operating agreement or on-sale malt beverage license may apply for a sidewalk café permit for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages which the licensee is authorized to sell on a sidewalk or walkway subject to a public right-of-way abutting a licensed premises, provided that the license holder derives more than 50% of its gross receipts from the sale of prepared food for consumption on the licensed premises.
(2) The sidewalk or walkway subject to a public right-of-way shall be immediately adjacent to and abutting the licensed premises.
(3) This section does not apply to any federal-aid eligible highway unless approved in accordance with the applicable requirements for the receipt of federal aid.
(4) The hours of authorized sale and consumption on the sidewalk or walkway subject to a public right-of-way as provided by this section shall be consistent with the hours permitted for the license held by the sidewalk café permittee.
Alcoholic Beverages
5
(5) A violation of any provision of SDCL Title 35 by an alcoholic beverage license holder
conducting business on a sidewalk or walkway subject to a public right-of-way pursuant to this section constitutes a violation of SDCL Title 35 as if the violation had occurred in or on the licensed premises.
(B) Definition of sidewalk café. A SIDEWALK CAFÉ is an outdoor area located on a public sidewalk
or walkway which is operated and maintained by an establishment, coffeehouse, tea shop, restaurant or bar.
(C) Applicable procedure.
(1) An application for a sidewalk café permit shall be filed with the Finance Officer. There shall be a one-time application fee of $100. The application shall include a site plan which identifies the location of tables, chairs, umbrellas, trash receptacles, heaters and barricades.
(2) (a) The location of the sidewalk café must be directly in front of the business operating the café, and may not extend beyond the side property lines. Tables, chairs, benches and food and beverage carts and equipment shall be located so that they do not impede, endanger or interfere with pedestrian traffic, with a minimum width of three feet of unobstructed passage for pedestrian traffic on Fifth Street and a minimum width of three feet of unobstructed passage for pedestrian traffic on side streets.
(b) No fixtures or devices on which food or beverages are sold or consumed shall be attached to the sidewalk or other public property. The property owner is responsible for the restoration of the sidewalk or public right-of-way if any damage is caused by the sidewalk café. Physical barriers may not exceed four feet in height.
(c) Lighting for sidewalk cafés is subject to approval during the permitting process. Tabletop lighting may include candles and battery-operated fixtures.
(d) Physical barricades are required if alcoholic beverages are sold at the sidewalk café.
(3) All services provided to the sidewalk café patrons as well as all patron activity must occur within the designated sidewalk café area.
(4) The permit holder is responsible for proper supervision of the sidewalk café in order to ensure the requirements of this section are met.
(5) Every sidewalk café permit holder shall furnish a certificate of insurance proving commercial insurance coverage of at least $1,000,000 for bodily injury, death, disability and property damage liability. The city shall be named as an additional insured on a primary, noncontributory basis for any liability arising directly or indirectly from the operation of a sidewalk café. In the event that the insurance is cancelled, the permit holder has 24 hours to reinstate the insurance or the permit shall be revoked.
(6) (a) Permit holders must ensure that the requirements for the operation are met.
(b) These include:
1. Patrons must wear shoes and shirts at all times; and
2. All sidewalk cafés must maintain at least one opening for ingress and egress at all times. All sidewalk cafés shall abide by all requirements of the currently adopted International Building Code and the American=s Disabilities Act, being 42 USC 12101 et seq.
Alcoholic Beverages
6
(7) All areas within and surrounding a sidewalk café must be maintained in a clean, neat and sanitary condition.
(8) All permit holders shall be required to abide by all federal, state and local laws.
(9) A sidewalk café permit may be revoked for failure to maintain the standards required for the initial permit. A notice of intent to revoke a sidewalk café permit shall be given in writing ten days prior to actual revocation and shall specify the area or areas of continued failure to meet requirements and maintain conditions the city may have imposed. If, during that period, proof of compliance is made by the permit holder, the permit shall be continued in force.
(Prior Code, ' 5.03.090) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 112.10 SPECIAL PERMIT LICENSES.
(A) The city may issue:
(1) A special permit malt beverage retailers license in conjunction with a special event within the municipality or county to any civic, charitable, educational, fraternal or veterans organization or any licensee licensed pursuant to SDCL ' 35-4-2(4) or SDCL ' 35-4-2(16) in addition to any other licenses held by the special events license applicant;
(2) A special permit on-sale wine retailers license in conjunction with a special event within the municipality or county to any civic, charitable, educational, fraternal or veterans organization or any licensee licensed pursuant to SDCL ' 35-4-2(4);
(3) A special permit on-sale license in conjunction with a special event within the municipality or county to any civic, charitable, educational, fraternal or veterans organization or any licensee licensed pursuant to SDCL ' 35-4-2(4) or SDCL ' 35-4-2(16) in addition to any other licenses held by the special events license applicant; or
(4) A special permit off-sale package wine dealer=s license in conjunction with a special event within the municipality or county to any civic, charitable, educational, fraternal, or veterans organization or any licensee licensed pursuant to SDCL ' 35-4-2(5), in addition to any other licenses held by the special events license applicant.
(B) Any special permit license issued pursuant to this section may be issued for a period of time established by the municipality. However, no period of time may exceed 15 consecutive days.
(C) Any special permit license issued pursuant this section shall be issued to the person and the location specified on the application. The governing body of the municipality shall determine the fee for this special permit license. Each application shall be accompanied by the fee prior to consideration by the City Commission. The fee provided for in this section shall be retained by the Finance Officer.
(D) The issuance of the special permit license is limited and restricted as follows:
(1) Alcoholic beverages for the purposes of this section include, malt beverages, wines and distilled spirits;
(2) Applications for a special permit license shall be submitted in writing to the Finance Officer and shall be submitted at least 20 days prior to the day on which the permit is to be effective; and
(3) The special permit license period may not exceed 15 days, and hours of authorized consumption may not exceed those permitted for on-sale licenses.
(E) Permit fees are established at an amount of not less than $100 for each special permit license. The permit fee may be waived by the City Commission for civic, charitable, educational and governmental groups.
Alcoholic Beverages
7
(F) Such application shall be accompanied by a payment in cash or guaranteed funds of such special permit license fees and security deposits as the City Commission shall establish from time to time, the special permit license fee to be retained by the city to cover the expenses of processing the application and the security deposit to be returned to the applicant organization if the property affected by issuance of such special permit license shall be returned to the condition thereof which existed at the time special permit license was issued, and if this is not done within two days after expiration of such special permit license, the city shall retain the security deposit in partial payment of its expenses in connection therewith, which shall be in addition to any other recourse the city may have by way of criminal proceedings or civil action for the damage of public property or the violation of any law
(G) Special permit license requests and/or applications may be obtained from the Finance Officer.
(Prior Code, ' 5.08.100) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 112.11 SANITATION.
Every on-sale business shall maintain upon its licensed premises, toilets properly connected with the city water and sewer system with separate facilities for men and women. In each such facility there shall be maintained running water and approved sanitary drying facilities. Every licensee shall have such facilities equipped and maintained so as to pass state and/or local health requirements at all times.
(Prior Code, ' 5.03.110)
' 112.12 MAXIMUM NUMBER OF ON-SALE
AND OFF-SALE ALCOHOL LICENSES.
(A) The number of on-sale alcoholic beverage licenses that may be issued by the city shall not exceed five.
(B) The number of off-sale alcoholic beverage licenses that may be issued by the city shall not exceed four.
(Ord. 1024, passed 4-7-2014)
' 112.99 PENALTY.
(A) An alcohol licensee that violates any law or regulation governing licensees is subject to revocation or suspension of its alcohol license.
(B) An alcohol licensee whose agents or employees make a sale of alcohol to a person under the legal age is subject to mandatory civil penalty. The civil penalty is $500 for a first offense within 24 months and is $1,000 for a second offense within 24 months. The civil penalty is doubled if the agent or employee making the illegal sale has not been certified by an alcohol training program approved by the Department of Revenue. A third or subsequent violation subjects the licensee to revocation or suspension.
(C) Any person, firm or licensee in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. For failure to correct any offense when applicable, after conviction, each day of failure to do so shall constitute an additional separate offense. Whenever any person shall as clerk, servant, agent or employee of any other person or establishment violates any of the provisions of this chapter he or she shall also be deemed as guilty as a principal. Failure to comply with all existing requirements, including the provisions in this chapter, shall provide cause for revocation of any licenses granted under the provisions of state law.
(Prior Code, ' 5.08.130)
(D) It is a Class 2 misdemeanor for any person to consume any distilled spirits in any public place, other than upon
Alcoholic Beverages
8
the premises of licensed on-sale dealers, or on the premises of a special permit license holder.
(Prior Code, ' 5.08.100)
CHAPTER 113: CABLE TELEVISION
Section
113.01 FCC Rate Regulations adopted
' 113.01 FCC RATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED.
(A) The city will follow FCC Rate Regulations and any amendments thereto in its regulation of the basic service rates and charges of the company and any other cable television system operating in the city, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent pro-visions in the franchise.
(B) In connection with such regulations, the city will ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties.
(C) The Mayor, or his or her designee, is authorized to execute on behalf of the city and file with the FCC such certification forms or other instruments as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC Rate Regulations in order to enable the city to regulate basic service rates and charges.
(Prior Code, ' 5.12.010)
1
CHAPTER 114: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
114.01 Definitions
114.02 License required for massage establishment
114.03 Application for massage establishment license
114.04 Investigation of premises proposed to be used as massage establishment
114.05 Denial of massage establishment license; notice; right to hearing
114.06 Temporary massage establishment license
114.07 Massage establishment facilities
114.08 Inspection of establishments by officials
114.09 Name of establishment
114.10 Change of location of establishment
114.11 Massagist licensees to be employed
114.12 Massages at massage establishment only
114.13 Massagist license required
114.14 Application for massagist license
114.15 Investigation upon receipt of application for massagist license
114.16 Denial of massagist license; notice; right to hearing
114.17 Temporary massagist license
114.18 Transfer of massagist license
114.19 Posting of massagist and massage establishment licenses
114.20 Denial, suspension or revocation of licenses generally
114.21 Injunction relief
114.22 Exemptions
114.23 Unlawful acts
114.24 Transfer of massage establishment license
114.25 Application fee
114.99 Penalty
' 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
MASSAGE. The administration by any person of any method of exerting or applying pressure, friction, moisture, heat or cold to the human body, or the rubbing, stroking, kneading, pounding or tapping of the human body by any physical or mechanical means for any form of consideration.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment or operation wherein a massage is administered or is permitted to be administered when such massage is administered or permitted to be administered for any form of consideration.
MASSAGIST. Any person who administers a massage for any form of consideration.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.010)
Message Establishments
2
' 114.02 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.
No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried in or upon any premises within the city a massage establishment, unless the license for the operation of a massage establishment has been issued by the city and unless the license remains in effect in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.020) Penalty, see ' 114.99
' 114.03 APPLICATION FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE.
Each application for a massage establishment license shall be upon a form provided by the city and shall be submitted to the Finance Officer and shall contain the following information:
(A) A definition of service to be provided;
(B) The location and mailing address of the proposed establishment;
(C) The name and residence address of each applicant;
(D) If the applicant is a corporation, the names and residence addresses of each of the officers and directors of the corporation and of each stockholder owning more than 10% of stock of the corporation, and the address of the corporation itself, if different from the address of the massage establishment;
(E) If the applicant is a partnership, the names and residence addresses of each of the partners, including limited partners, and the address of the partnership itself, if different from the address of the massage establishment;
(F) The last two previous addresses (if any) during the past three years immediately prior to the present address of the applicant;
(G) A certified copy of applicant=s birth certificate showing that the applicant is over the age of 18 years;
(H) Individual or partnership applicant=s height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and sex;
(I) Copy of identification such as driver=s license and Social Security card;
(J) Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application, including the name, dates of, location and nature of employment;
(K) The history of the applicant in the operation of a massage establishment or similar business or occupation, including, but not limited to, whether or not such person, in previously operating in this or another city within any state with or without license, has had such license revoked or suspended and the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation;
(L) All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations, including the dates of convictions, nature of the crimes and place convicted;
Message Establishments
3
(M) The name and address of each massagist who is or will be employed in the establishment;
(N) Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters specified in this section as required to be set forth in the application; and
(O) If a corporation, the name and address of the resident agent, which must be kept current at all times.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.030) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 114.04 INVESTIGATION OF PREMISES PROPOSED TO BE USED AS MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.
Upon receipt of the application for a massage establishment license, the Finance Officer shall refer the application to the Planning and Zoning Commission, and the Police Department, each of which, within a period of 30 days from the date of application, shall review records and make inspection of the premises proposed to be used as a massage establishment and shall make a written recommendation to the City Commission concerning compliance with the law.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.040) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 114.05 DENIAL OF MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE; NOTICE; RIGHT TO HEARING.
(A) The City Commission shall not issue such massage establishment license if, based upon the investigation and reports, it is found that:
(1) The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if licensed, would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city=s building, zoning and health regulations;
(2) The applicant has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any offense involving the use of force or violence upon the person of another; and
(3) The applicant has, knowingly and with intent to deceive, made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact in the permit application or any other document required by the city in conjunction therewith.
(B) For denial, notifications and reasons for the denial shall be set forth in writing by the Finance Officer and sent to the applicant by means of registered or certified mail or hand delivery. The denied applicant shall at his or her election have the right to receive a hearing before the City Commission pursuant to the terms of ' 114. 20. If such a hearing is not requested within ten days of the notice of denial, the denial shall be final.
(C) This section shall not limit causes for denial but shall be in addition to other causes for denial found by the City Commission or provided by this code.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.050) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 114.06 TEMPORARY MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE.
Upon application, the Finance Officer shall issue a temporary massage establishment license to any applicant who was, upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, the owner
Message Establishments
4
or operator of such an establishment in the city pending review and investigation of the application submitted as required in this chapter. Such temporary license shall remain in effect for a period of no longer than 30 days or until issuance/denial of the permanent license. If the application for the permanent license is denied, the temporary license shall immediately expire and shall be of no further force or effect.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.060) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 114.07 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT FACILITIES.
No license to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued to an applicant therefore unless the proposed establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements, and no licensee operating a massage establishment shall fail to comply with the following minimum requirements:
(A) A recognizable and legible sign shall be posted at the main entrance to any building, or to a portion of a building used as a massage establishment identifying the premises as a massage establishment, and recognizable and legible signs shall be posted at all exits;
(B) No less than one artificial white light of 60 watts or more shall be provided and illuminated in each room or enclosure where a massage is administered while occupied;
(C) Equipment approved by the City Health Officer for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in performing a massage shall be provided;
(D) Hot and cold running water shall be provided to a metal or ceramic coated metal utility sink approved by the City Health Officer;
(E) Sanitary cabinet space shall be provided for storage of clean linen;
(F) Adequate dressing, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided for patrons. A minimum of one dressing room containing adequate lockers for patrons to be served, and a minimum of one toilet and one wash basin shall be provided by every massage establishment; provided, however, that if male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously at the establishment, separate massage rooms, separate locker facilities, separate dressing facilities and separate toilet facilities shall be provided for male and female patrons;
(G) All walls, ceiling, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all other physical facilities for the massage establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, bathtubs and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected with a disinfectant each day the business is in operation; and
(H) Clean and sanitary towels and linens shall be provided for each patron of the establishment. No common or repeated use of unlaundered towels or linens shall be permitted.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.070)
' 114.08 INSPECTION OF ESTABLISHMENTS BY OFFICIALS.
The investigating officials of the city or its agent, and the City Health Officer, shall have the right to enter the massage establishment premises from time to time during regular business hours for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to enforce compliance with building, fire, electrical, plumbing or health
Message Establishments
5
regulations. This shall not restrict or limit the right of entry vested in any law enforcement agency.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.080)
' 114.09 NAME OF ESTABLISHMENT.
No person licensed to do business as provided in this chapter shall operate under any name or conduct the business under any designation not specified in the license.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.090)
' 114.10 CHANGE OF LOCATION OF ESTABLISHMENT.
A change of location of a licensed massage establishment may be approved by the Finance Officer provided all applicable provisions of the city ordinances are complied with and upon payment of a change of location fee of $25 to partly defray the costs of investigation.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.100) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 114.11 MASSAGIST LICENSEES TO BE EMPLOYED.
No massage establishment licensee shall employ, or otherwise allow, any person to perform as a massagist who is not licensed as a massagist under the terms of this chapter.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.110)
' 114.12 MASSAGES AT MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT ONLY.
No person shall administer a massage or permit a massage to be administered at or upon any public place other than a massage establishment.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.120)
' 114.13 MASSAGIST LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall perform as a massagist within the city unless such person has first been issued a massagist license by the City Commission and unless such license or temporary license remains in effect in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.130)
' 114.14 APPLICATION FOR MASSAGIST LICENSE.
Each application for a massagist license shall be upon a form provided by the city and shall be submitted to the Finance Officer. Each form shall contain the following information:
(A) The applicant=s full name, residence address and telephone number;
(B) The name and address of the massage establishment where the applicant is to be employed as a massagist;
(C) The criminal record, if any, other than misdemeanor traffic violations, of the applicant;
Message Establishments
6
(D) Whether any license to perform as a massagist has previously been denied or revoked and, if so, the reasons, dates and places of such denial or revocation;
(E) One portrait photograph at least two inches by two inches and a complete set of the applicant=s fingerprints which shall be taken by the Police Chief or his or her agent;
(F) Written proof that the applicant is over the age of 18 years; and
(G) A certificate from a medical doctor stating that the applicant, within 30 days immediately prior to filing application, has been examined and found to be free from any contagious or communicable disease which is likely to be communicated during the administration of a massage. Every massagist licensed under this chapter shall be recertified, in accordance with this division (G) each year.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.140) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 114.15 INVESTIGATION UPON RECEIPT OF APPLICATION FOR MASSAGIST LICENSE.
Upon receipt of the application for a massages license, the Finance Officer shall refer the application to the Police Department within 30 days from the date of the application and submit a written recommendation thereon to the City Commission.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.150) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 114.16 DENIAL OF MASSAGIST LICENSE; NOTICE; RIGHT TO HEARING.
(A) The Finance Officer shall not issue a massages license if, based upon the investigation and report, it is found that:
(1) The applicant has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving the use of force or violence upon the person of another; and
(2) The applicant has, knowingly and with intent to deceive, made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact in the license application or in any other document required by the city in conjunction therewith.
(B) For denial, notifications and reasons for denial shall be set forth in writing by the Finance Officer and shall be sent to the applicant by means of registered or certified mail or hand delivery. The denied applicant shall, at his or her election, have the right to a hearing before the City Commission pursuant to the terms of ' 114. 20. If such hearing is not requested within ten days of the notice of denial, the denial shall be final.
(C) This section shall not limit causes for denial but shall be addition to other causes for denial found by the Finance Officer or provided by this code.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.160) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 114.17 TEMPORARY MASSAGIST LICENSE.
Upon application, the Finance Officer shall issue a temporary massages license to any applicant who was, upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, performing the function of massagist in the city, pending review and investigation of the applicant submitted in this chapter. Such
Message Establishments
7
temporary license shall remain in effect for a period of no longer than 30 days or until issuance/denial of the permanent license. If the application for the permanent license is denied, the temporary license shall immediately expire and shall be of no further force or effect.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.170) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 114.18 TRANSFER OF MASSAGIST LICENSE.
No massagist license shall be transferable.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.180)
' 114.19 POSTING OF MASSAGIST AND MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSES.
Each massage establishment licensee shall post in a conspicuous place within the massage establishment the license of each massagist performing as a massagist in the establishment and the license of the massage establishment.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.190)
' 114.20 DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES GENERALLY.
(A) Denial. Within ten days of the denial by the Finance Officer of an application for a massage establishment license or massagist license, the applicant may file with the Finance Officer a written request for hearing before the City Commission. At such hearing, evidence shall be received for the purpose of determining whether or not such denial shall be upheld. Following the hearing, if the denial is upheld, the notification of and reasons for such decision shall be set forth in writing and sent to the applicant by means of registered or certified mail or hand delivery.
(B) Suspension or revocation. Any massage establishment or massagist license shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the City Commission for violation of any provision of this chapter, city ordinance, rule or regulation or state law, or for grounds that should warrant the denial of the issuance of such license in the first instance, or for the violation of any law relating to or regulating massage establishments or massagists. The suspension or revocation of a license shall be accomplished pursuant to a hearing held before the City Commission at which time evidence shall be received for the purpose of determining whether or not such license shall be suspended or revoked or retained. Following the hearing, if the license is suspended or revoked, the notification of and reasons for such decision shall be set forth in writing and sent to the licensee by means of registered or certified mail or hand delivery. Notice of such hearing shall be in writing, directed to and delivered to applicant by means of registered or certified mail or hand delivery at least ten days before such hearing.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.200) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 114.21 INJUNCTION RELIEF.
In addition to the legal remedies provided for in the city ordinances, the operation of any massage establishment in violation of the terms of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be enjoined by the city.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.210)
Message Establishments
8
' 114.22 EXEMPTIONS.
This chapter shall not apply to the following:
(A) Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, physical therapists, psychiatrists, psychologists, clinical social workers, family counselors and clergy who are licensed to practice their respective professions in the state or who are permitted to practice temporarily under the auspices of an associate or establishment duly licensed business or profession;
(B) Nurses and hospital employees who are registered under the laws of this state while in the normal course of their duties;
(C) A trainer of any duly constituted athletic team while in the normal course of his or her duties;
(D) Any duly licensed establishment in which such persons practice their respective professions; and
(E) Any establishment which offers massage as one part of a complete athletic, recreational or health facility or program, nor to persons employed by such establishments to perform massages.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.220)
' 114.23 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
(A) It is unlawful for any person in a massage establishment to place his or her hands upon, to fondle in any manner, or to massage a sexual or genital part of any other person.
(B) It is unlawful for any massagist, in a massage establishment, to expose his or her sexual or genital parts, or any portion thereof, to any other person.
(C) It is unlawful for any person, while in the presence of any other person in a massage establishment, to fail to conceal with a fully opaque covering the sexual or genital parts of their body.
(D) It is unlawful for any person owning, renting, leasing, operating or managing a massage establishment knowingly to cause, allow or permit, in or about such massage establishment, any agent, lessee, employee or any other person under their control or supervision to perform such acts prohibited in divisions (A), (B) or (C) above.
(E) For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
SEXUAL OR GENITAL PARTS. Includes the genitals, pubic area, anus or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.230) Penalty, see ' 114.99
' 114.24 TRANSFER OF MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE.
No massage establishment license shall be transferable.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.240)
Message Establishments
9
' 114.25 APPLICATION FEE.
(A) Application fee for the massage establishment license shall be in the amount as established by resolution of the City Commission, which fee must accompany the application. Such fee is not refundable.
(B) Application fee for massagist license shall be in the amount as established by resolution of the City Commission, which fee must accompany the application. Such fee is not refundable.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.250)
' 114.99 PENALTY.
Except as otherwise specifically provided, any person violating any provisions of this chapter, or failing to comply with any of the provisions thereof, shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine of the maximum amount permitted by law, or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, ' 5.16.260)
1
CHAPTER 115: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
115.01 Definitions
115.02 License required
115.03 License application
115.04 Application contents
115.05 Application approval and permit issuance
115.06 Permit fee
115.07 Exceptions
115.08 Transfer of permit
115.09 Execution of order by solicitor
115.10 Solicitor to leave property upon request
' 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PEDDLING. A person engaged in selling of personal property or personal services by going about from place to place, highway to street parking, or house to house to sell the same and who carries with him or her such property for delivery at the time of sale or performs such service at the time of contract for such service or immediately thereafter is a peddler.
SOLICITING. A person engaged in going from place to place, highway or street parking, or house to house to solicit orders for, or to offer to sell, personal property for future delivery or the performance of personal services at some time in the future, is a solicitor.
(Prior Code, ' 5.20.010)
' 115.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall deal as a peddler or solicitor, as defined, without having first procured a license in the manner provided herein.
(Prior Code, ' 5.20.020) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 115.03 LICENSE APPLICATION.
Any peddler or solicitor, before selling or offering for sale or taking any orders or soliciting any orders for the sale or future delivery of personal property or for the performance of personal services within the provisions of this chapter, shall first make application for a license to transact business as a peddler or solicitor, as the case may be, to the Finance Officer.
(Prior Code, ' 5.20.030) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 115.04 APPLICATION CONTENTS.
The forms shall require the applicant to furnish the following information:
(A) Name of applicant;
Peddlers and Solicitors
2
(B) Permanent address of applicant;
(C) Whether he or she transacts business for himself or herself or someone else;
(D) If for someone else, the name and address of the person, firm or corporation he or she represents;
(E) The nature and character of the property or personal service to be sold;
(F) Whether he or she sells or delivers the property directly to the purchaser or whether he or she solicits or takes orders for it by carrying samples or catalogs;
(G) Whether he or she performs the personal service directly for the purchaser or whether he or she solicits or takes orders for it to be performed at some time in the future, whether by the applicant or by some other person, firm or corporation;
(H) Manner in which he or she intends to travel and a complete description of the vehicle used for traveling;
(I) Copies of contracts and agreements he or she intends to make with the customers;
(J) The area or areas of the city in which he or she intends to operate; and
(K) Such other information as the Finance Officer recently requires.
(Prior Code, ' 5.20.040) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 115.05 APPLICATION APPROVAL AND PERMIT ISSUANCE.
Upon completion, execution and filing of the application forms and the payment of the fee hereinafter provided, the Finance Officer shall approve the application and issue a permit to the applicant for the activities described in the application.
(Prior Code, ' 5.20.050) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 115.06 PERMIT FEE.
The fee for a peddler=s or solicitor=s permit shall be set by resolution of the City Commission.
(Prior Code, ' 5.20.060)
' 115.07 EXCEPTIONS.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following:
(A) Solicitations, sales or distributions made by charitable, educational or religious organizations, which have registered, with the city;
(B) Traveling salespersons doing business exclusively with retail merchants, manufacturers or public officials; and
(C) Members of professions licensed by the state.
(Prior Code, ' 5.20.070)
' 115.08 TRANSFER OF PERMIT.
No two or more persons shall deal on the same permit as partners, agents or otherwise, nor shall such permit be
Peddlers and Solicitors
3
assignable from the person to whom it was originally issued to any other person, firm or corporation.
(Prior Code, ' 5.20.080)
' 115.09 EXECUTION OF ORDER BY SOLICITOR.
Every solicitor shall execute, sign his or her own name, and deliver to the person giving an order for the future delivery of property or for the performance of personal services in the future an exact copy thereof, and no such order shall be binding on the party giving the same, unless all the terms thereof, as made by such solicitor, shall be set forth therein.
(Prior Code, ' 5.20.090)
' 115.10 SOLICITOR TO LEAVE PROPERTY UPON REQUEST.
No peddler or solicitor shall remain upon the property of any customer or prospective customer who has requested the peddler or solicitor to leave such property.
(Prior Code, ' 5.20.100)
1
CHAPTER 116: TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
116.01 Definitions
116.02 License required
116.03 Application for license
116.04 Inspection
116.05 Minimum sanitation standards
116.06 Granting of license
116.07 Denial of license
116.08 Renewal of license
116.09 Change of location of establishment
116.10 Revocation of license
116.11 Patrons restricted
' 116.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BODY PIERCING. The placing of a permanent or temporary foreign object in a person=s body, such as ears, nose, lips, genitals, nipples or parts thereof, for a decorative or other nonmedical purpose by a person not directly under the supervision of a licensed physician as defined by SDCL ' 36-4-11; the site or location, on the patron, of the body piercing.
BODY PIERCING AREA. Within a body piercing establishment, the immediate vicinity where body piercing is performed.
BODY PIERCING ARTIST. A person engaged in the practice of body piercing.
BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENT. The building or structure where body piercing is practiced.
COMMUNICABLE DISEASE. A disease which is capable of being transmitted from person to person.
MINOR. A person who is under the age of 18 years.
PATRON. A person who receives a tattoo.
PERMANENT BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENT. A building where body piercing is practiced on a year-round basis.
PERMANENT TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT. A building where tattooing is practiced on a year-round basis.
TATTOO ARTIST. A person engaged in the practice of tattooing.
TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT. The building or structure where tattooing is practiced.
TATTOOING. To puncture the skin of a person with a needle and insert indelible permanent colors through the puncture to leave permanent marks or designs.
Tattooing and Body Piercing Establishments
2
TATTOOING AREA. Within a tattoo establishment, the immediate vicinity where tattooing is performed.
TEMPORARY BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENT. A building or structure where body piercing is practiced for not more than 30 consecutive days.
TEMPORARY TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT. A building or structure where tattooing is practiced for not more than 30 days.
(Prior Code, ' 5.24.010)
' 116.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on in or upon any premises within the city, a tattoo establishment or body piercing establishment unless a license has been issued by the city which remains in effect in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, ' 5.24.020) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 116.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
Each application for a license shall be upon a form provided by the city and shall be submitted to the city along with a fee, in the amount established by resolution of the City Commission, and shall contain the following information:
(A) A definition of service to be provided;
(B) The location and mailing address of the proposed establishment;
(C) The name and residence address of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, the name and address of the registered agent and of the officers. If the applicant is a partnership, the names and residence addresses of each of the partners, including limited partners, and the address of the partnership itself, if different from the address of the tattoo establishment;
(D) The last two previous addresses (if any) during the past three years immediately prior to the present address of the applicant;
(E) Written proof that the applicant is over the age of 18 years;
(F) Individual or partnership applicant=s height, weight, color of eyes, hair and sex;
(G) Copy of identification such as driver=s license and Social Security card;
(H) The history of the applicant in the operation of a tattoo establishment or similar business or occupation, including, but not limited to, whether or not such person has previously had a similar license revoked or suspended and the reason therefore;
(I) The name and address of each tattoo or body piercing artist who is or will be employed in the establishment; and
(J) Any other information or identification necessary to substantiate these provisions.
(Prior Code, ' 5.24.030)
Tattooing and Body Piercing Establishments
3
' 116.04 INSPECTION.
After the city receives an application, the Finance Officer shall request that the tattoo and body piercing establishment be inspected by the Department of Health within 30 days, and annually upon renewal of the license.
(Prior Code, ' 5.24.040) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 116.05 MINIMUM SANITATION STANDARDS.
The establishment shall meet the minimum sanitation standards set forth by the South Dakota Administrative Rules, Chapters 44:12:01 and 44:12:02 before a license will be granted.
(Prior Code, ' 5.24.050)
' 116.06 GRANTING OF LICENSE.
Upon proof of compliance from the Department of Health, the city shall grant the establishment a license which shall be effective for one year.
(Prior Code, ' 5.24.060)
' 116.07 DENIAL OF LICENSE.
(A) The city shall not issue such establishment a license if the Department of Health report finds that establishment does not meet the minimum sanitation standards or the applicant has knowingly made any false or fraudulent statement in the application for the license.
(B) The Finance Officer shall notify the applicant of the denial and the reasons for the denial in writing and send it to the applicant by certified mail. The applicant may request a hearing with the City Commission by filing the request within ten days of receipt of the notice.
(Prior Code, ' 5.24.070) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 116.08 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
An application to renew a license shall be made no later than 30 days before the expiration of the current license along with a renewal fee in the amount established by resolution of the City Commission. After an inspection is completed by the Department of Health which shows proof of compliance, the city shall renew the license for an additional year.
(Prior Code, ' 5.24.080)
' 116.09 CHANGE OF LOCATION OF ESTABLISHMENT.
A license is not transferable to a new location until a transfer fee, in the amount established by resolution of the City Commission, has been submitted and an inspection showing that the establishment is in compliance with the sanitation standards.
(Prior Code, ' 5.24.090)
' 116.10 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
Any establishment granted a license under this chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the
Tattooing and Body Piercing Establishments
4
Finance Officer for violation of any provision of this chapter, or applicable provision of the city ordinances, administrative rule, state law or for grounds that should warrant the denial of the issuance of such license in the first instance. The suspension or revocation of a license shall be accomplished pursuant to a hearing held before the City Commission at which time evidence shall be received for the purpose of determining whether or not such license shall be suspended or revoked or retained. Following the hearing, if the license is suspended or revoked, the notification of and reasons for such decision shall be set forth in writing and sent to the licensee by means of registered or certified mail or hand delivery. Notice of such hearing shall be in writing, directed to and delivered to the applicant by means of registered or certified mail or hand delivery at least ten days before such hearing.
(Prior Code, ' 5.24.100) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 116.11 PATRONS RESTRICTED.
(A) Any establishment may not tattoo or body pierce a patron without first obtaining a signed consent. The consent must include a statement by the patron that he or she is free from infectious or contagious diseases in a communicable stage. This includes rashes, skin lesions, boils, and blood-borne diseases such as viral hepatitis B and human immunodeficiency virus infection. An establishment may not tattoo or body pierce a patron with evident skin lesions or skin infections or who is known or suspected to have an infectious or contagious disease in a communicable stage.
(B) Minors may not be tattooed or body pierced unless the minor=s parents have signed a consent form authorizing the tattoo or body piercing in the presence of an employee at the licensed establishment. No establishment may tattoo or body pierce a patron who is under the influence of alcohol or other mind-altering drugs.
(C) The establishment shall conspicuously post a notice stating that it is illegal to tattoo or body pierce
any person under the age of 18 without the parents= signed consent.
(Prior Code, ' 5.24.110)
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY
Section
130.01 Open containers
130.02 False emergency alarms prohibited
130.03 Indecency
130.04 Throwing containers
' 130.01 OPEN CONTAINERS.
(A) Generally. It is unlawful to drink any beer or alcoholic beverage or to possess any glass, can or other container containing beer or any alcoholic beverage on which the seal has been broken, in any public place, vacant building, automobile, street, alley, sidewalk or place of amusement or business establishment not authorized to sell beer or alcoholic beverages, unless approved by the City Commissioners.
(B) Carry out of partially consumed, sealed bottle of wine permitted under certain circumstances. A licensee that is licensed to sell wine on-sale may permit a customer to carry out the unconsumed portion of a bottle of wine if the customer purchased the bottle of wine from the licensee and consumed a portion of it with a meal that was prepared and served by the licensee at a table on the licensed premises. The licensee shall securely reseal the bottle of wine with a cork or other similar cap and place the bottle in a sealed bag or other container. The licensee shall also attach a receipt for the meal and the wine to the bag or container.
(Prior Code, ' 9.04.010) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 130.02 FALSE EMERGENCY ALARMS PROHIBITED.
No person shall knowingly make or give any false alarm of fire or other emergency by calling or causing to be called, the Volunteer Fire Department, law enforcement personnel or any authorized emergency vehicle.
(Prior Code, ' 9.04.020) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 130.03 INDECENCY.
It is unlawful for any person within the city to:
(A) Knowingly disseminate, distribute or make available to the public any obscene materials;
(B) Knowingly engage or participate in any obscene performance made available to the public;
(C) Knowingly engage in commerce for commercial gain with materials depicting and describing explicit sexual conduct, nudity or excretion utilizing displays, circulars, advertisements and other public sales efforts that promote such commerce primarily on the basis of the prurient appeal; or
(D) Expose his or her anus or genitals in a public place, with an immoral purpose, where another person may be present who would be offended or alarmed by the person=s act.
(Prior Code, ' 9.04.030) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 130.04 THROWING CONTAINERS.
It is unlawful to throw, cast or otherwise put in movement any bottle, can, glass or other container at any other person or vehicle, whether moving or parked.
(Prior Code, ' 5.08.120) Penalty, see ' 112.99
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
131.01 Injury or removal of public or private property
131.02 Tampering in general
' 131.01 INJURY OR REMOVAL OF PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
No person shall willfully, maliciously, wantonly, negligently, or otherwise, injure, deface, destroy or remove real property or improvements thereto or moveable or personal property belonging to the city or to any person in the city.
(Prior Code, ' 9.08.010) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 131.02 TAMPERING IN GENERAL.
No person shall tamper with, injure, deface, destroy or remove any sign, notice, marker, fire hydrant, topographical survey marker to monument or any other personal property erected or placed by the city.
(Prior Code, ' 9.08.020) Penalty, see ' 10.99
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
131.01 Injury or removal of public or private property
131.02 Tampering in general
' 131.01 INJURY OR REMOVAL OF PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
No person shall willfully, maliciously, wantonly, negligently, or otherwise, injure, deface, destroy or remove real property or improvements thereto or moveable or personal property belonging to the city or to any person in the city.
(Prior Code, ' 9.08.010) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 131.02 TAMPERING IN GENERAL.
No person shall tamper with, injure, deface, destroy or remove any sign, notice, marker, fire hydrant, topographical survey marker to monument or any other personal property erected or placed by the city.
(Prior Code, ' 9.08.020) Penalty, see ' 10.99
1
CHAPTER 132: DISORDERLY CONDUCT
Section
132.01 Disorderly conduct
132.02 Definitions
132.03 Construction
' 132.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder, nuisance or if his or her conduct is likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, he or she willfully does any of the following acts in a public place:
(A) Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner towards another whereby that other is placed in danger of life, limb or health;
(B) Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged;
(C) Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another, except in exhibitions duly authorized and licensed by law;
(D) Interferes with another=s pursuit of a lawful occupation by acts of violence;
(E) Obstructs, either individually or together with other persons, the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way or place when ordered to do so by a law enforcement officer or other authorized official;
(F) Resists or obstructs the performance of duties by a law enforcement officer or other authorized official;
(G) Incites, attempts to incite, or is involved in attempting to incite a riot;
(H) Addresses abusive language or threats to any law enforcement officer, or any other authorized official of the city who is engaged in the lawful performance of his or her duties, or any other person when such words have direct tendency to cause acts of violence. Words merely causing displeasure, annoyance or resentment shall not be prohibited;
(I) Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive condition;
(J) Makes or causes to be made any loud, boisterous and unreasonable noise or disturbance to the annoyance of any other persons nearby, or near to any public highway, road or common, whereby the public peace is broken or disturbed or the traveling public annoyed; or
(K) Fails to obey a lawful order to disperse by a law enforcement officer or other authorized official, where one or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity, and the public health and safety is eminently threatened.
(Prior Code, ' 9.12.010) Penalty, see ' 10.99
Disorderly Conduct
2
' 132.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of ' 132.01, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
INCITING RIOTS. Means, but is not limited to, urging or instigating other persons to riot, but shall not be deemed to mean the mere oral or written advocacy of ideas or express of belief, not involving advocacy of any act or acts of violence or assertion of the rightness, or the right to commit, any such act or acts.
PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the general public has access in the right resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose, but does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the use of the public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, areas or parks.
RIOT. A public disturbance involving:
(1) An act or acts of violence by one or more persons, which act or acts shall constitute a clear and present danger of, or shall result in, damage or injury to the property of another person or to the person or any other individual; or
(2) A threat or threats of the commission of an act or acts of violence by one or more persons part of an assemblage of three or more persons having, individually or collectively, the ability of immediate execution of such threat or threats, where the performance of the threatened act or acts of violence would constitute a clear and present danger of, or would result in, damage or injury to the property of any other person or to the persons of any other individual.
(Prior Code, ' 9.12.020)
' 132.03 CONSTRUCTION.
Sections 132.01 and 132.02 shall not be construed to suppress the right of lawful assembly, picketing, public speaking or lawful means of expressing public opinion not in contravention with other laws.
(Prior Code, ' 9.12.030)
1
CHAPTER 133: CURFEW
Section
133.01 Curfew hours
133.02 Exceptions to curfew
133.03 Responsibility of officers
133.04 Responsibility of parents
' 133.01 CURFEW HOURS.
No minor under the age of 18 years shall be or remain in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds, public grounds, public places, public buildings, public places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised public places within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. of the following day.
(Prior Code, ' 9.16.010) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 133.02 EXCEPTIONS TO CURFEW.
(A) The provisions of this chapter imposing a curfew on minors shall not apply to a minor accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed or authorized by his or her parent, guardian or such other adult person having the care and custody of the minor.
(B) This section does not apply to a minor who is:
(1) Accompanied by the minor=s parent or guardian;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor=s parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(4) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
(5) Involved in an emergency;
(6) On the sidewalk abutting the minor=s residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence;
(7) Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the town, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the town, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
(8) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or
(9) Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with state law.
(Prior Code, ' 9.16.020)
Curfew
2
' 133.03 RESPONSIBILITY OF OFFICERS.
It shall be the right of any authorized officer or person to arrest and detain any minor violating the curfew and to keep the minor detained until the parent, guardian or custodian is notified, when the minor may be released upon giving of a promise by the minor and his or her parent or custodian that such minor together with his or her parent, guardian or custodian will appear at a stated time before the proper authority to answer the charges.
(Prior Code, ' 9.16.030)
' 133.04 RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS.
It is unlawful for the parents, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 18 years to permit such a minor to be or remain in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds, public grounds, public places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised public places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. of the following day except when the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor or when the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed or authorized by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody the minor.
(Prior Code, ' 9.16.040) Penalty, see ' 10.99
CHAPTER 134: WEAPONS
Section
134.01 Drawing a deadly weapon
134.02 Slingshots
134.03 Discharging firearms and weapons
' 134.01 DRAWING A DEADLY WEAPON.
No person except an officer of the law in the execution of his or her duty or a person in self-defense shall in the city draw a pistol, gun, revolver, knife or any other deadly or dangerous weapon upon another person.
(Prior Code, ' 9.20.010) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 134.02 SLINGSHOTS.
No person shall throw any projectile from any sling within the city.
(Prior Code, ' 9.20.020) Penalty, see ' 10.99
' 134.03 DISCHARGING FIREARMS AND WEAPONS.
No person shall discharge or shoot off any gun, pistol, air gun, rocket, missile or other firearm or shoot any bow and arrow within the limits of the city, or in or within one mile of the platted portion of the city, provided, that this section shall not apply to shooting galleries or archery ranges regularly licensed by the city. Neither shall this apply to any police officer who discharges a firearm while in the performance of his or her official duties.
(Prior Code, ' 9.20.030) Penalty, see ' 10.99
1
CHAPTER 150: BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Section
Building Code Adopted
150.001 Adoption
150.002 Building Inspector
150.003 Application for permits
150.004 Permit fees
150.005 Conflicts
Building Numbers and Street Names
150.020 Houses and business places must be numbered
150.021 Dividing line for numbering; street prefixes
150.022 Numbering to be apportioned
150.023 Fractional numbers
150.024 Numbering of streets, blocks and buildings
150.025 Enforcement
150.026 Names of streets and avenues
Factory Produced Housing
150.040 Adoption of regulations
Flood Damage Prevention
150.055 Definitions
150.056 Lands to which this chapter applies
150.057 Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard
150.058 Compliance
150.059 Abrogation and greater restrictions
150.060 Interpretation
150.061 Warning and disclaimer of liability
150.062 Establishment of development permit
150.063 Designation of the Municipal Finance Officer
150.064 Duties and responsibilities of the Municipal Finance Officer
150.065 General standards for flood hazard reduction
150.066 Specific standards
150.067 Variances
Lot Vacation Requirements
150.080 Vacated building lots
Property Maintenance Code
150.095 Adoption
150.096 Amendments
150.999 Penalty
Buildings and Construction
2
BUILDING CODE ADOPTED
' 150.001 ADOPTION.
The most recent edition of the International Residential Code for One and Two-Family Dwellings, as published by the International Code Council and the International Building Code, as published by the International Code Council, are adopted by reference as the official building codes of the city. Printed copies of International Residential Code for One and Two-Family Dwellings and the International Building Code, shall be on file in the office of the Municipal Finance Officer.
(Prior Code, ' 15.04.010)
' 150.002 BUILDING INSPECTOR.
The Finance Officer or his or her designee shall act as the Building Inspector unless the City Commission appoints a Building Inspector. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to enforce all regulations relative to the construction, alteration, removal and demolition of buildings and structures, and to make all necessary inspections as required.
(Prior Code, ' 15.04.020) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 150.003 APPLICATION FOR PERMITS.
Application for all building permits required by zoning regulations, subdivision regulations and building codes shall be submitted to the Finance Officer or his or her designee.
(Prior Code, ' 15.04.030) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 150.004 PERMIT FEES.
No building permit shall be issued unless the appropriate fee, as established by the City Commission, is paid at the time of application.
(Prior Code, ' 15.04.040)
' 150.005 CONFLICTS.
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation, the provisions of state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation shall prevail and be controlling.
(Prior Code, ' 15.04.050)
BUILDING NUMBERS AND STREET NAMES
' 150.020 HOUSES AND BUSINESS PLACES MUST BE NUMBERED.
Every person who is or may hereafter become the owner of any house, residence, store, shop or other business building, situated on any lot fronting on any of the streets or avenues of the city shall number the same over the main entrance thereof as hereinafter provided.
(Prior Code, ' 15.08.010)
Buildings and Construction
3
' 150.021 DIVIDING LINE FOR NUMBERING; STREET PREFIXES.
The dividing line of numbering on all streets and avenues running east and west shall be Main Street. The dividing line for numbering on all streets and avenues running north and south shall be Fifth Street. All streets and parts of streets running west from Main Street shall be designated by prefixing to the names thereof the word AWest@ and all streets and parts of streets running east from Main Street shall be designated by prefixing to the names thereof the word AEast.@ In like manner all streets and parts of streets running south from Fifth Street shall be designated by prefixing to the names thereof the word ASouth@ and all streets and parts of streets running north from Fifth Street shall be designated by prefixing to the names thereof ANorth.@
(Prior Code, ' 15.08.020)
' 150.022 NUMBERING TO BE APPORTIONED.
One number shall be apportioned to every subdivision of 25 feet along all the thoroughfares of the city whether the same be occupied by buildings or not. Provided, however, that in case any block or blocks or any lot or lots will not divide perfectly into subdivisions of 25 feet, one whole number shall be assigned to the fractional part thereof.
(Prior Code, ' 15.08.030)
' 150.023 FRACTIONAL NUMBERS.
In case more than one building is erected in a single space of 25 feet, the same may be numbered by placing thereon the regular number which appeared on the building formerly situated in the space or the number which would otherwise be allotted to the space
and on the second building to be erected thereon the regular number plus the fraction, one-half.
(Prior Code, ' 15.08.040)
' 150.024 NUMBERING OF STREETS, BLOCKS AND BUILDINGS.
(A) All buildings shall be numbered consecutively in units and tens and all blocks consecutively in even hundreds. All numbering on east and west thoroughfares shall begin at the dividing line at Main Street and proceed outward to the limits of the city placing odd numbers on the south side and even numbers on the north side of each thoroughfare. All numbering on north and south thoroughfares shall begin at the dividing line at Fifth Street and proceed outward to the limits of the city placing odd numbers on the west side and even numbers on the east side of each such thoroughfare.
(B) The number of the first block on each side of the street proceeding from a dividing line shall be 100; the second shall be 200 and so on, and each block shall be numbered consecutively to the outer limits of the city. The number on the first building on the south side of an east and west street, and on the west side of a north and south street, shall be 101, and the first number on the opposite side thereof shall be 102. The first number on the second block shall be 201, and the first number on the opposite side thereof shall be 202, and so on consecutively along all the streets and avenues throughout the city.
(Prior Code, ' 15.08.050)
' 150.025 ENFORCEMENT.
The Chief of Police of the city shall enforce the provisions of the subchapter by giving notice in writing to all persons failing to comply therewith.
(Prior Code, ' 15.08.060)
' 150.026 NAMES OF STREETS AND AVENUES.
Buildings and Construction
4
The Public Works Commissioner or his or her designee shall be authorized to place or cause to be placed the names of streets and avenues in conspicuous places at all the crossings thereof at the expense of the city.
(Prior Code, ' 15.08.070) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
FACTORY PRODUCED HOUSING
' 150.040 ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS.
There is adopted by the city for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of factory-produced housing the following rules and regulations.
(A) Factory produced housing. All residential structures transported to the building sites. There are three categories of factory produced housing and they are: manufactured, modular and panelized.
(1) Manufactured home.
(a) A dwelling unit built on a steel undercarriage with necessary wheel assembly to be transported to a permanent or semi-permanent site. The wheel assembly and tongue can be removed when placed on a permanent foundation. The steel undercarriage is a necessary structural component.
(b) A structure that contains any of the following factors may also be considered a manufactured home:
1. Running gear that is an integral part of the structure;
2. The structure does not require a perimeter box beam assembly;
3. The structure does not have a structural joist system other than the steel undercarriage;
4. The structure comes equipped with a furnace as standard equipment;
5. A water heater may be included in the structure from the factory;
6. Duct work, other utilities and plumbing are installed in the structure from the factory;
7. A manufacturer=s statement of origin is issued for the structure; and
8. The structure may contain a serial number or other means of identifying it from structures of similar manufacture.
(c) Any manufactured home, trailer home or mobile home shall be located in a mobile home park authorized by the city.
(d) A manufactured home, trailer home or mobile home may not be located, established or placed in a residential neighborhood with the exception of a mobile home park authorized by the city.
(e) Whenever the City Building Inspector determines that there has been a violation of this portion of this chapter, he or she shall give notice of the alleged violation to the occupant and owner.
(2) Modular home.
Buildings and Construction
5
(a) A structure which can be transported on a steel undercarriage. The steel undercarriage is not permanent, not a necessary structural component of the structure and is removed when the structure is placed on a permanent foundation. A modular home must meet or exceed local, regional and state building codes.
(b) The following factors are essential to the determination of whether or not a structure will be deemed to be a modular house.
1. A permanent furnace is not installed in the structure prior to on-site installation.
2. A water heater is not installed in the structure prior to on-site installation.
3. The structure contains a perimeter box beam support system.
4. The structure is installed on a frost-free foundation.
5. A wooden underfloor joist system is provided as part of the assembly process as a main structural component of the structure.
(3) Panelized house.
(a) A structure which consists of packaged, prefabricated, factory-built components and are on site-assembled. A panelized house must meet or exceed local, regional and state building codes.
(b) The following minimum factors must be present for a structure to qualify as a panelized house.
1. The structure contains a perimeter box beam support system.
2. The structure is installed on a frost-free foundation.
3. A wooden underfloor joist system is provided as a main structural component of the structure.
(B) Local and state building code requirements. This section shall not be constructed to require that modular or panelized structures exceed local and state building code requirements.
(Prior Code, ' 15.12.010) Penalty, see ' 150.999
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
' 150.055 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
APEX. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO, AH or VO zone on a community=s Flood Insurance Rate
Buildings and Construction
6
Map (FIRM) with a 1% chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.
CRITICAL FEATURE. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING.
(1) A non-basement building:
(a) Built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water; and
(b) Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, ELEVATED BUILDING also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters.
(2) In the case of Zones V1-30, VE, or V, ELEVATED BUILDING also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of ELEVATED BUILDING, even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls met the standards of ' 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the Astart of construction@ commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. EXISTING CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as EXISTING STRUCTURES.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes
are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANU-FACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
Buildings and Construction
7
areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of FLOODING).
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGU-LATIONS. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a Aspecial flood hazard@ and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
FLOOD PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY (REGULATORY FLOODWAY). The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
Buildings and Construction
8
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
(a) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or;
(b) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
LEVEE. A human-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building=s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of ' 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community=s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the Astart of construction@ commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Buildings and Construction
9
(2) Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. No. 97-348), being 16 USC 3501 et seq., includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
(1) Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before Astart of construction@ of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred Asubstantial damage,@ regardless of the actual repair work performed.
(2) The term does not, however, include either:
(a) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions; or
(b) Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure=s continued designation as a historic structure.
VARIANCE. A grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this subchapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A VARIANCE, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this subchapter. (For full requirements see ' 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community=s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in '' 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of
Buildings and Construction
10
1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
(Prior Code, ' 15.20.010)
' 150.056 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
This subchapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city.
(Prior Code, ' 15.20.020)
' 150.057 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated April 2, 2008, is adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter. The FIRM panel numbers are 300C, 286C, 287C, 291C and 275C. The FIRM is on file at 210 N. Dakota at City Hall, Canton, South Dakota 57013.
(Prior Code, ' 15.20.030)
' 150.058 COMPLIANCE.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended or altered without full compliance with the terms of this subchapter and other applicable regulations.
(Prior Code, ' 15.20.040)
' 150.059 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
This subchapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this subchapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Prior Code, ' 15.20.050)
' 150.060 INTERPRETATION.
In the interpretation of this subchapter, all provisions shall be:
(A) Considered as minimum requirements;
(B) Liberally construed in favor of the governing board; and
(C) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Prior Code, ' 15.20.060)
' 150.061 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
The degree of flood protection required by this subchapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. This subchapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This subchapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or
Buildings and Construction
11
any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Prior Code, ' 15.20.070)
' 150.062 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
(A) A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in '' 150.056 through 150.061. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the City and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
(B) Specifically, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been flood proofed;
(3) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood proofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the flood proofing criteria in '' 150.065 and 150.066; and
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
(Prior Code, ' 15.20.080) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 150.063 DESIGNATION OF THE MUNICIPAL FINANCE OFFICER.
The Finance Officer is appointed to administer and implement this subchapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
(Prior Code, ' 15.20.090) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 150.064 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE MUNICIPAL FINANCE OFFICER.
Duties of the Finance Officer shall include, but not be limited to:
(A) Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required; and
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development adversely affects the flood carrying capacity of the area of special flood hazard. For the purposes of this subchapter, ADVERSELY AFFECTS means damage to adjacent properties because of rises in flood stages attributed to physical changes of the channel and the adjacent overbank areas:
(a) If it is determined that there is no adverse effect and the development is not a building, then the permit shall be granted without further consideration;
(b) If it is determined that there is no adverse effect, then technical justification, (i.e., a registered professional engineer) for the proposed development shall be required; and
Buildings and Construction
12
(c) If the proposed development is a building, then the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
(B) Use of other flood base data. The Municipal Finance Officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements or other development in Zone A meets division (C) below containing specific elevation and flood proofing requirements for residential and nonresidential structures.
(C) Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement;
(2) For all new or substantially improved flood proofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure has been flood proofed; and
(b) Maintain the flood proofing certifications required in ' 150.062.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this subchapter.
(D) Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the State Planning Bureau prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
(E) Interpretation of the FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions).
(Prior Code, ' 15.20.100) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 150.065 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required.
(A) Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvement shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.
(2) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors. Specific requirements shall be that:
(a) Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations, with manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side;
(b) Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate
Buildings and Construction
13
points; with manufactured homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side;
(c) All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds; and
(d) Any additions to the manufactured home be similarly anchored.
(B) Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(C) Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters.
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(D) Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(2) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which contain at least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
(E) Encroachments. Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development shall be prohibited in any floodway unless a technical evaluation demonstrates that the encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(Prior Code, ' 15.20.110)
' 150.066 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in ' 150.064(B), Use of Other Base Flood Data, the following standards are required.
(A) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation. Properties that have received a letter of map amendment or letter of map revision based upon fill must still have their lowest floor elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation.
Buildings and Construction
14
(B) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
(1) Be flood proofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(2) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(3) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this division (B) are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in ' 150.064(B).
(Prior Code, ' 15.20.120)
' 150.067 VARIANCES.
(A) General. The Board of Adjustment established in ' 16.01 of the zoning ordinance for the city, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this subchapter. All variance procedures and conditions set forth in the zoning ordinance for the city are hereby adopted by reference and declared a part of this subchapter.
(1) The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the Finance Officer in the enforcement or administration of this subchapter.
(2) In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustment shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this subchapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owners;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with the existing and anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and floodplain management program for that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
Buildings and Construction
15
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, streets and bridges.
(3) Upon consideration of the factors of division (A)(2) above and the purposes of this subchapter, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
(4) The Finance Officer or his or her designee shall maintain the records of all appeal actions, including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the State Office of Emergency Management.
(B) Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items in division (A)(2) above have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justifications required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expenses, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in division (A)(2) above or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
(Prior Code, ' 15.20.130) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
LOT VACATION REQUIREMENTS
' 150.080 VACATED BUILDING LOTS.
Buildings and Construction
16
(A) When a residence, building or other structure capable of receiving utility services has been removed or demolished, the following minimum requirements for reclamation shall be met within 30 days after receiving approval from the city to remove or demolish the structure.
(1) The property owner shall be responsible for termination of all utility services to the property, including, but not limited to, water, sewer, electric, cable, phone and gas, at the property boundary or, where deemed appropriate by the Public Works Superintendent, at a more distant utility distribution point. The termination of utility services shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of the utility provider.
(2) The property owner shall be responsible for notifying the utility provider and the city of the location of the termination point for any utility services.
(3) All costs for capping or terminating utility services, including any fee owed to the utility provider, shall be the responsibility of the lot owner.
(4) No personal property, garbage or debris, including concrete, wood, pipe, wire or cable, may be placed or remain on the property as fill. Fill material shall consist of granular soil or rock material no greater than one inch in diameter.
(5) The lot shall be properly leveled in the manner by the city or by the Public Works Superintendent.
(B) The property owner shall be responsible for controlling noxious weeds and providing proper drainage on the property.
(Prior Code, ' 15.24.010)
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
' 150.095 ADOPTION.
(A) The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council as amended, is hereby adopted as the property maintenance code to provide standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating, governing and controlling the use, occupancy, conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures within this jurisdiction and to provide for a just, equitable and practicable method whereby buildings or structures, which from any cause endanger the life, limb, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants, may be repaired, vacated or demolished.
(B) A printed copy as amended is on file with the City Finance Officer.
(Prior Code, ' 15.28.010)
' 150.096 AMENDMENTS.
The following sections and subsections of the International Property Maintenance Code adopted in this chapter shall be amended or added as follows. All other sections or subsections shall remain the same.
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Canton, South Dakota, hereinafter referred to as Athis code.@
102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions, or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the International Building Code or International Residential Code. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify, or set aside any provision of the Zoning Ordinances of
Buildings and Construction
17
Canton, South Dakota.
103.2 Code official. The Finance Officer or his or her designee is designated as the code official and shall enforce all provisions of this code.
103.4 Liability. The code official, officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act or omission required or permitted in the discharge of official duties.
Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act or omission performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be afforded all the protection by the city=s insurance pool and any immunities and defenses provided by other applicable state and federal laws. The code official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code; and any officer or employee of the city, acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection therewith.
103.5 Fees. The fees for building permits, activities and services performed by the city in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as established by resolution by the City Commission and kept on file in the office of the City Finance Officer.
107.6 Extension of time agreement. If the code official determines that an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property, the code official may grant an extension of time, not to exceed 180 days in which to complete the work listed in the Notice and Order. Any extension shall not extend the time to appeal the Notice and Order. Any extension shall be agreed to in writing in a document containing the following:
1. A reasonable and acceptable schedule, setting forth specific dates to complete corrective action for each violation listed in the Notice and Order.
2. A signature of the responsible party.
111.1 Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the City Commission provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means.
111.2 Hearing. The commission shall hear the appeal within 30 days of the filing of the appeal at a regularly scheduled meeting or special meeting. Any commissioner who has a personal, professional, or financial interest shall not hear the appeal.
111.2.1 Repealed.
111.2.2 Repealed.
111.2.3 Repealed.
111.2.4 Repealed.
111.2.5 Repealed.
111.3 Decision. The commission shall uphold, modify or reverse the decision of the code official by majority vote of the total commissioners.
111.4 Notice. Notice of the decision shall be given to the appellant and code official.
Buildings and Construction
18
111.4.1 Repealed.
111.5 Enforcement. The code official shall take action to enforce the decision 30 days after notice of the decision is mailed to the appellant. If an imminent danger notice was issued, the code official may take action immediately.
111.6 Repealed.
111.6.1 Repealed.
111.6.2 Repealed.
111.7 Appeal to Circuit Court. The decision of the commission is subject to judicial review as provided by state law.
111.8 Stays of enforcement. Any appeals filed on notices and orders (other than imminent danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard and ruled on.
201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the Building Code or Residential Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of eight inches tall. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens.
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after service of
a notice of violation, they shall be in violation of the Revised Ordinances of the City of Canton. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the cost of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property.
304.14 Insect screens. During the period from May 1 to October 1, every door, window, and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged, or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
402.1 Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be eight percent of the floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than three feet (914 mm) from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room.
Exceptions:
1. Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least eight percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33m2). The exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being served.
2. The glazed areas need not be provided in rooms where artificial light is provided capable of producing an average illumination of six foot candles (6.46 lux) over the area of the room at a height of 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor level.
Buildings and Construction
19
404.4.1 Room area. Every living room shall contain at least 120 square feet (11.2 m2), and every bedroom shall contain at least 70 square feet (6.5 m2) and every bedroom occupied by more than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet (4.6 m2) of area for each occupant.
404.5 Overcrowding. Delete.
505.1 General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the state plumbing code.
602.2 Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section.
Exception:
In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C), a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases, or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory, or guestroom on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from October 1 to May 1 to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms.
Exceptions:
1. When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity.
2. In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C), a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.
602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from October 1 to May 1 to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied.
Exceptions:
1. Processing, storage, and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities.
604.2 Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with the state electrical code.
(Prior Code, ' 15.28.020) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 150.999 PENALTY.
(A) Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of ' 10.99.
(B) Any person, firm or corporation in violation of the rules and regulations relating to manufactured homes is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction will be punishable by a fine of the maximum amount permitted by law. Each day that a violation is committed, continued or permitted will be deemed a separate offense.
(Prior Code, ' 15.12.010)
1
CHAPTER 151: HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Section
In General
151.01 Legislative findings; purpose of chapter
Historic Preservation Commission
151.15 Created
151.16 Composition
151.17 Vacancies
151.18 Meetings
151.19 Powers and authorities
151.20 Acquisition of historic easements
Canton Register of Historic Landmarks
151.35 Created
151.36 Criteria for designation
151.37 Nomination of structures and districts to the register
151.38 Notification of nomination
151.39 Determination of the Board
151.40 Notification of determination
151.41 Appeal
151.42 Action by City Commission
151.43 Demolition and house moving
151.44 Notice of intent to demolish or move
151.45 Delay of demolition or house moving
151.46 Moving structures into a historic district
151.47 Burning of structures
151.99 Penalty
IN GENERAL
' 151.01 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS; PURPOSE OF CHAPTER.
Whereas the legislature of the state has determined that the historical, architectural, archaeological, paleontological and cultural heritage of this state is among its most important assets, it is declared to be the purpose of this chapter to authorize the city to engage in a comprehensive program of historic preservation, to promote the use and conservation of historic properties for the education, inspiration, pleasure and enrichment of the citizens of this city. The city adopts this chapter pursuant to the authority of SDCL Ch. 1-19B and by incorporating provisions therefrom in this chapter.
(Prior Code, ' 15.16.010)
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
Historic Preservation
2
' 151.15 CREATED.
Pursuant to authority granted to the city in SDCL 1-19B-2 there is created a Historic Preservation Commission for the city. The Historic Preservation Commission will be referred to as the Canton Board of Historic Preservation, referred to in this chapter as the Board.
(Prior Code, ' 15.16.020)
' 151.16 COMPOSITION.
The Board shall consist of not less than five, nor more than ten members who shall be appointed by the City Commission with due regard to proper representation of such fields as history, architecture, urban planning, archaeology and law. All the members of the Board shall reside within the city limits and shall serve three-year terms. Each member shall be eligible for appointment for one additional term.
(Prior Code, ' 15.16.030) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 151.17 VACANCIES.
Any vacancy in the membership of the Board shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as for appointment.
(Prior Code, ' 15.16.040)
' 151.18 MEETINGS.
The Board shall hold a regular meeting every three months. The Board shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which shall be of public record.
(Prior Code, ' 15.16.050)
' 151.19 POWERS AND AUTHORITIES.
(A) Pursuant to SDCL Ch. 1-19B, the Board may exercise the following powers, duties and responsibilities to:
(1) Conduct a survey of local historic properties, complying with all applicable standards and criteria the statewide survey undertaken by the Office of History of the State Department of Education and Cultural Affairs;
(2) Participate in the conduct of land use, urban renewal and other planning processes undertaken by the city;
(3) Acquire fee and lesser interests in historic properties, including adjacent or associated lands, by purchase, bequest or donation;
(4) Preserve, restore, maintain and operate historic properties under the ownership or control of the Board;
(5) Lease, sell and otherwise transfer or dispose of historic properties subject to rights of public access and other covenants and in a manner that will preserve the properties within its jurisdiction;
(6) Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on historic properties within its jurisdiction;
(7) Recommend ordinances and otherwise provide information for the purposes of historic preservation to the City Commission;
Historic Preservation
3
(8) Establish an endowment fund for the purpose of providing low interest loans and grants to allow for the restoration and preservation of historic properties;
(9) Recommend to the Board of Appeals exemptions from the Building Code relating to exterior features of structures designated by the City Commission as having historical or architectural significance;
(10) Cooperate with the federal, state and local governments in the pursuance of the objectives of historic preservation; and
(11) Contract, with the approval of the City Commission, with the state or the federal government, or any agency of either, or with any other organization.
(B) All lands, buildings, structures, sites, areas or objects acquired by funds appropriated by the city shall be acquired in the name of the city unless otherwise provided by the City Commission. If acquired by funds other than those appropriated by the city, the lands, buildings or structures may be held in the name Board, the city or both.
(Prior Code, ' 15.16.060)
' 151.20 ACQUISITION OF HISTORIC EASEMENTS.
The city may acquire by purchase, donation or condemnation historic easements in any area within its jurisdiction wherever and to the extent that the City Commission determines that the acquisition will be in the public interest. For the purpose of this section, HISTORIC EASEMENT means any easement restriction, covenant or condition running with the land designated to preserve, maintain or enhance all or part of the existing state of places of historical, architectural, archaeological, paleontological or cultural significance.
(Prior Code, ' 15.16.070)
CANTON REGISTER OF HISTORIC LANDMARKS
' 151.35 CREATED.
Pursuant to SDCL ' 1-19B-53, the city creates the Canton Register of Historic Landmarks, hereinafter referred to as the register.
(Prior Code, ' 15.16.080)
' 151.36 CRITERIA FOR DESIGNATION.
The Board of Historic Preservation shall, upon such investigation as it deems necessary, make a determination as to whether a nominated historic property, structure or area meets one or more of the following criteria:
(A) It is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of city history;
(B) Its identification with a person who significantly contributed to the development of the community, county, state or country;
(C) Its embodiment of distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of construction;
(D) It represents the work of a master or possesses high artistic values;
(E) It represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or
Historic Preservation
4
(F) It has yielded or may be likely to yield information important in prehistory or history.
(Prior Code, ' 15.16.090)
' 151.37 NOMINATION OF STRUCTURES AND DISTRICTS TO THE REGISTER.
Nominations for inclusion on the register shall be made to the Board of Historic Preservation on a form prepared by the Board and may be submitted by a member of the Board, owner of record of the nominated property or structure, the City Commission, or any other person or organization.
(Prior Code, ' 15.16.100)
' 151.38 NOTIFICATION OF NOMINATION.
The Board of Historic Preservation shall notify the owners of all property nominated to the local register of the date on which the Board will hear the nomination. Notification will be at least 14 days prior to the meeting. The city shall also publish a notice of the time and place of the meeting in the official newspaper of the city at least one week prior to the meeting.
(Prior Code, ' 15.16.110)
' 151.39 DETERMINATION OF THE BOARD.
The Board of Historic Preservation shall adopt by resolution a recommendation that the structure,
property or district nominated for inclusion on the register does or does not meet the criteria for designation specified in ' 151.36. The resolution will be accompanied by a report to the City Commission containing an explanation of the significance of the nominated structure, property or district as it relates to the criteria for designation.
(Prior Code, ' 15.16.120)
' 151.40 NOTIFICATION OF DETERMINATION.
A notice of determination shall be sent by regular mail to the owner of record of all property nominated to the local register. The notice shall include a copy of the report sent to the City Commission concerning the nomination and shall be sent within seven days of the Board of Historic Preservation=s adoption of a resolution. If the decision is that the nominated property does meet the criteria for designation, a copy of the report and resolution shall be sent to the City Commission for official designation by ordinance.
(Prior Code, ' 15.16.130)
' 151.41 APPEAL.
A determination by the Board of Historic Preservation that the nominated property does or does not meet the criteria for designation the register shall be a final decision unless the applicant files a written appeal with the Finance Officer within 20 days of the postmarked date of the notice of determination.
(Prior Code, ' 15.16.140) (Ord. 1051, passed 4-16-2018)
' 151.42 ACTION BY CITY COMMISSION.
The City Commission shall either reject the recommendation or written appeal or they shall designate the property on
Historic Preservation
5
the register by ordinance within 60 days after receiving the resolution from the Board of Historic Preservation or the appeal from the owner. The Commission=s action shall occur at a regular City Commission meeting at least one week after a notice has been published in the official newspaper stating the time and place of the meeting.
(Prior Code, ' 15.16.150)
' 151.43 DEMOLITION AND HOUSE MOVING.
Every application for a demolition permit or a house moving permit for a property listed on the local register shall be forwarded to the Board of Historic Preservation within seven days following receipt of the application by the city.
(Prior Code, ' 15.16.160)
' 151.44 NOTICE OF INTENT TO DEMOLISH OR MOVE.
The owner of any structure on the local register, upon application for a demolition or house moving permit, shall be required to post four signs on the property stating the intent to demolish or move the structure. The signs shall be provided by the city and shall be placed on the four corners of the property. The signs must be posted within seven days of the date of application and must remain posted for a minimum of 90 days unless the Board of Historic Preservation approves the demolition or removal prior to the expiration of the 90-day period.
(Prior Code, ' 15.16.170)
' 151.45 DELAY OF DEMOLITION OR HOUSE MOVING.
A permit to demolish or move a structure which is on the local register may not be obtained for a period of 90 days from the date the application is received by the city unless approval for removal or demolition is given by the Board of Historic Preservation at an earlier date. During this period, the Board may attempt to preserve the property by exercising the powers and authorities given to the Board in ' 151.19.
(Prior Code, ' 15.16.180)
' 151.46 MOVING STRUCTURES INTO A HISTORIC DISTRICT.
Before a structure can be moved into a historic district, the procedure described in '' 151.43 and 151.44 must be followed. If the structure proposed for the district does not meet the approval of the Board of Historic Preservation, a permit will not be issued for 90 days from the date the application is received by the city. During this period, the Board may negotiate with the property owner to attempt to find a reasonable alternative for the proposed structure.
(Prior Code, ' 15.16.190)
' 151.47 BURNING OF STRUCTURES.
Any contract entered into by the Fire Department for burning a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the local register must receive the approval of the Board of Historic Preservation.
(Prior Code, ' 15.16.200)
' 151.99 PENALTY.
Any person who demolishes or removes a structure listed on local register without following the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $500. Each and every day, up to 90 days, such demolition and removal activity continues after notification shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, ' 15.16.210)
CHAPTER 152: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
152.01 Adopted by reference
' 152.01 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
The subdivision ordinance, copies of which are on file at the City Hall, is adopted by reference and incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as fully as set out at length herein.
(Ord. 1008, passed 7-16-2012)
CHAPTER 153: ZONING
Section
153.01 Adopted by reference
' 153.01 ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
The zoning ordinance, copies of which are on file at the City Hall, is adopted by reference and incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as fully as set out at length herein.
(Ord. 998, passed 12-5-2011; Ord. 1000, passed 4-16-2012; Ord. 1003, passed 6-18-2012; Ord. 1018, passed 10-7-2013; Ord. 1021, passed 10-21-2013; Ord. 1041, passed 5-1-2017; Ord. 1042, passed 5-1-2017; Ord. 1048, passed 3-5-2018; Ord. 1049, passed 4-3-2018)
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
554 2-18-1975 Granting permission to Northern States Power Company to construct, operate, repair and maintain, in the city an electric distribution system and transmission lines, including necessary poles, pole lines and fixtures and appurtenances, for the furnishing of electric energy to the city and its inhabitants.
980 8-16-2010 Granting a cable services franchise to MidContinent Communications for a period of ten years.
1017 9-16-2013 Granting to Midamerican Energy Company, its successors and assigns, the right and non-exclusive franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain and operate in the city, a natural gas system and to furnish and sell natural gas to the city and its inhabitants for 20 years.
TABLE II: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
1034 11-21-2016 Rezoning property legally described as Lot 6 in Block 33 in the Hills Addition to the City of Canton, Lincoln County, South Dakota, from (R) Residential to (LI) Light Industrial.
1035 11-21-2016 Rezoning property legally described as the east 13 feet of Lot 7 and all of Lot 8 in Block 10 of Fitzgerald and Benedict=s Addition to the City of Canton, in Lincoln County, South Dakota, from (GB) General Business to (R) Residential.
1044 11-6-2017 Rezoning property legally described as Tract 1 in Rutten Addition to the City of Canton, in Lincoln County, South Dakota, from (UR) Urban Reserve District to (GB) General Business District.
1045 11-20-2017 Rezoning property legally described as W 852' of E 128 Rods of S1/2, SE 1/4 13-98-49 *Ex Lot H-1** Ex South 285*, from (UR) Urban Reserve District to (R) Residential District.
1047 1-2-2018 Rezoning property legally described as the east 13 feet of Lot 7 and all of Lot 8 in Block 10 of Fitzgerald and Benedict=s Addition to the City of Canton, in Lincoln County, South Dakota, from (GB) General Business to (R) Residential.
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to South Dakota Codified Laws
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO SOUTH DAKOTA CODIFIED LAWS
SDCL Cite Code Section
Ch. 1-19B 151.01, 151.19
1-19B-2 151.15
1-19B-53 151.35
1-25-2 30.10
1-27-19 31.15
4-11-6 36.014
9-1-1 10.02, 10.04
9-9-9 30.08
9-9-20 through 9-9-24 30.14
9-11-10 30.20
9-13-13 10.04
9-19-1 10.04
9-19-3 10.99
9-19-5 30.16
9-19-6 30.16
9-19-7 30.17
9-19-8 30.17
9-19-9 30.17
9-19-13 30.18, 52.07
9-19-15 30.19
9-19-16 30.19
9-19-17 30.19
Ch. 9-21A 36.060
9-22-12 36.008
9-22-17 36.002
9-32-10 54.09
9-32-11 Ch. 54
9-34-19 96.034
9-38-80 32.108
9-40-30 36.007
9-40-32 36.007
9-46-l.2 95.025
10-45 36.041, 36.044, 36.046, 36.999
10-46 36.042, 36.044, 36.999
10-52 36.040, 36.043
10-52A 36.046
SDCL Cite Code Section
11-4-8 30.17
22-6-2(2) 10.99
32-20B-2 77.08
32-20B-3 77.09
32-20B-4 77.09
32-20B-5 77.10
32-20B-6 77.11
32-20B-7 77.12
32-20B-8 77.12
32-12-22 71.02
32-25-23 77.12
32-26-22 77.11
32-26-22.1 77.11
32-26-46 71.32
32-26-47 71.32
34A-6 111.19
34A-7-6 et seq. 54.09
34A-7-14 54.09
34A-7-15 54.09
Title 35 112.09
Chapter 35 112.02
35-1-1 36.046
35-4-2(4) 112.10
35-4-2(5) 112.10
35-4-2(12) 112.07
35-4-2(16) 112.07, 112.10
35-4-2(17A) 112.07
35-4-2(19) 112.07
Chapter 35-12 112.07
36-4-11 116.01
40-12-5 90.43
40-12-6 90.44
42-2-1 32.108, 32.110
42-7A-41 112.07
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section 2015 Code Section
1.08.010 10.99
2.04.010 30.01
2.04.030 30.03
2.04.040 30.04
2.04.050 30.05
2.04.060 30.06
2.04.070 30.07
2.04.090 30.08
2.04.100 30.09
2.04.110 30.10
2.04.120 30.11
2.04.140 30.12
2.04.150 30.13
2.04.170 30.14
2.04.220 30.15
2.08.020 31.02
2.08.030 31.03
2.12.010 31.15
2.12.020 31.16
2.16.010 31.45
2.24.010 33.01
2.24.020 33.02
2.24.030 33.03
2.24.040 33.04
2.36.010 32.050
2.36.020 32.051
2.36.030 32.052
2.36.040 32.053
2.36.050 32.054
2.36.060 32.055
2.36.070 32.056
2.36.080 32.057
2.36.090 32.058
2.36.100 32.059
2.36.110 32.060
2.40.010 32.075
2.40.020 32.076
2.40.030 32.077
Prior Code Section 2015 Code Section
2.40.040 32.078
2.40.050 32.079
2.40.060 32.080
2.40.070 32.081
2.40.080 32.082
2.40.090 32.083
2.40.100 32.084
2.40.110 32.085
2.40.120 32.086
2.40.130 32.087
2.40.140 32.088
2.40.150 32.089
Prior Code Section 2015 Code Section
2.40.160 32.090
2.40.170 32.091
2.44.010 32.105
2.44.020 32.106
2.44.030 32.107
2.44.040 32.108
2.44.050 32.109
2.44.060 32.110
2.44.070 32.111
2.44.080 32.112
2.44.090 32.113
2.52.010 34.01
2.52.020 34.02
2.52.030 34.03
2.60.010 35.01
2.60.020 35.02
2.60.030 35.03
2.60.040 35.04
2.60.050 35.05
2.60.060 35.06
2.60.070 35.07
2.60.080 35.08
2.60.090 35.09
2.60.100 35.99
2.60.110 35.99
2.60.120 35.10
3.01.010 36.001
3.01.020 36.002
3.01.030 36.003
3.01.040 36.004
3.01.050 36.005
3.01.060 36.006
3.01.070 36.007
3.01.080 36.008
3.01.090 36.009
3.01.100 36.010
3.01.110 36.011
3.01.120 36.012
3.01.130 36.013
3.01.140 36.014
3.02.010 36.025
3.04.010 36.040
3.04.010A 36.046, 36.999
3.04.020 36.041
3.04.030 36.042
Prior Code Section 2015 Code Section
3.04.040 36.043
3.04.050 36.044
3.04.060 36.999
3.04.070 36.045
3.05.010 36.060
3.05.020 36.061
3.05.030 36.062
3.05.040 36.063
3.05.050 36.064
3.05.060 36.065
3.05.070 36.066
Ch. 3.05, Exh. A 36.067
3.08.010 36.080
3.08.020 36.081
3.08.030 36.082
5.03.090 112.09
5.03.110 112.11
5.04.010 110.01
5.04.020 110.02
5.04.030 110.03
5.04.035 110.04
5.04.040 110.05
5.04.050 110.06
5.04.060 110.07
5.05.010 111.01
5.05.020 111.02
5.05.030 111.03
5.05.040 111.04
5.05.050 111.05
5.05.060 111.06
5.05.070 111.07
5.05.080 111.08
5.05.090 111.09
5.05.100 111.10
5.05.110 111.11
5.05.120 111.12
5.05.130 111.13
5.05.140 111.14
5.05.150 111.15
5.05.160 111.16
5.05.170 111.17
5.05.180 111.18
5.05.190 111.19
5.05.200 111.20
5.08.010 112.01
Prior Code Section 2015 Code Section
5.08.020 112.02
5.08.040 112.04
5.08.050 112.05
5.08.060 112.06
5.08.070 112.07
5.08.080 112.08
5.08.100 112.10, 112.99
5.08.120 130.04
5.08.130 112.99
5.12.010 113.01
5.16.010 114.01
5.16.020 114.02
5.16.030 114.03
5.16.040 114.04
5.16.050 114.05
5.16.060 114.06
5.16.070 114.07
5.16.080 114.08
5.16.090 114.09
5.16.100 114.10
5.16.110 114.11
5.16.120 114.12
5.16.130 114.13
5.16.140 114.14
5.16.150 114.15
5.16.160 114.16
5.16.170 114.17
5.16.180 114.18
5.16.190 114.19
5.16.200 114.20
5.16.210 114.21
5.16.220 114.22
5.16.230 114.23
5.16.240 114.24
5.16.250 114.25
5.16.260 114.99
5.20.010 115.01
5.20.020 115.02
5.20.030 115.03
5.20.040 115.04
5.20.050 115.05
5.20.060 115.06
5.20.070 115.07
5.20.080 115.08
Prior Code Section 2015 Code Section
5.20.090 115.09
5.20.100 115.10
5.24.010 116.01
5.24.020 116.02
5.24.030 116.03
5.24.040 116.04
5.24.050 116.05
5.24.060 116.06
5.24.070 116.07
5.24.080 116.08
5.24.090 116.09
5.24.100 116.10
5.24.110 116.11
6.04.04 90.23
6.04.05 90.24
6.04.06 90.25
6.04.07 90.26
6.04.08 90.27
6.04.010 90.01
6.04.020 90.02
6.04.030 90.03
6.04.040 90.04
6.04.050 90.05
6.04.060 90.06
6.04.070 90.07
6.04.080 90.08, 90.99
6.05.01 90.20
6.05.02 90.21
6.05.03 90.22
8.04.010 91.20
8.04.020 91.21
8.04.030 91.22
8.04.040 91.23
8.08.010 92.01
8.08.020 92.02
8.08.030 92.03
8.08.040 92.04
8.16.010 91.01
8.16.020 91.02
8.16.030 91.03
8.16.040 91.04
8.16.050 91.05
8.16.060 91.06
8.16.070 91.07
8.20.010 91.35
Prior Code Section 2015 Code Section
8.20.020 91.36
8.20.030 91.37
8.20.040 91.38
8.20.050 91.39
8.20.060 91.40
8.20.070 91.41
8.20.080 91.42
8.20.090 91.43
8.20.110 91.99
8.24.010 93.01
8.24.020 93.02
8.24.030 93.03
8.24.040 93.04
8.24.050 93.05
8.24.060 93.06
8.24.070 93.07
8.24.080 93.08
8.24.090 93.09
8.24.100 93.10
8.24.110 93.11
8.30.010 94.01
8.30.020 94.02
8.30.030 94.03
8.30.040 94.04
8.30.050 94.05
8.30.060 94.06
8.30.070 94.07
8.30.080 94.08
8.70.010 91.55
8.70.020 91.56
8.70.030 91.57
9.04.010 130.01
9.04.020 130.02
9.04.030 130.03
9.08.010 131.01
9.08.020 131.02
9.12.010 132.01
9.12.020 132.02
9.12.030 132.03
9.16.010 133.01
9.16.020 133.02
9.16.030 133.03
9.16.040 133.04
9.20.010 134.01
Prior Code Section 2015 Code Section
9.20.020 134.02
9.20.030 134.03
10.04.010 70.01
10.04.020 70.15
10.04.030 70.16
10.04.040 70.17
10.04.050 70.18
10.04.060 70.19
10.04.070 70.20
10.04.080 70.21
10.04.090 70.22
10.04.100 70.23
10.04.110 70.24
10.04.120 70.25
10.04.130 70.26
10.04.140 70.27
10.04.150 70.28
10.04.160 70.29
10.04.170 70.30
10.04.180 70.99
10.04.190 71.01
10.04.200 71.02
10.04.210 71.03
10.04.220 71.04
10.04.230 71.05
10.04.240 71.06
10.04.250 71.07
10.04.260 71.08
10.04.270 71.09
10.04.280 71.10
10.04.290 71.11
10.04.300 71.12
10.04.310 71.13
10.04.320 71.14
10.04.330 71.15
10.04.340 71.16
10.04.350 71.17
10.04.360 71.18
10.04.370 71.19
10.04.380 71.20
10.04.390 71.21
10.04.400 71.22
10.04.410 71.23
10.04.420 71.24
10.04.430 71.25
Prior Code Section 2015 Code Section
10.04.440 71.26
10.04.450 71.27
10.04.460 71.28
10.04.470 71.29
10.04.480 71.30
10.04.490 71.31
10.04.500 72.01
10.04.510 72.02
10.04.520 72.03
10.04.530 72.04
10.04.540 72.05
10.04.550 72.06
10.04.560 72.07, 72.99
10.04.570 72.20
10.04.580 72.21
10.04.590 72.22
10.04.600 72.23
10.04.610 73.01
10.04.620 73.02
10.04.630 73.03
10.04.640 71.45
10.04.650 71.46
10.04.660 71.47
10.04.670 71.48
10.08.010 74.01
10.08.030 74.03
10.08.040 74.04
10.08.050 74.05
10.08.060 74.06
10.08.080 74.08
10.08.090 74.09
10.08.105 Ch. 78 Sch. I
10.08.110 74.12
10.08.120 74.13
10.08.130 74.14
10.08.140 74.15, 74.99
10.08.150 74.99
10.12.010 75.01
10.12.020 75.02
10.12.030 75.03
10.12.040 75.04
10.12.050 75.05
Prior Code Section 2015 Code Section
10.12.060 75.06
10.12.070 75.07
10.12.080 75.99
10.16.010 76.01
10.16.020 76.02
10.16.030 76.03
10.16.040 76.04
10.16.050 76.05
10.16.060 76.06
10.16.070 76.07
10.20.010 77.01
10.20.020 77.02
10.20.030 77.03
10.20.040 77.04
10.20.050 77.05
10.20.060 77.06
10.20.070 77.07
10.24.010 77.20
10.24.020 77.21
10.24.030 77.22
10.24.040 77.23
10.24.050 77.24
10.24.060 77.25
10.24.070 77.26
10.24.080 77.27
10.24.090 77.28
12.04.010 96.001
12.04.020 96.002
12.04.030 96.015
12.04.040 96.030
12.04.050 96.031
12.04.060 96.032
12.04.070 96.033
12.04.080 96.034
12.04.090 96.035
12.04.100 96.036
12.04.110 96.037
12.04.120 96.050
12.04.130 96.051
12.04.140 96.052
12.04.150 96.053
12.04.160 96.054
12.04.170 96.065
12.04.180 96.066
12.04.190 96.067
Prior Code Section 2015 Code Section
12.04.200 96.068
12.04.210 96.069
12.04.220 96.070
12.04.230 96.071
12.04.240 96.072
12.04.250 96.073
12.04.260 96.085
12.04.270 96.086
12.04.280 96.087
12.04.290 96.100
12.04.300 96.101
12.04.310 96.102
12.04.320 96.115
12.04.330 96.116
12.04.340 96.130
12.04.350 96.131
12.04.360 96.132
12.08.010 95.001
12.08.020 95.002
12.08.030 95.003
12.08.040 95.004
12.08.050 95.005
12.08.060 95.006
12.08.070 95.007
12.08.080 95.008
12.08.090 95.009
12.12.010 95.020
12.12.020 95.021
12.12.030 95.022
12.12.040 95.023
12.12.050 95.024
12.12.060 95.025
12.12.070 95.026
12.12.080 95.027
12.12.090 95.028
12.12.100 95.029
12.12.110 95.030
12.16.010 95.045
12.16.020 95.046
12.16.030 95.047
12.16.040 95.048
12.16.050 95.049
12.16.060 95.050
12.16.070 95.051
12.16.080 95.052
Prior Code Section 2015 Code Section
12.16.090 95.053
12.16.100 95.054
12.16.110 95.055
12.16.120 95.056
12.20.010 95.070
12.20.020 95.071
12.20.030 95.072
12.20.040 95.073
12.20.050 95.074
12.20.060 95.075
12.20.070 95.999
12.24.010 97.01
12.24.015 97.02
12.24.020 97.03
12.24.030 97.04
12.24.035 97.05
12.24.040 97.06
12.24.050 97.07
12.24.060 97.08
12.24.065 97.09
12.24.070 97.10
12.24.075 97.11
12.24.080 97.99
12.28.010 98.01
12.28.020 98.02
12.28.030 98.03
12.28.040 98.04
12.28.050 98.05
12.28.060 98.06
12.28.070 98.07
12.28.080 98.08
12.28.090 98.99
13.04.010 50.01
13.04.020 50.02
13.04.030 50.03
13.04.040 50.04
13.04.050 50.05
13.04.060 50.06
13.04.070 50.07
13.04.080 50.08
13.04.090 50.09
13.04.100 50.10
13.04.110 50.11
13.04.120 50.12
13.04.130 50.13
Prior Code Section 2015 Code Section
13.04.140 50.14
13.04.150 50.15
13.04.160 50.16
13.04.170 50.17
13.04.180 50.18
13.04.190 50.19
13.04.200 50.20
13.04.210 50.21
13.04.220 50.22
13.04.230 50.23
13.04.240 50.24
13.04.250 50.25
13.04.260 50.26
13.04.270 50.27
13.04.280 50.28
13.04.290 50.29
13.04.300 50.30
13.04.310 50.31
13.04.320 50.32
13.04.330 50.33
13.04.340 50.34
13.04.350 50.35
13.04.360 50.36
13.04.370 50.37
13.04.380 50.38
13.04.390 50.39
13.04.400 50.40
13.04.410 50.41
13.04.420 50.42
13.04.430 50.43
13.04.440 50.44
13.04.450 50.45
13.04.460 50.46
13.04.470 50.99
13.08.010 51.01
13.08.020 51.02
13.08.030 51.03
13.08.040 51.04
13.08.045 51.05
13.08.050 51.06
13.08.060 51.07
13.08.070 51.08
13.08.080 51.99
13.12.010 52.01
Prior Code Section 2015 Code Section
13.12.030 52.02
13.12.040 52.03
13.12.050 52.04
13.12.060 52.05
13.12.070 52.06
13.12.080 52.07
13.16.010 53.01
13.16.020 53.02
13.16.030 53.03
13.16.040 53.04
13.16.050 53.05
13.16.060 53.06
15.04.010 150.001
15.04.020 150.002
15.04.030 150.003
15.04.040 150.004
15.04.050 150.005
15.08.010 150.020
15.08.020 150.021
15.08.030 150.022
15.08.040 150.023
15.08.050 150.024
15.08.060 150.025
15.08.070 150.026
15.12.010 150.040, 150.999
15.16.010 151.01
15.16.020 151.15
15.16.030 151.16
15.16.040 151.17
15.16.050 151.18
15.16.060 151.19
15.16.070 151.20
15.16.080 151.35
15.16.090 151.36
15.16.100 151.37
15.16.110 151.38
15.16.120 151.39
15.16.130 151.40
15.16.140 151.41
15.16.150 151.42
15.16.160 151.43
15.16.170 151.44
15.16.180 151.45
15.16.190 151.46
15.16.200 151.47
Prior Code Section 2015 Code Section
15.16.210 151.99
15.20.010 150.055
15.20.020 150.056
15.20.030 150.057
15.20.040 150.058
15.20.050 150.059
15.20.060 150.060
15.20.070 150.061
15.20.080 150.062
15.20.090 150.063
15.20.100 150.064
15.20.110 150.065
15.20.120 150.066
15.20.130 150.067
15.24.010 150.080
15.28.010 150.095
15.28.020 150.096
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
554 2-18-1975 TSO I
824 - -1998 10.99
980 8-16-2010 TSO I
998 12-5-2011 153.01
1000 4-16-2012 153.01
1003 6-18-2012 153.01
1008 7-16-2012 152.01
1017 9-16-2013 TSO I
1018 10-7-2013 153.01
1021 10-21-2013 153.01
1023 4-7-2014 112.06
1024 4-7-2014 112.12
1025 5-5-2014 74.99
1028 2-2-2015 Ch. 78 Sch. I
1029 2-7-2015 112.08
1032 3-21-2016 Adopting Ordinance
1034 11-21-2016 TSO II
1035 11-21-2016 TSO II
1036 11-21-2016 74.02, 74.07, 74.10, 74.11, 74.14, 74.99
1038 12-5-2016 36.050
1039 3-20-2017 52.01 - 52.03
1040 4-3-2017 112.07
1041 5-1-2017 153.01
1042 5-1-2017 153.01
1044 11-6-2017 TSO II
1045 11-20-2017 TSO II
1047 1-2-2018 TSO II
1048 3-5-2018 153.01
1049 4-3-2018 153.01
1050 4-16-2018 112.03, 112.06
1051 4-16-2018 30.05 - 30.07, 30.09, 30.11, 30.14, 31.01, 31.04, 32.015, 32.051, 32.054, 35.057, 32.076, 32.084, 32.085 - 32.087, 32.105, 32.109, 32.111 - 32.113, 35.07, 36.014, 50.03, 50.07, 50.09, 50.18, 50.19, 50.40, 51.03, 51.04, 54.04, 76.01, 76.03, 76.04, 77.02, 77.03, 77.21, 90.01, 90.02, 90.20, 90.22, 90.25, 91.02, 91.35, 91.39, 91.41, 92.04, 94.06, 95.001, 95.002, 95.047, 95.048 - 95.050, 95.053, 95.075, 96.030, 96.068, 96.072, 97.02, 97.04, 97.05, 97.08, 97.11, 98.07, 110.02, 110.05 - 110.07, 111.02, 111.09, 111.18, 111.20, 112.05, 112.09, 112.10, 114.03 - 114.06, 114.10, 114.14 - 114.17, 114.20, 115.03 - 115.05, 116.04, 116.07, 116.10, 150.002, 150.003, 150.026, 150.062 - 150.064, 150.067, 150.096, 151.16, 151.41
1052 5-7-2018 112.03.1
1053 5-29-2018 30.02
1054 7-16-2018 90.09

INDEX
ABANDONED PROPERTY, 91.05
ABANDONED VEHICLES
Definitions, 91.20
Nuisance declared, 91.21
Removal of motor vehicles, 91.22
Vehicles on private property, 91.23
ACCOUNTING FUNDS (See also FINANCE AND REVENUES)
Annual estimate of expenses and revenue, 36.014
Annual financial report; publication; filing; extension, 36.012
Assignment of delinquent accounts; uncollectible accounts; disposition, 36.004
Bond record, 36.013
Debt service funds; investment; maturity dates of securities, 36.008
Debt service funds; investment; special assessment bonds and certificates; interest in investments, 36.007
Depositories for municipal funds; designation, 36.006
Duplicate receipts; filing with Auditor or Clerk, 36.003
Finance Officer; duties; accounting, 36.002
Finance Officer; reports to governing body, 36.011
Municipal treasury; receipts; designated funds, 36.001
Separate accounts for funds and appropriations, 36.009
Special assessment money; receipt and application; cancellation of certificates, 36.010
Use for personal benefit; prohibition, 36.005
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ENFORCEMENT
Administrative citation penalties assessed, 35.08
Administrative citation procedures, 35.06
Administrative citations, 35.05
Appeal, 35.07
Authority to inspect, 35.04
Definitions, 35.02
Failure to appeal or pay administrative citation penalties, 35.09
General enforcement authority, 35.03
Penalty, 35.99
Remedies not exclusive, 35.10
Statement of purpose and intent, 35.01
ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS
Administrative portions to be governed by, 34.01
Notice requirements, 34.03
Retirement system, 34.02
AIRPORT BOARD
Airport Board created, 32.075
Annual estimates of expenditures, 32.087
Authority of Board, 32.085
Authority to sign for Board, 32.081
Bond required, 32.077
Compensation and expenses, 32.078
Duties of City Attorney, 32.083
Levy of tax for airport purposes, 32.088
Meetings, 32.079
Officers, 32.080
Officers and employees of the Board, 32.084
Qualifications and term of office, 32.076
Recommendations to governing body, 32.091
Record of proceedings, 32.082
Report of the Board, 32.090
Rules and regulations of Boards, 32.086
Special fund, 32.089
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Application for license, 112.02
Full-service on-sale restaurant licenses, 112.08
Hours of operation for the sale or service of all alcoholic beverages licenses, 112.03
Issuance of licenses and sale of alcoholic beverages by city, 112.06
License required, 112.01
Maximum number of on-sale and off-sale alcohol licenses, 112.12
Maximum number of on- off-sale malt beverage licenses and maximum number of wine dealers being
both package dealers and on-sale dealers, 112.07
Penalty, 112.99
Permit public location, 112.05
Possession of alcoholic beverages, 112.04
Regulation of the transaction of any business in, and use and consumption, including on and off sale, of
malt beverages, wine, cider, spirits, and alcoholic beverages, 112.03.1
Sanitation, 112.11
Sidewalk café alcoholic beverage sales and consumption regulations, 112.09
Special permit licenses, 112.10
ANIMALS
Animal Control Code
Animal care, 90.05
Animal waste, 90.06
Enforcement, 90.07
Farm animals, 90.09
Horses, 90.08
Licensing, 90.01
Nuisance, 90.04
Permits, 90.02
Running at large, 90.03
Penalty, 90.99
Rabies Control
Confinement of pet bitten by animal suspected of having rabies, 90.44
Confinement of pet after attack upon person, 90.43
Destruction of animal required, 90.45
Impoundment of animal that has bitten or attacked, 90.42
Report of rabies, 90.41
Vaccination required, 90.40
Vicious Animals
Automatic declaration, 90.23
Declaring a vicious animal, 90.20
Exceptions to declaration, 90.21
Exceptions to requirements, 90.27
Impoundment, 90.25
Notice to owner, 90.22
Requirement by owner, 90.24
Violation requirements, 90.26
ANNEXATIONS, TSO II
ANNUAL INDEPENDENT AUDIT, 36.025
ATTORNEY; CITY
Duties, 31.45
AUDIT
Annual independent audit, 36.025
BICYCLES
Care in riding, 77.07
License fee, 77.04
License required, 77.01
Operation on roadway; riding close to right-hand curb, 77.10
Operation on sidewalk or crosswalk, 77.08
Parking on sidewalk, 77.09
Racing, 77.12
Registration required, 77.02
Tags and certificate nontransferable, 77.05
Tags and registration certificate, 77.03
Turning, stopping or starting signals required, 77.11
Unlawful to interfere with pedestrians, 77.06
BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS
Application for license, 116.03
Change of location of establishment, 116.09
Definitions, 116.01
Denial of license, 116.07
Granting of license, 116.06
Inspection, 116.04
License required, 116.02
Minimum sanitation standards, 116.05
Patrons restricted, 116.11
Renewal of license, 116.08
Revocation of license, 116.10
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Building Code Adopted
Adoption, 150.001
Application for permits, 150.003
Building Inspector, 150.002
Conflicts, 150.005
Permit fees, 150.004
Building Numbers and Street Names
Dividing line for numbering; street prefixes, 150.021
Enforcement, 150.025
Fractional numbers, 150.023
Houses and business places must be numbered, 150.020
Names of streets and avenues, 150.026
Numbering of streets, blocks and buildings, 150.024
Numbering to be apportioned, 150.022
Factory Produced Housing, 150.040
Flood Damage Prevention
Abrogation and greater restrictions, 150.059
Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, 150.057
Compliance, 150.058
Definitions, 150.055
Designation of the Municipal Finance Officer, 150.063
Duties and responsibilities of the Municipal Finance Officer, 150.064
Establishment of development permit, 150.062
General standards for flood hazard reduction, 150.065
Interpretation, 150.060
Lands to which this chapter applies, 150.056
Specific standards, 150.066
Variances, 150.067
Warning and disclaimer of liability, 150.061
Penalty, 150.999
Property Maintenance Code
Adoption, 150.095
Amendments, 150.096
Vacated building lots, 150.080
BURNING GARBAGE, 54.10
BUSINESS LICENSING PROVISIONS
Application for license, 110.02
Discrimination, 110.04
Issuance, 110.06
License expiration, 110.03
License required, 110.01
License revocation, 110.05
Record of licenses, 110.07
CABLE TELEVISION
FCC Rate Regulations adopted, 113.01
CITY ATTORNEY
Duties, 31.45
CITY COMMISSIONERS (See MAYOR AND CITY COMMISSIONERS)
CITY OFFICIALS
Appointive Officers Generally
Appointments, 31.01
Contracts, 31.04
Duties, 31.03
Oath of office, 31.02
City Attorney
Duties, 31.45
Finance Officer
Financial records maintained; signature of evidences of indebtedness, 31.16
Records, warrants on treasury, expenses estimates, contracts and certificates of work; destruction of
record, 31.15
CODE OF CONDUCT
Application, 33.02
Purpose, 33.01
Remedies, 33.04
Requirements, 33.03
CODE OF ORDINANCES (See also MAYOR AND CITY COMMISSIONERS)
Captions, 10.03
Definitions, 10.04
Errors and omissions, 10.08
General penalty, 10.99
Ordinances repealed, 10.10
Ordinances unaffected, 10.11
Ordinances which amend or supplement code, 10.13
Powers to enact, amend or repeal ordinances and resolutions; generally, 10.09
Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities, 10.14
Reference to offices, 10.07
Reference to other sections, 10.06
Repeal or modification of ordinance, 10.12
Rules of interpretation, 10.02
Severability, 10.05
Title of code, 10.01
COMMISSIONERS; CITY (See MAYOR AND CITY COMMISSIONERS)
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN, 32.056
CROSSWALKS, SAFETY ZONES AND TRAFFIC LANES, 70.20
CURFEW
Curfew hours, 133.01
Exceptions to curfew, 133.02
Responsibility of officers, 133.03
Responsibility of parents, 133.04
DEAD OR DISEASED TREES AND OVERHANGING BRANCHES; REMOVAL OF, 97.04
DISEASED TREES AND OVERHANGING BRANCHES; REMOVAL OF, 97.04
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
Construction, 132.03
Definitions, 132.02
Disorderly conduct, 132.01
DOGS (See ANIMALS)
DRIVING REGULATIONS (See TRAFFIC CODE)
EMERGENCY VEHICLES; FIRE REGULATIONS
Crossing fire hose, 72.22
Emergency vehicle exceeding speed limit to give warning of approach, 72.21
Exemption to authorized emergency vehicles, 72.20
Following fire apparatus, 72.23
EXCAVATIONS
Application for permit, 95.047
Backfilling excavations, 95.053
Bond and insurance proof, 95.046
Bond or insurance, 95.048
EXCAVATIONS (Cont=d)
Deposit forfeited, 95.049
Excavations near streets, 95.056
Guarding excavations, 95.051
Interfering with barricades, 95.052
Minimum charge asphalt service cuts, 95.054
Permit required, 95.045
Service cuts after November 15 until frost goes out in the spring, 95.055
Supervision of excavations, 95.050
FALSE EMERGENCY ALARMS PROHIBITED, 130.02
FCC Rate Regulations adopted, 113.01
FINANCE AND REVENUES
Accounting Funds
Annual estimate of expenses and revenue, 36.014
Annual financial report; publication; filing; extension, 36.012
Assignment of delinquent accounts; uncollectible accounts; disposition, 36.004
Bond record, 36.013
Debt service funds; investment; maturity dates of securities, 36.008
Debt service funds; investment; special assessment bonds and certificates; interest in investments,
36.007
Depositories for municipal funds; designation, 36.006
Duplicate receipts; filing with Auditor or Clerk, 36.003
Finance Officer; duties; accounting, 36.002
Finance Officer; reports to governing body, 36.011
Municipal treasury; receipts; designated funds, 36.001
Separate accounts for funds and appropriations, 36.009
Special assessment money; receipt and application; cancellation of certificates, 36.010
Use for personal benefit; prohibition, 36.005
Audit
Annual independent audit, 36.025
Funds Deposited With the City
Imposition of requirements, 36.081
Interest earned to be property of city, 36.082
No interest to be paid, 36.080
Municipal property tax rebate, 36.050
Municipal Retail Occupational Sales and Service Tax
Collection, 36.043
Effective date and enactment of tax, 36.041
Interpretation, 36.044
Municipal gross receipts tax, 36.046
Purpose, 36.040
Separability, 36.045
Use tax, 36.042
Penalty, 36.999
Urban and Rural Service Districts
Agricultural land annexed; limitation on mill levy and assessed value, 36.064
Filing ordinance amendment or order with County Auditor, 36.066
Lands described; rural service district, 36.062
Lands included in urban service district, 36.063
Lands included in the rural service district, 36.067
Platting or construction in rural district, 36.065
Rural service district; criteria for lands included, 36.061
Service districts established, 36.060
FINANCE OFFICER
Duties; accounting, 36.002
Reports to governing body, 36.011
FINANCE OFFICER
Financial records maintained; signature of evidences of indebtedness, 31.16
Records, warrants on treasury, expenses estimates, contracts and certificates of work; destruction of
record, 31.15
FIRE DEPARTMENT
Expenditures, 32.015
FIRE PREVENTION
Fireworks
Discharge unlawful, 92.02
Possession in a public place, 92.03
Possession unlawful, 92.01
Public displays; permit required, 92.04
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS; DISCHARGING, 134.03
FIREWOOD ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY; STORAGE OF, 91.06
FIREWORKS
Discharge unlawful, 92.02
Possession in a public place, 92.03
Possession unlawful, 92.01
Public displays; permit required, 92.04
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Abrogation and greater restrictions, 150.059
Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, 150.057
Compliance, 150.058
Definitions, 150.055
Designation of the Municipal Finance Officer, 150.063
Duties and responsibilities of the Municipal Finance Officer, 150.064
Establishment of development permit, 150.062
General standards for flood hazard reduction, 150.065
Interpretation, 150.060
Lands to which this chapter applies, 150.056
Specific standards, 150.066
Variances, 150.067
Warning and disclaimer of liability, 150.061
FRANCHISES, TSO I
FUNERAL PROCESSIONS
Operation of vehicles, 71.24
Stops, 71.25
GARBAGE AND RECYCLABLES; COLLECTION OF
Application, 111.02
City not liable, 111.17
Collection of garbage and recyclable materials, 111.10
Commercial haulers responsibilities, 111.19
Customer information, 111.16
Denial of license, 111.09
Display of permit, 111.08
Dumping, 111.13
Expiration, 111.05
Hauling unit permits, 111.06
Identifying name, 111.03
Insurance, 111.14
License required, 111.01
Rates, 111.11
Resident compliance, 111.15
Termination of license, 111.20
Transfer, 111.04
Transfer, 111.18
Unit inspection required, 111.07
Vehicles for collection of garbage and recyclables, 111.12
GARBAGE AND RECYCLING
Burning garbage, 54.10
Customer information, 54.11
Definitions, 54.01
Garbage containers, 54.08
Hearing; revocation; appeal, 54.04
License for collection and hauling of garbage, 54.02
Littering prohibited, 54.09
Loading of vehicles, 54.06
Revocation of license, 54.03
Vehicles used for collecting, 54.05
Yard waste collection, 54.07
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Canton Register of Historic Landmarks
Action by City Commission, 151.42
Appeal, 151.41
Burning of structures, 151.47
Created, 151.35
Criteria for designation, 151.36
Delay of demolition or house moving, 151.45
Demolition and house moving, 151.43
Determination of the Board, 151.39
Moving structures into a historic district, 151.46
Nomination of structures and districts to the register, 151.37
Notice of intent to demolish or move, 151.44
Notification of determination, 151.40
Notification of nomination, 151.38
Historic Preservation Commission
Acquisition of historic easements, 151.20
Composition, 151.16
Created, 151.15
Meetings, 151.18
Powers and authorities, 151.19
Vacancies, 151.17
Legislative findings; purpose of chapter, 151.01
Penalty, 151.99
HOUSE NUMBERS (See BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION)
ICE REMOVAL
Duty of police, 95.074
Person defined, 95.070
Snow on sidewalks; removal of, 95.071
Snow shall not be put or thrown onto city streets; exception, 95.073
Use of ashes and sand, 95.072
When city is to do work, 95.075
INDECENCY, 130.03
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS
Additional restrictions, 94.04
Containers not allowed in city limits, 94.05
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS
Definition, 94.01
Dispensing and storing in unsuitable tanks; prohibited, 94.07
Exceptions, 94.08
Permit required, 94.06
Storage, handling, transportation and installation, 94.02
Storage prohibited within corporate limits, 94.03
LIQUOR REGULATIONS (See ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES)
LITTERING PROHIBITED, 54.09
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Application fee, 114.25
Application for massage establishment license, 114.03
Application for massagist license, 114.14
Change of location of establishment, 114.10
Definitions, 114.01
Denial of massage establishment license; notice; right to hearing, 114.05
Denial of massagist license; notice; right to hearing, 114.16
Denial, suspension or revocation of licenses generally, 114.20
Exemptions, 114.22
Injunction relief, 114.21
Inspection of establishments by officials, 114.08
Investigation of premises proposed to be used as massage establishment, 114.04
Investigation upon receipt of application for massagist license, 114.15
License required for massage establishment, 114.02
Massage establishment facilities, 114.07
Massages at massage establishment only, 114.12
Massagist license required, 114.13
Massagist licensees to be employed, 114.11
Name of establishment, 114.09
Penalty, 114.99
Posting of massagist and massage establishment licenses, 114.19
Temporary massage establishment license, 114.06
Temporary massagist license, 114.17
Transfer of massage establishment license, 114.24
Transfer of massagist license, 114.18
Unlawful acts, 114.23
MAYOR AND CITY COMMISSIONERS
Absence or disability of Mayor, 30.07
Areas of responsibility, 30.14
Bond, 30.04
City Commission compelling attendance of witnesses and production of evidence; execution and service
of process, 30.08
City Commission meetings open to public; journal of proceedings, 30.10
Majority vote required for passage of measures; two-thirds vote for sale of real property, 30.13
Mayor, 30.06
Meetings of the City Commissioners and order of business, 30.09
Oath of office, 30.03
Ordinances and Resolutions
Amendments, 30.15
Compilation of ordinances, 30.19
Continuation in force of ordinance after change in form of government, 30.20
Effective date of ordinances and resolutions, 30.18
Readings; passage and publications, 30.17
Style of ordinances; subject, 30.16
Qualifications of City Commissioners, 30.01
Quorum of City Commission; majority vote required for action, 30.11
MAYOR AND CITY COMMISSIONERS (Cont=d)
Recording of votes of City Commissioners, 30.12
Terms of office, 30.02
Vacancies, 30.05
MEETINGS OF THE CITY COMMISSIONERS AND ORDER OF BUSINESS, 30.09
MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE CONTROL
Applicability, 75.03
Definitions, 75.01
Exceptions, 75.07
Exhaust system requirements, 75.04
Penalty, 75.99
Radios and stereo receiver restrictions, 75.06
Sound level measurement, 75.05
Sound level restrictions, 75.02
MOWING AND DISCHARGE OF MOWING WASTE
Discharge of mowing waste regulated, 91.56
Mowing required, 91.55
Notice to stop discharge, 91.57
MUFFLER; SMOKE, 72.03
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY TAX REBATE, 36.050
MUNICIPAL RETAIL OCCUPATIONAL SALES AND SERVICE TAX
Collection, 36.043
Effective date and enactment of tax, 36.041
Interpretation, 36.044
Municipal gross receipts tax, 36.046
Purpose, 36.040
Separability, 36.045
Use tax, 36.042
NOISE CONTROL; MOTOR VEHICLE
Applicability, 75.03
Definitions, 75.01
Exceptions, 75.07
Exhaust system requirements, 75.04
Penalty, 75.99
Radios and stereo receiver restrictions, 75.06
Sound level measurement, 75.05
Sound level restrictions, 75.02
NUISANCES
Abandoned property, 91.05
Abandoned Vehicles
Definitions, 91.20
Nuisance declared, 91.21
Removal of motor vehicles, 91.22
Vehicles on private property, 91.23
Abatement by city; costs levied against premises, 91.04
Disposition of unclaimed property, 91.07
Mowing and Discharge of Mowing Waste
Discharge of mowing waste regulated, 91.56
Mowing required, 91.55
Notice to stop discharge, 91.57
Noncompliance, 91.03
Notice to abate, 91.02
Penalty, 91.99
Prohibited and defined, 91.01
Rubble Site
Employee=s responsibilities, 91.36
Grass clippings and garden waste; commercial enterprises, 91.40
Loads to be secured; exceptions, 91.37
Permitted items, 91.39
Prohibited items, 91.38
Rate schedule, 91.41
Removal restricted, 91.43
Schedule of operation, 91.35
Terms and conditions of operation, 91.42
Storage of firewood on residential property, 91.06
OCCUPATIONAL SALES AND SERVICE TAX; RETAIL
Collection, 36.043
Effective date and enactment of tax, 36.041
OCCUPATIONAL SALES AND SERVICE TAX; RETAIL (Cont=d)
Interpretation, 36.044
Municipal gross receipts tax, 36.046
Purpose, 36.040
Separability, 36.045
Use tax, 36.042
OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Injury or removal of public or private property, 131.01
Tampering in general, 131.02
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY
False emergency alarms prohibited, 130.02
Indecency, 130.03
Open containers, 130.01
Throwing containers, 130.04
OFFICIALS (See CITY OFFICIALS)
ONE-WAY STREETS AUTHORIZED, 71.30
OPEN CONTAINERS, 130.01
ORDINANCES (See CODE OF ORDINANCES and MAYOR AND CITY COMMISSIONERS)
PARADES AND PROCESSIONS, 71.23
PARALLEL AND DIAGONAL PARKING, 74.05
PARK USE REGULATIONS
Cleaning up litter and refuse after use of facility, 98.06
Defacing property, 98.05
Destruction of park property prohibited, 98.02
Exhibitions prohibited, 98.04
Metal containers, glass bottles, glass containers or glassware prohibited in swimming pool areas of
public parks, 98.07
Penalty, 98.99
Signs prohibited, 98.03
Trespassing, 98.01
Use of park waters, 98.08
PARKING (See TRAFFIC CODE)
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS, 32.060
PARKWAYS, PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS, 32.060
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Application approval and permit issuance, 115.05
Application contents, 115.04
Definitions, 115.01
Exceptions, 115.07
Execution of order by solicitor, 115.09
License application, 115.03
License required, 115.02
Permit fee, 115.06
Solicitor to leave property upon request, 115.10
Transfer of permit, 115.08
PEDESTRIANS
Use of crosswalks, 73.01
Pedestrians walking along the roadways, 73.03
Pedestrians= right-of-way, 73.02
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
City Planning and Zoning Commission created, 32.050
Compensation and expenses, 32.053
Comprehensive Plan, 32.056
Membership of the Planning and Zoning Commission, 32.051
Organization, rules, staff and finances, 32.054
Plats and subdivisions, 32.059
Public buildings and improvements, 32.058
Rezoning, 32.055
Streets, parkways, parks and playgrounds, 32.060
Surveys and studies, 32.057
Terms of members, 32.052
PLATS AND SUBDIVISIONS, 32.059
PLAYGROUNDS, 32.060
PRIVATE PROPERTY; INJURY OR REMOVAL OF, 131.01
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Adoption, 150.095
Amendments, 150.096
PROPERTY; ABANDONED, 91.05
PROPERTY; INJURY OR REMOVAL OF, 131.01
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY; INJURY OR REMOVAL OF, 131.01
PUBLIC PLACES (See STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES)
RAILROAD SIGNALS, 71.17
RECKLESS DRIVING, 71.27
RECREATION BOARD
Appointment of other officers and employees, 32.111
Authority, 32.108
Bond, 32.106
Funds for operation, 32.113
Meetings; quorum; records and reports, 32.109
Membership, 32.105
Officers, 32.107
Operation of public recreation and playgrounds, 32.110
Reporting requirements, 32.112
RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Bicycles
Care in riding, 77.07
License fee, 77.04
License required, 77.01
Operation on roadway; riding close to right-hand curb, 77.10
Operation on sidewalk or crosswalk, 77.08
Parking on sidewalk, 77.09
Racing, 77.12
Registration required, 77.02
Tags and certificate nontransferable, 77.05
Tags and registration certificate, 77.03
Turning, stopping or starting signals required, 77.11
Unlawful to interfere with pedestrians, 77.06
Snowmobiles
Automobile rules of the road applicable, 77.26
Driver=s license required, 77.22
Impoundment by Chief of Police, 77.27
Lighting required, 77.25
Operation on sidewalks and parking prohibited, 77.24
Regulations applicable at street intersections, 77.23
Safety regulation, 77.21
Snowmobile defined, 77.20
Towing conveyances prohibited; exceptions, 77.28
RECYCLABLES; COLLECTION OF
Application, 111.02
City not liable, 111.17
Collection of garbage and recyclable materials, 111.10
Commercial haulers responsibilities, 111.19
Customer information, 111.16
RECYCLABLES; COLLECTION OF (Cont=d)
Denial of license, 111.09
Display of permit, 111.08
Dumping, 111.13
Expiration, 111.05
Hauling unit permits, 111.06
Identifying name, 111.03
Insurance, 111.14
License required, 111.01
Rates, 111.11
Resident compliance, 111.15
Termination of license, 111.20
Transfer, 111.04
Transfer, 111.18
Unit inspection required, 111.07
Vehicles for collection of garbage and recyclables, 111.12
RECYCLING (See GARBAGE AND RECYCLING)
RESOLUTIONS
Amendments, 30.15
Compilation of ordinances, 30.19
Continuation in force of ordinance after change in form of government, 30.20
Effective date of ordinances and resolutions, 30.18
Readings; passage and publications, 30.17
Style of ordinances; subject, 30.16
RETAIL OCCUPATIONAL SALES AND SERVICE TAX
Collection, 36.043
Effective date and enactment of tax, 36.041
Interpretation, 36.044
Municipal gross receipts tax, 36.046
Purpose, 36.040
Separability, 36.045
Use tax, 36.042
REVENUES (See FINANCE AND REVENUES)
REZONING, 32.055
RIGHT-OF-WAY CONSTRUCTION AND USE PERMITS
Administration
Abandoned and unused facilities, 96.037
Future uses, 96.036
Grant of privilege, 96.032
No construction without registration, 96.031
Administration (Cont=d)
Registration and right-of-way occupancy, 96.030
Registration information, 96.033
Reporting obligations, 96.034
Unregistered facilities, 96.035
Construction and Restoration
Damage to other facilities, 96.070
Inspection, 96.072
Installation requirements, 96.071
Least disruptive technology, 96.066
Location of facilities, 96.065
Other obligations, 96.073
Relocation of facilities, 96.068
Right-of-way restoration, 96.069
Special exceptions, 96.067
Damage caused by defects; responsibility, 96.132
Definitions, 96.015
Findings and purpose, 96.002
Indemnification and Liability
City does not accept liability, 96.115
Registrant or permittee indemnifies city, 96.116
Nonexclusive remedy, 96.130
Permit Obligation Enforcement
Denial of permit, 96.085
Revocation of permits, 96.087
Work done without a permit, 96.086
Reservation of regulatory and police powers, 96.131
Right-of-Way Permits
Issuance of permit; conditions, 96.052
Joint applications, 96.054
Permit applications, 96.051
Permit fees, 96.053
Permit requirement, 96.050
Right-of-Way Bonds
Form, 96.102
Purposes, 96.101
Right-of-way bond, 96.100
Title, 96.001
RUBBISH; ACCUMULATION OF, 97.07
SEWER RATES AND CHARGES (See also SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM and WATER SERVICE
SYSTEM)
Bulk water rates, 52.04
Effective date, 52.07
Late fees for water and wastewater (sewer) service, 52.06
Outside watering purposes, 52.05
Wastewater (sewer) rates and service outside the corporate limits of the city, 52.03
Wastewater (sewer) rates inside the corporate limits of the city, 52.02
Water rates and services, 52.01
SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM (See also WATER AND SEWER RATES AND CHARGES)
Definitions, 51.01
Penalty, 51.99
Powers and authority of Inspectors, 51.09
Private wastewater disposal, 51.03
Protection from damage, 51.07
Sanitary sewers, building sewers and connections, 51.04
Use of public sewers, 51.06
Use of public sewers required, 51.02
Wastewater (sewer) hookup fee, 51.05
SHRUBS
Accumulation of weeds and rubbish, 97.07
Boulevard and parking strip defined, 97.01
Clearance over sidewalks, 97.10
Enforcement by the city, 97.08
Failure to comply, 97.09
Penalty, 97.99
Planting regulations, 97.02
Removal of dead or diseased trees and overhanging branches, 97.04
Removal of trees in contact with utilities, 97.05
Tree Board, 97.11
Tree branches to be trimmed and cut, 97.06
Trimming existing trees at intersections, 97.03
SIDEWALKS (See STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES)
SLINGSHOTS, 134.02
SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL
Duty of police, 95.074
Person defined, 95.070
Snow on sidewalks; removal of, 95.071
Snow shall not be put or thrown onto city streets; exception, 95.073
Use of ashes and sand, 95.072
When city is to do work, 95.075
SNOWMOBILES
Automobile rules of the road applicable, 77.26
Driver=s license required, 77.22
Impoundment by Chief of Police, 77.27
Lighting required, 77.25
Operation on sidewalks and parking prohibited, 77.24
Regulations applicable at street intersections, 77.23
Safety regulation, 77.21
Snowmobile defined, 77.20
Towing conveyances prohibited; exceptions, 77.28
SOLICITORS
Application approval and permit issuance, 115.05
Application contents, 115.04
Definitions, 115.01
Exceptions, 115.07
Execution of order by solicitor, 115.09
License application, 115.03
License required, 115.02
Permit fee, 115.06
Solicitor to leave property upon request, 115.10
Transfer of permit, 115.08
SPEED LIMITS DESIGNATED, 71.31
SPRINKLING, 50.34
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING (See TRAFFIC CODE)
STREET NAMES (See BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION)
STREET TREES AND SHRUBS
Accumulation of weeds and rubbish, 97.07
Boulevard and parking strip defined, 97.01
Clearance over sidewalks, 97.10
Enforcement by the city, 97.08
Failure to comply, 97.09
Penalty, 97.99
Planting regulations, 97.02
Removal of dead or diseased trees and overhanging branches, 97.04
Removal of trees in contact with utilities, 97.05
Tree Board, 97.11
Tree branches to be trimmed and cut, 97.06
Trimming existing trees at intersections, 97.03
STREETS, PARKWAYS, PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS, 32.060
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Curbs, Gutters and Pavement Standards
Curb and gutter, 95.020
New subdivisions, 95.026
Notice to install or replace paving, curb and gutter; procedure on failure or refusal, 95.023
Notice to repair curb and gutter, 95.027
Paving, 95.021
Permit required, 95.022
Removal of existing curb and gutter and replacement, 95.029
Removal of existing paving, curb and gutter, 95.024
Removal of existing curb and gutter, 95.028
Removal of tree roots during curb and gutter repair, 95.030
Wheelchair curb ramps, 95.025
Excavations
Application for permit, 95.047
Backfilling excavations, 95.053
Bond and insurance proof, 95.046
Bond or insurance, 95.048
Deposit forfeited, 95.049
Excavations near streets, 95.056
Guarding excavations, 95.051
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES (Cont=d)
Excavations (Cont=d)
Interfering with barricades, 95.052
Minimum charge asphalt service cuts, 95.054
Permit required, 95.045
Service cuts after November 15 until frost goes out in the spring, 95.055
Supervision of excavations, 95.050
Penalty, 95.999
Sidewalk Construction
New subdivisions, 95.009
Notice to construct sidewalk; procedure on failure or refusal, 95.005
Permit required, 95.004
Removal of existing sidewalk; replacement, 95.007
Removal of existing sidewalk, 95.006
Safety barricades, 95.003
Specifications, 95.002
Supervision of sidewalk construction, 95.001
Wheelchair curb ramps, 95.008
Snow and Ice Removal
Duty of police, 95.074
Person defined, 95.070
Snow on sidewalks; removal of, 95.071
Snow shall not be put or thrown onto city streets; exception, 95.073
Use of ashes and sand, 95.072
When city is to do work, 95.075
SUBDIVISIONS, 32.059, 152.01
SWIMMING POOLS
Commercial pools, 93.11
Compliance required, 93.01
Drawings, plans and permits, 93.05
Electrical requirements, 93.10
Fences, 93.08
Outlets, 93.09
Permit required, 93.04
Private pool, 93.02
Recirculation pools, 93.06
Structural design, 93.07
TAMPERING IN GENERAL, 131.02
TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS
Application for license, 116.03
Change of location of establishment, 116.09
Definitions, 116.01
Denial of license, 116.07
TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS (Cont=d)
Granting of license, 116.06
Inspection, 116.04
License required, 116.02
Minimum sanitation standards, 116.05
Patrons restricted, 116.11
Renewal of license, 116.08
Revocation of license, 116.10
TAX (See FINANCE AND REVENUES)
TRAFFIC CODE
Accidents
Duty of stop in case of accident, 71.45
Duty to report accidents, 71.47
Duty upon striking unattended vehicle, 71.46
Garage keeper to report damaged vehicle, 71.48
Administration and Enforcement
Account for notices, 70.30
Appearance, 70.28
Arrest on failure to appear, 70.29
Construction and maintenance of crossing devices, 70.18
Crosswalks, safety zones and traffic lanes, 70.20
Manner of arrest, 70.26
No parking signs, 70.22
Notice to appear, 70.27
Obedience to police, 70.16
Obedience to traffic ordinances, official traffic signals, signs and markings, 70.15
Police to direct traffic, 70.17
Regulations to enforce traffic ordinances; emergency and temporary conditions, 70.25
Signs at through highways and at reduced speed intersections, 70.23
Signs for one-way traffic or parking restrictions, 70.24
Traffic control devices; traffic engineering, 70.19
AU@ turns, official traffic signals and signs indicating methods of turn, 70.21
Backing, 71.09
Bicycles
Care in riding, 77.07
License fee, 77.04
License required, 77.01
Operation on roadway; riding close to right-hand curb, 77.10
Operation on sidewalk or crosswalk, 77.08
Parking on sidewalk, 77.09
Racing, 77.12
Registration required, 77.02
Tags and certificate nontransferable, 77.05
Tags and registration certificate, 77.03
Turning, stopping or starting signals required, 77.11
Unlawful to interfere with pedestrians, 77.06
Brakes and signaling device, 72.04
Careless driving, 71.26
Clinging to a moving vehicle, 71.21
Coaster, roller skates and similar devices, 71.20
Crossing sidewalk, 71.18
Definitions, 70.01
Dimming headlights, 72.06
Driving or operating a motor vehicle without a permit, 71.02
Emergency Vehicles; Fire Regulations
Crossing fire hose, 72.22
Emergency vehicle exceeding speed limit to give warning of approach, 72.21
Exemption to authorized emergency vehicles, 72.20
Following fire apparatus, 72.23
Emerging from alley or driveway; stop before entering, 71.14
Establishment of emergency snow routes, 74.11
Exceptions to right-of-way rule, 71.13
Exhibition driving, 71.28
Funeral processions; operation of vehicles, 71.24
Funeral processions; stops, 71.25
Horns and warning devices, 72.02
Illegally parked vehicles, 74.07
Keep to the right, 71.07
Leaving vehicle unattended with motor running, 74.09
License plates, 72.01
Lights, 72.05
Motor vehicle noise control
Applicability, 75.03
Definitions, 75.01
Exceptions, 75.07
Exhaust system requirements, 75.04
Penalty, 75.99
Radios and stereo receiver restrictions, 75.06
Sound level measurement, 75.05
Sound level restrictions, 75.02
Muffler; smoke, 72.03
One-way streets authorized, 71.30
Overtaken vehicle; slow driving, 71.10
Overtaking and passing, 71.08
Parades and processions, 71.23
Parallel and diagonal parking, 74.05
Parking limits, 74.08
Parking of trucks, 74.06
Pedestrians
Pedestrians walking along the roadways, 73.03
Pedestrians= right-of-way, 73.02
Use of crosswalks, 73.01
Penalty, 70.99, 72.99, 74.99
Police parking, 74.03
Proceeding without safe passage, 71.11
Prohibition of street parking for snow removal, 74.10
Railroad signals, 71.17
Reckless driving, 71.27
Recreational vehicles
Bicycles
Care in riding, 77.07
License fee, 77.04
License required, 77.01
Operation on roadway; riding close to right-hand curb, 77.10
Operation on sidewalk or crosswalk, 77.08
Parking on sidewalk, 77.09
Racing, 77.12
Registration required, 77.02
Tags and certificate nontransferable, 77.05
Tags and registration certificate, 77.03
Turning, stopping or starting signals required, 77.11
Unlawful to interfere with pedestrians, 77.06
Snowmobiles
Automobile rules of the road applicable, 77.26
Driver=s license required, 77.22
Impoundment by Chief of Police, 77.27
Lighting required, 77.25
Operation on sidewalks and parking prohibited, 77.24
Regulations applicable at street intersections, 77.23
Safety regulation, 77.21
Snowmobile defined, 77.20
Towing conveyances prohibited; exceptions, 77.28
Restricted left turns, 71.04
Restricted minor=s permit, 71.01
Riding on outside prohibited, 71.22
Right-of-way, 71.12
Signaling intention to turn, stop or decrease speed, 71.03
Size and weight of vehicle and load, 72.07
Snow routes, Ch. 78, Sch. I
Snowmobiles
Automobile rules of the road applicable, 77.26
Driver=s license required, 77.22
Impoundment by Chief of Police, 77.27
Lighting required, 77.25
Operation on sidewalks and parking prohibited, 77.24
Regulations applicable at street intersections, 77.23
Safety regulation, 77.21
Snowmobile defined, 77.20
Towing conveyances prohibited; exceptions, 77.28
Special street signs for snow removal, 74.13
Speed limits designated, 71.31
Stalled or abandoned vehicle, 74.12
Temporary no parking areas for street cleaning and snow removal, 74.04
Texting prohibited, 71.32
Towing of violators, 74.14
Tractor with lugs, 71.29
Traffic control signal legend, 71.15
Traffic schedules
Snow routes, Ch. 78, Sch. I
Truck routes
Authority to post signs, 76.01
Enforcement, 76.05
School bus routes, 76.03
State statutes or State Highway Department regulations, 76.06
Temporary truck routes, 76.04
Truck driver responsibilities, 76.02
Weighing of vehicles, 76.07
Turning at intersections, 71.06
Unauthorized removal of impounded vehicles, 74.15
Unnecessary driving adjacent to school property, 71.19
AU@ turns and traveling on left side, 71.05
Use of dynamic brake device prohibited, 72.08
Vehicles standing or parking in alleys, 74.02
Where prohibited, 74.01
Yield signs, 71.16
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Snow routes, Ch. 78, Sch. I
TREE BOARD, 97.11
TREE BRANCHES TO BE TRIMMED AND CUT, 97.06
TREES AND SHRUBS
Accumulation of weeds and rubbish, 97.07
Boulevard and parking strip defined, 97.01
Clearance over sidewalks, 97.10
Enforcement by the city, 97.08
Failure to comply, 97.09
Penalty, 97.99
Planting regulations, 97.02
Removal of dead or diseased trees and overhanging branches, 97.04
Removal of trees in contact with utilities, 97.05
Tree Board, 97.11
Tree branches to be trimmed and cut, 97.06
Trimming existing trees at intersections, 97.03
TREES IN CONTACT WITH UTILITIES; REMOVAL OF, 97.05
TRUCK ROUTES
Authority to post signs, 76.01
Enforcement, 76.05
School bus routes, 76.03
State statutes or State Highway Department regulations, 76.06
Temporary truck routes, 76.04
Truck driver responsibilities, 76.02
Weighing of vehicles, 76.07
USE TAX, 36.042
VEHICLE NOISE CONTROL
Applicability, 75.03
Definitions, 75.01
Exceptions, 75.07
Exhaust system requirements, 75.04
Penalty, 75.99
Radios and stereo receiver restrictions, 75.06
Sound level measurement, 75.05
Sound level restrictions, 75.02
VEHICLE STANDARDS AND EQUIPMENT (See TRAFFIC CODE)
VEHICLES; ABANDONED
Definitions, 91.20
Nuisance declared, 91.21
Removal of motor vehicles, 91.22
Vehicles on private property, 91.23
WASTEWATER (See SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM)
WATER AND SEWER RATES AND CHARGES (See also SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM and WATER
SERVICE SYSTEM)
Bulk water rates, 52.04
Effective date, 52.07
Late fees for water and wastewater (sewer) service, 52.06
Outside watering purposes, 52.05
Wastewater (sewer) rates and service outside the corporate limits of the city, 52.03
Wastewater (sewer) rates inside the corporate limits of the city, 52.02
Water rates and services, 52.01
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM (See also WATER AND SEWER RATES AND CHARGES)
Abandonment of service, 50.37
Authority of department, 50.40
Automatic valves, 50.29
Breaking seals, 50.46
City not responsible for damage, 50.27
Construction of cesspool and privy, 50.45
Consumers must not permit others to use water, 50.12
Contamination prohibited, 50.43
Cross connections, 50.28
Curb stop boxes and valves, 50.09
Definitions, 50.01
Expansion loops required, 50.10
Expenses for new tap and service, 50.04
Extension of service pipes, 50.14
Failure to repair private service line, 50.18
Inspection of water mains constructed under private contract, 50.38
Interfering with fire hydrants, 50.36
Interfering with or damaging property of Water Department prohibited, 50.42
Leave water turned off, 50.31
May shut off to make repairs, 50.30
Meter boxes, 50.25
Meter installation, 50.21
Meter required, 50.20
Meters failing to register, 50.22
New service permit required, 50.03
Notice to continue or discontinue required, 50.35
One consumer to each service, 50.13
Owner responsible for pipe and fixtures, 50.11
Penalty, 50.99
Pipe size and type, 50.07
Pipes inspected before covering, 50.16
Reimbursement to city of administrative costs of water mains constructed under private contract, 50.39
Replacing or repair of service line, 50.17
Rules and regulations, 50.02
Separation of water service from sewer service, 50.15
Service line stop valves, 50.08
Service line work, 50.19
Sprinkling, 50.34
Submit plans, 50.32
Tampering with meters, 50.23
Testing meters, 50.24
Use of water for building purposes, 50.33
Valve between meter and boiler, 50.26
Water consumers to comply with sanitary regulations, 50.44
Water hookup fee, 50.05
Water line hookup fee, 50.06
Water shut-off expense, 50.41
WEAPONS
Discharging firearms and weapons, 134.03
Drawing a deadly weapon, 134.01
Slingshots, 134.02
WEEDS AND RUBBISH; ACCUMULATION OF, 97.07
WELLHEAD PROTECTION
Administration, 53.06
Definitions, 53.02
Establishment of wellhead protection zone, 53.03
Permitted uses, 53.04
Prohibited uses, 53.05
Short title and purpose, 53.01
YARD WASTE COLLECTION, 54.07
YIELD SIGNS, 71.16
ZONING, 153.01
ZONING COMMISSION
City Planning and Zoning Commission created, 32.050
Compensation and expenses, 32.053
Comprehensive Plan, 32.056
Membership of the Planning and Zoning Commission, 32.051
Organization, rules, staff and finances, 32.054
Plats and subdivisions, 32.059
Public buildings and improvements, 32.058
Rezoning, 32.055
Streets, parkways, parks and playgrounds, 32.060
Surveys and studies, 32.057
Terms of members, 32.052

2011 REVISED CANTON ZONING REGULATIONS
Prepared by the South Eastern Council of Governments at the direction of the Planning Commission and City Commission of the City of Canton, South Dakota
i
Table of Contents
GENERAL PROVISIONS ............................................................................................................ 1
1.01 Title and Application ........................................................................................................ 1
1.02 Jurisdiction ....................................................................................................................... 1
1.03 Purpose ............................................................................................................................. 1
1.04 Provisions of Ordinance Declared to be Minimum Requirements. .................................. 1
1.05 Violations ......................................................................................................................... 2
1.06 Separability Clause ........................................................................................................... 2
1.07 Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances. ................................................................................... 2
1.08 Effective Date. .................................................................................................................. 2
DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES ............................................................................................... 3
2.01 Districts Designated ......................................................................................................... 3
2.02 Adoption of Official Zoning Map..................................................................................... 3
2.03 Changes to Official Zoning Map ...................................................................................... 3
2.04 Interpretation of District Boundaries ................................................................................ 3
2.05 Annexations. ..................................................................................................................... 4
UR: URBAN RESERVE DISTRICT .......................................................................................... 5
3.01 Permitted Uses .................................................................................................................. 5
3.02 Conditional Uses .............................................................................................................. 6
3.03 Lot and Yard Regulations ................................................................................................. 6
R: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT .................................................................................................... 8
4.01 Permitted Uses .................................................................................................................. 8
4.02 Conditional Uses .............................................................................................................. 9
4.03 Lot and Yard Regulations ................................................................................................. 9
MH: MANUFACTURED HOUSING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT ...................................... 11
5.01 Permitted Uses ................................................................................................................ 11
5.02 Conditional Uses ............................................................................................................ 11
5.03 Lot and Yard Regulations ............................................................................................... 12
CB: CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT ................................................................................... 13
6.01 Permitted Uses ................................................................................................................ 13
6.02 Conditional Uses ............................................................................................................ 14
6.03 Lot and Yard Regulations ............................................................................................... 14
GB: GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT .................................................................................. 16
7.01 Permitted Uses ................................................................................................................ 16
7.02 Conditional Uses ............................................................................................................ 17
7.03 Lot and Yard Regulations ............................................................................................... 18
LI: LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT ..................................................................................... 21
8.01 Permitted Uses ................................................................................................................ 21
8.02 Conditional Uses ............................................................................................................ 22
8.03 Lot and Yard Regulations ............................................................................................... 23
HI: HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT ................................................................................... 24
ii
9.01 Permitted Uses ................................................................................................................ 24
9.02 Conditional Uses ............................................................................................................ 25
9.03 Lot and Yard Regulations ............................................................................................... 27
PD: PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT ....................................................................... 29
10.01 Compliance with Comprehensive Plan ......................................................................... 29
10.02 Procedure ...................................................................................................................... 29
10.03 Initial Development Plan .............................................................................................. 31
10.04 Final Development Plan ............................................................................................... 31
10.05 Amendments ................................................................................................................. 33
10.06 Planned Development Districts .................................................................................... 34
ADDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS ...................................................................................... 35
11.01 Reserved ....................................................................................................................... 35
11.02 Visibility at Intersections and Driveways. .................................................................... 35
11.03 Accessory Use and Structures ...................................................................................... 36
11.04 Off-Street Parking ........................................................................................................ 37
11.05 Off-Street Loading Requirements ................................................................................ 40
11.06 On-Premise Signs. ........................................................................................................ 40
11.07 Off-Premise Signs ........................................................................................................ 40
11.08 Other Permitted Signs ................................................................................................... 41
11.09 Fences. .......................................................................................................................... 43
11.10 Telecommunications Tower, Antenna Support Structures and Wireless Communications Facilities ........................................................................................... 44
11.11 Site-Built Single-Family and Multi-Family Dwelling Standards ................................. 44
11.12 Landscaping Standards. ................................................................................................ 45
11.13 Home Occupations ....................................................................................................... 47
11.14 Manufactured Home Requirements .............................................................................. 48
11.15 Bed and Breakfast Establishments ............................................................................... 48
11.16 Airport Approach Zones ............................................................................................... 49
ADJUSTMENTS TO YARD REGULATIONS ........................................................................ 51
12.01 Adjustment to Front Yard Requirements ...................................................................... 51
12.02 Adjustment to Side Yard Requirements ....................................................................... 51
12.03 Projection From Buildings............................................................................................ 51
NON-CONFORMING AND NON-STANDARD USES ........................................................... 52
13.01 Uses and Structures. ..................................................................................................... 52
13.02 Continuation of Non-Standard Uses ............................................................................. 52
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT ......................................................................... 54
14.01 Appointment ................................................................................................................. 54
14.02 Powers and Duties ........................................................................................................ 54
14.03 Right of Entry ............................................................................................................... 54
14.04 Stop Order .................................................................................................................... 54
BUILDING PERMITS AND FEES ............................................................................................ 56
15.01 Building Permits. ........................................................................................................... 56
15.02 Fees ................................................................................................................................ 57
15.03 Expiration of a Building Permit .................................................................................... 57
ii
i
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT ...................................................................................................... 58
16.01 Establishment ............................................................................................................... 58
16.02 Powers and Duties ........................................................................................................ 58
16.03 Appeal Procedure. ........................................................................................................ 58
16.04 Variances ...................................................................................................................... 59
16.05 Court Review. ............................................................................................................... 60
AMENDMENTS AND CHANGE OF ZONE ........................................................................... 62
17.01 Procedure. ..................................................................................................................... 62
CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS ............................................................................................... 64
18.01 Conditional Uses .......................................................................................................... 64
DEFINITIONS ............................................................................................................................. 68
19.01 Purpose. ........................................................................................................................ 68
19.02 Definitions. ................................................................................................................... 68
1
1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.01 Title and Application
These regulations shall be referred to as the 2011 Revised Zoning Ordinance of the City of Canton.
1.02 Jurisdiction
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all territory within the boundaries of the City of Canton, South Dakota, as established on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Canton.
1.03 Purpose
These regulations have been based upon the Canton Comprehensive Plan adopted and in conformance with Chapter 11-4 and 11-6 of South Dakota Codified Laws. These regulations are designed to carry out the goals, objectives and policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
The Zoning Ordinance is intended:
* to lessen congestion in the streets;
* to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers;
* to promote health and the general welfare;
* to provide adequate light and air;
* to prevent overcrowding of land;
* to avoid undue concentrations of population; and
* to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewers, school, parks and other public necessities.
1.04 Provisions of Ordinance Declared to be Minimum Requirements
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this Ordinance are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions, or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern.
2
1.05 Violations
If the Authorized Official determines that a violation of the provisions of this Ordinance has occurred, they shall issue a notice of violation and give the landowner time to comply with the Ordinance. If the person fails to comply within the time designated, then a citation shall be issued and the landowner assessed a civil penalty, which shall be set by resolution of the City Commission. Each day that the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense and subject them to additional civil penalties. The City may file legal proceedings to collect the civil penalties and/or to correct the violation.
The owner or tenant of any building, structure or premises, any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, maintains, assists in or participates in such violation may be also assessed a civil penalty.
1.06 Separability Clause
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any part other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
1.07 Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances
All prior ordinances or parts of prior ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance are hereby declared repealed.
1.08 Effective Date
These regulations shall be in full force and effect from and after their passage, approval, publication and effective date of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Canton, as provided for by South Dakota law.
3
2
DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES
2.01 Districts Designated
The City is hereby divided into the following districts:
UR Urban Reserve District
R Residential District
MH Manufactured Housing Residential District CB Central Business District
GB General Business District
LI Light Industrial District
HI Heavy Industrial District
PD Planned Development
2.02 Adoption of Official Zoning Map
The Official Zoning Map for the City of Canton, on record with the Finance Officer, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance.
2.03 Changes to Official Zoning Map
Changes to or replacement of the Official Zoning Map shall require amendment of these regulations by ordinance, as provided for in 17.01 of these regulations. The current Official Zoning Map and previously adopted versions are on file at City Hall.
2.04 Interpretation of District Boundaries
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines or corporate limits shall be interpreted to follow such platted lot lines or corporate limits;
B. Boundaries indicated as approximately following railroad lines shall be interpreted to be midway between the main tracks;
4
C. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets or other rights- of-way, or streams or other bodies of water, shall be interpreted to follow such center lines;
D. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, the Board of Adjustment, as established in Chapter 16, shall interpret the district boundaries;
E. Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this Ordinance, the Planning Commission may permit, as a Conditional Use Permit (Chapter 18) the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot into the remaining portion of the lot.
2.05 Annexations
When possible, the City will make every effort to conduct the rezoning of new territories concurrent with the annexation into the City. When it is not possible to conduct the rezone concurrent with the annexation, the territories which may hereafter be annexed into the City shall automatically be assigned the zoning district concurrent with or closest to the existing Lincoln County zoning classification until such time as the area is rezoned by amendment of these regulations by ordinance. The rezone shall be initiated within ninety (90) days of the annexation.
5
3
UR: URBAN RESERVE DISTRICT
The purpose of this district is to preserve lands best suited for natural drainage areas, public open space and agricultural uses from encroachment by incompatible uses. The area will also provide protection from floods and erosion, to protect views, to preserve natural settings for wildlife habitats, to add to the aesthetic quality of the community and to lessen the urban density.
3.01 Permitted Uses
Permitted Use Applicable Standards Agricultural crops
11.02, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Farm dwellings, single- family
11.02, 11.04, 11.06, 11.11, 11.12, 11.16
Not within identified floodplain area. School
11.02, 11.04, 11.12, 11.16
All parking lots being eight (8) feet from all residential properties.
One freestanding sign as allowed within 11.06. Public parks and trails
11.02, 11.04, 11.06, 11.16 Golf course
11.02, 11.04, 11.16
One freestanding sign as allowed within 11.06. Electrical substation
11.02, 11.04, 11.12, 11.16
An opaque screen, six feet in height, shall be located at all setback lines. Neighborhood utility facility
11.02, 11.12, 11.16 Public utility facility
11.02, 11.04, 11.12, 11.16
One freestanding sign allowed as allowed within 11.06.
6
Permitted Use Applicable Standards Cemetery
11.02, 11.16
At least two (2) acres in size and adequate road system within cemetery.
Not within an identified floodplain area.
One freestanding sign as allowed within 11.06. Fence
11.09, 11.16 Bed and breakfast establishment
11.15, 11.16
All applicable farm dwelling, single family standards apply. One freestanding sign as allowed within 11.06. Accessory use and structure (i.e. garage, shed)
11.02, 11.03, 11.16
(see definition) Home occupation
11.13
3.02 Conditional Uses
Conditional Uses Applicable Standards One additional single-family dwelling
11.02, 11.11, 11.16, 11.12, 18.01
Said dwelling shall be located within the farmstead perimeter. All farm dwelling, single family requirements apply.
Not within an identified floodplain area. Wireless communication facility on existing support structure
11.10, 11.16, 18.01
Not within an identified floodplain area. Municipally owned waste water treatment facility
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01 Major home occupation
11.13, 18.01 Public service facility
11.02, 11.04, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
One freestanding sign as allowed within 11.06.
3.03 Lot and Yard Regulations
All measurements shall be taken from the lot line to the building line (see definitions). A parking lot is not included as a portion of a side yard or rear yard (see 11.04).
7
Lot Area Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Maximum Height All Uses
1 acre
150 feet
50 feet
30 feet
30 feet
35 feet
Exceptions
#1 See also Adjustment to Yard Regulations (Chapter 12) and Non-Conforming and Non- Standard Uses (Chapter 13) for other specific exceptions.
8
4
R: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
The purpose of this district is to provide for certain urban density residential areas the City has now developed primarily with single-family, two-family and multiple family dwellings and where similar development is likely to occur.
4.01 Permitted Uses
Permitted Use Applicable Standards Single-family detached dwelling
11.02, 11.04, 11.11, 11.12, 11.16 Two-family dwelling
11.02, 11.04, 11.11, 11.12, 11.16 Church
11.02, 11.04, 11.12, 11.16
All parking lots being eight (8) feet from all residential properties.
One freestanding sign as allowed within 11.06. Public parks and trails
11.02, 11.04, 11.06, 11.16 Library
11.02, 11.04, 11.12, 11.16
All parking lots being eight (8) feet from all residential properties.
One freestanding sign as allowed within 11.06. School
11.02, 11.04, 11.12, 11.16
All parking lots being eight (8) feet from all residential properties.
One freestanding sign as allowed within 11.06. Neighborhood utility facility
11.02, 11.12, 11.16 Electrical substation
11.02, 11.04, 11.12, 11.16
An opaque screen, six feet in height, shall be located at all setback lines. Accessory structure (i.e. garage, shed, pool)
11.02, 11.03, 11.16
(see definition) Fence
11.09, 11.16
9
Permitted Use Applicable Standards Home occupation
11.13
4.02 Conditional Uses
Conditional Use Applicable Standards Multiple-family dwelling (3 or more dwelling units)
11.02, 11.04, 11.11, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
One freestanding sign allowed as allowed within 11.06. Townhouse
11.02, 11.04, 11.11, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01 Public service facility
11.02, 11.04, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
One freestanding sign as allowed within 11.06. Major home occupation
11.13, 18.01 Day care center
11.16, 11.11, 18.01
A safe pickup and drop off area must be provided for the children.
All single family standards apply. Bed and breakfast establishment
11.15, 11.16, 18.01
All single-family detached dwelling standards apply. One freestanding sign as allowed within 11.06. Group home
11.16, 18.01
Structure must be a single housekeeping unit. Applicant must provide copy of state agency license. All single-family detached dwelling standards apply.
4.03 Lot and Yard Regulations
All measurements shall be taken from the lot line to the building line (see definitions). A parking lot is not included as a portion of a side yard or rear yard (see 11.04). Lot coverage shall not exceed 50% in R Districts.
10
Zone standards
District Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Maximum Height 
R-1 Single-Family Detached
7,500 sq. ft.
66 feet
see #1,
#2
20 feet
see #3
7 feet
15 feet
35 feet 
R-2 Two-Family Attached 
7,500 sq. ft.
66 feet
see #1,
#2
20 feet
see #3
7 feet
15 feet
35 feet 
R-2 Two-Family Attached 
3,750 sq. ft.
25 feet
see #1,
#2
20 feet
see #3
0’ or 7’ on nonparty
wall side
15 feet
35 feet 
R-3 Multiple Dwellings 
1,500 sq. ft. 
80 feet
20 feet
see #3
7 feet
15 feet
55 feet 
R-3 All other uses
5,000 sq. ft.
50 feet
20 feet
see #3
7 feet
15 feet
35 feet
Exceptions
#1 A residence may be constructed on a lot-of-record which has a lot width of less than 66 feet.
#2 For a lot located on a cul-de-sac bulb, the required lot width will be measured at the required front yard setback line; however, the minimum lot width at the right-of-way line shall not be less than 50 feet.
#3 There shall be a required front yard on each street side of a double-frontage lot. There shall be a required front yard on each street side of a corner lot.
#4 See also Adjustment to Yard Regulations (Chapter 12) and Non-Conforming and Non- Standard Uses (Chapter 13) for other specific exceptions.
11
5
MH: MANUFACTURED HOUSING RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
The purpose of this district is to provide for high density residential areas in the City that may be developed for all types of manufactured housing and support facilities.
5.01 Permitted Uses
Permitted Use Applicable Standards Manufactured home
11.02, 11.04, 11.12, 11.14, 11.16 Electrical substation
11.02, 11.04, 11.12, 11.16
An opaque screen, six feet in height, shall be located at all setback lines. Neighborhood utility facility
11.02, 11.16 Public parks and trails
11.02, 11.04, 11.06, 11.16 Accessory structure (i.e. garage, shed)
11.02, 11.03, 11.16
(see definition) Home occupation
11.13
5.02 Conditional Uses
Conditional Use Applicable Standards Licensed manufactured home park
11.02, 11.04, 11.06, 11.12, 11.14, 11.16, 18.01
Municipal code regulations regarding manufactured home parks. Church
11.02, 11.04, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
One freestanding sign as allowed within 11.06. School
11.02, 11.04, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
One freestanding sign as allowed within 11.06.
12
Conditional Use Applicable Standards Day care center
11.16, 18.01
A safe pickup and drop off area must be provided for the children. Group home
11.16, 18.01
Structure must be a single housekeeping unit. Applicant must provide copy of state agency license. Public service facility
11.02, 11.04, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
One freestanding sign as allowed within 11.06 Major home occupation
11.13, 18.01
5.03 Lot and Yard Regulations
All measurements shall be taken from the lot line to the building line (see definitions). A parking lot is not included as a portion of a side yard or rear yard (see 11.04).
1. Each manufactured home park shall be at least ten (10) acres.
2. The licensed manufactured home park shall be surrounded by a landscaped area 25 feet wide along all public streets and all manufactured home park boundaries.
3. The entrance to the manufactured home park shall be allowed one freestanding sign as allowed for specified uses in 11.06.
Lot Area Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Maximum Height Residential Uses
6,600
sq. ft.
66 feet
20 feet
10 feet
10 feet
35 feet Corner Lots
7,500
sq. ft.
66 feet
20 feet
10 feet
10 feet
35 feet All Other Uses
6,000
sq. ft.
60 feet
25 feet
10 feet
10 feet
35 feet
Exception
#1 See also Adjustment to Yard Regulations (Chapter 12) and Non-Conforming and Non- Standard Uses (Chapter 13) for other specific exceptions.
13
6
CB: CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
The purpose of this district is to provide a commercial area for those establishments serving the general shopping needs of the trade area, with specific attention to preserving the City's Main Street Commercial Core. The grouping of uses is intended to preserve and improve the character and economic vitality of Main Street.
6.01 Permitted Uses
Permitted Use Applicable Standards Retail trade or service
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Office
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Personal service
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Hotel/motel
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Gasoline dispensing station
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Public utility facility
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Mortuary
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Private club
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Church
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Arcade
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Rooming /boarding house
11.02, 11.04, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16
Subject to the residence being constructed above the first floor. Motor vehicle service station
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16
Gasoline pumps and gasoline pump islands shall be located more than 15 feet from the nearest property line.
14
Permitted Use Applicable Standards Public service facility
11.02, 11.04, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16
One freestanding sign as allowed within 11.06. Accessory use (i.e. garage & shed)
11.02, 11.03, 11.16
(see definition) Public parks and trails
11.02, 11.04, 11.06, 11.16 Fence
11.09, 11.16
6.02 Conditional Uses
Conditional Use Applicable Standards Mixed use (commercial/ residential)
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01 Adult oriented business
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Applicant must comply with SDCL Ch. 11-12-2 & 11-12-3. Electrical substation
11.02, 11.04, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
An opaque screen, six feet in height, shall be located at setback lines. Day care center
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Adequate and safe playground area with a fence four (4) feet high (see 11.09). Motor vehicle repair shop
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Subject to an adequate number of parking spots to allow temporary storage of the cars only while being repaired, not exceeding twenty-one (21) days. On-sale alcoholic beverage establishment
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01 Commercial parking lots/parking ramps
11.02, 11.04, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
6.03 Lot and Yard Regulations
All measurements shall be taken from the lot line to the building line (see definitions). A parking lot is not included as a portion of a side yard or rear yard (see 11.04).
15
A. The average front and rear yard setback existing on each street shall apply.
B. There are no side yard or lot area restrictions.
C. See also Adjustment to Yard Regulations (Chapter 12) for specific exceptions.
D. When abutting a residential district, uses and structures shall have a minimum front yard of 20 feet, minimum side yards of 5 feet and a minimum rear yard of 15 feet.
E. The maximum height of all buildings and structures shall not exceed 45 feet.
16
7
GB: GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
The purpose of this district is to provide a commercial area for those establishments serving the general shopping needs of the trade area, with specific attention to the carrying capacity of roads and streets and to encourage provision of adequate off-street parking and loading space. It is not the intent of this district to encourage the extension or enlargement of strip commercial areas.
7.01 Permitted Uses
Permitted Use Applicable Standards Retail trade or service
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Office
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Personal service
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Hotel/motel
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Motor vehicle service station/gas dispensing station
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Printing plant
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Hospital/clinic
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Public utility facility
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Mortuary
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Private club
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Church
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16
All parking lots being 8 feet from all residential properties. Arcade
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Greenhouse/nursery
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Drive-in theater
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16
17
Permitted Use Applicable Standards Car wash
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16
Five storage spaces for each bay beyond off-street parking requirements and the water from the car wash contained on the site. Farm store, feed store
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16
Subject to only accessory storage of fertilizer or farm chemicals on the site. Commercial recreation facility
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Accessory use (i.e. garage, shed)
11.02, 11.03, 11.16
(see definition) Commercial parking lots/parking ramps
11.02, 11.04, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Public service facility
11.02, 11.04, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Public parks and trails
11.02, 11.04, 11.06, 11.16 Fence
11.09, 11.16
7.02 Conditional Uses
Conditional Use Applicable Standards Motor vehicle sales, display, and service
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, , 11.16, 18.01 Adult oriented business
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Applicant must comply with SDCL Ch. 11-12-2 & 11-12-3. Electrical substation
11.02, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
An opaque screen, six feet in height, shall be located at setback lines. On-sale alcoholic beverage establishment
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01 Day care center
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Adequate and safe playground area with fence four (4) feet high.
18
Conditional Use Applicable Standards Motor vehicle repair shop
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Subject to an adequate number of parking spots to allow temporary storage of the cars only while being repaired, not exceeding twenty-one (21) days. Off-premise signs
11.02, 11.07, 18.01 Veterinarian
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
No outdoor kenneling of dogs within 1,000 feet of a residential area*. Bus passenger terminal
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01 Lumberyard
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Subject to screening of all parts and accessories from view. Farm implement sales, display and service
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Subject to the screening of all outdoor storage from view. Bus/truck terminal
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01 Campground
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Lot must contain at least 2,000 square feet and be supplied with city water and sanitary sewer services; access road on the campground site shall be paved or surfaced in a similar manner to the adjacent public roads, shall be approved by the City, and shall be 14 feet for one way and 20 feet for two-
way roads. Kennel
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Located 1,000 feet from residential district area*. Mixed use (commercial/ residential)
11.02, 11.04, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Warehouse, mini-warehouse
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 The materials stored on the premises shall have a Level 1 or below in the Fire Protection Guide on Hazardous Materials.
* measured from the closest point of the outside walls of both structures
7.03 Lot and Yard Regulations
All measurements shall be taken from the lot line to the building line (see definitions). A parking lot is not included as a portion of a side yard or rear yard (see 11.04).
Lot Area Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Maximum Height
19
All Uses
NA
NA
20 feet
see #3
7 feet
see #1
15 feet
see #2
35 feet
Exceptions
#1 A side yard of 10 feet shall be required where a lot is adjacent to or abuts a residential district.
#2 A rear yard of 20 feet with a landscape buffer shall be required where a lot is adjacent to or abuts a residential district.
#3 There shall be a required front yard on each street side of a double frontage lot. There shall be a required front yard on each street side of a corner lot.
#4 See also Adjustment to Yard Regulations (Chapter 12) for other specific exceptions.
20
8
LI: LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
This district is intended to provide for a number of light manufacturing, wholesale, warehousing and service uses in an attractive industrial park-like setting.
8.01 Permitted Uses
Permitted Use Applicable Standards Wholesale trade
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Light manufacturing
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Contractor’s shop/storage yard
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16
Subject to screening of all outdoor storage from view. Office
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Public utility facility
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Frozen food locker
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Wireless communication facility on existing support structure
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.10, 11.12, 11.16 Printing plant
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Motor vehicle service station
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Electrical substation
11.02, 11.12, 11.16
Opaque screen, six feet in height, located as far back as all setback lines. Warehouse, mini-warehouse
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16
The materials stored on the premises shall have a Level 1 or below in the Fire Protection Guide on Hazardous Materials. Lumberyard
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16
21
Permitted Use Applicable Standards Retail trade or service
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16
Only when it is an accessory use when in conjunction with the primary use of wholesaling or manufacturing. Truck or bus wash
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16
All water from the truck or bus wash being contained on the site. Truck repair, sales and service
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16
Subject to no unscreened outdoor storage of parts. Farm store or feed store
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16
Only accessory storage of fertilizer or farm chemicals on the site. Farm implement sales, display and service
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Public service facility
11.02, 11.04, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Accessory structure (i.e. garage, shed)
11.02, 11.03, 11.16
(see definition) Fence
11.09, 11.16
Temporary commercial grain storage facilities (open storage)
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16
Subject to the operator providing a letter to the Authorized Official stating the need for temporary storage of grain and that the facilities will be completely removed when the temporary use is vacated. The letter shall include a date certain for discontinuing the use.
8.02 Conditional Uses
Conditional Use Applicable Standards Telecommunications tower
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.10, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01 Off-premise sign
11.02, 11.07, 11.16, 18.01 Bus/truck terminal
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01 Recycling collection or processing facility
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Screening of all recyclable material from view.
22
Conditional Use Applicable Standards Automobile storage yard
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Screening of the storage yard with privacy fence, berm vegetation or placement on the lot. Broadcast tower
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Located at least 300 feet from a residential district. Grain terminal; grain processing
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01 Motor vehicle repair shop
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
An adequate number of parking spots to store the cars and screen parts and materials from view. Municipally owned waste water treatment facility
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01 Airport
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
8.03 Lot and Yard Regulations
All measurements shall be taken from the lot line to the building line (see definitions). A parking lot is not included as a portion of a side yard or rear yard (see 11.04).
Lot Area Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Maximum Height All Uses
NA
75 feet
25 feet
see #4
10 feet
see #2
30 feet
see #3
35 feet
see #1
Exceptions
#1 A conditional use permit will be required for any structure having a maximum height exceeding 35 feet.
#2 A side yard of 25 feet shall be required when a lot is adjacent to or abuts a residential district.
#3 A rear yard of 35 feet shall be required where a lot is adjacent to or abuts a residential district.
#4 There shall be a required front yard on each street side of a double frontage lot. There shall be a required front yard on each street side of a corner lot.
#5 See also Adjustment to Yard Regulations (Chapter 12) for other specific exceptions.
23
#6 Waste water treatment facilities are exempt from minimum yard or set back requirements.
24
9
HI: HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
This district is intended to provide for general industrial uses which may create some nuisance and which are not properly associated with, nor compatible with residential, office or commercial establishment. All uses in this district shall comply with any state or local regulations regarding noise, emissions, dust, odor, glare, vibration or heat when applicable.
9.01 Permitted Uses
Permitted Use Applicable Standards Wholesale trade
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 General manufacturing other than those listed below
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Farm store or feed store
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Contractor’s shop/storage yard
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16
Subject to screening of all outdoor storage from view. Public utility facility
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Frozen food locker
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Wireless communication facility on existing support structure
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Electrical substation
11.02, 11.04, 11.12, 11.16
An opaque screen, six feet in height, must be located as far back as all setback lines. Retail
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16
Being an accessory use when in conjunction with a primary use of wholesaling or manufacturing.
25
Permitted Use Applicable Standards A warehouse or mini- warehouse
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16
Subject to the materials stored on the premises shall have a Level 1 or below in the Fire Protection Guide on Hazardous Materials. Bus and truck wash
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16
All water from the truck or bus wash being contained on the site. Truck repair, sales and service
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16
No unscreened outdoor storage of parts. Fruit and vegetable canning and processing
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16
Traffic to and from the facility will not travel on residential streets and the odor will not impact residential neighborhoods. Refining
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16
Traffic to and from the facility will not travel on residential streets and the location shall not be located within ½ mile of a residential area. Motor vehicle repair shop
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16
An adequate number of parking spots to store the cars and screen parts and materials from view. Accessory structure (i.e. garage, shed)
11.02, 11.03, 11.16
(see definition) Airport
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Public service facility
11.02, 11.04, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Bus/truck terminal
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16 Fence
11.09, 11.16
9.02 Conditional Uses
Conditional Use Applicable Standards Telecommunications tower
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01 Off-premise signs
11.02, 11.07, 11.16, 18.01
26
Conditional Use Applicable Standards Recycling collection facility
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Subject to any outdoor storage of recyclable materials must be within an opaque screened area at least six feet in height. Manufacture of: acid, alcohol, ammonia, asphalt, bleach, cement, chlorine, dyestuffs, explosives, fertilizer, glue, gypsum, lime, oils, paint, plaster of Paris, shellac, sizing, turpentine or yeast
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Traffic to and from the facility will not travel on residential streets and the odor will not impact residential neighborhoods. Stockyards/slaughtering of animals
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Subject to traffic to and from the facility will not travel on residential streets and the odor will not impact residential neighborhoods. Rendering
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Traffic to and from the facility will not travel on residential streets and the location shall not be located within ½ mile of a residential area. Distillation of products
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Traffic to and from the facility will not travel on residential streets and the odor will not impact residential neighborhoods. Paper manufacturing Smelting Boilerworks
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Traffic to and from the facility will not travel on residential streets and the location shall not be located within ½ mile of a residential area. Tank farm; petroleum products terminal
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Compliance with the City’s fire and health code and traffic to and from the facility will not travel on residential streets and the odor will not impact residential neighborhoods. Grain terminal; grain processing
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Traffic to and from the facility will not travel on residential streets and the odor will not impact residential neighborhoods. Salvage yard
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Being sited off the main thoroughfares of the City, ½ mile from a residential district and be screened from view; the owner shall agree to control rodents as a condition of the permit.
27
Conditional Use Applicable Standards Manufacture and storage of electric transformers
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Chemicals associated with the transformers will be contained in an acceptable manner. Quarry/gravel pit
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Subject to the site being located at least 1,000 feet from commercial or residential properties. Automobile storage yard
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Screening of the storage yard with fence, berm, vegetation or placement on the lot. Recycling processing facility
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Any outdoor storage of recyclable materials must be within an opaque screened area at least six feet in height and all processing operations must be fully enclosed. Broadcast tower
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Being located at least 300 feet from a residential district. Solid waste transfer facility
11.02, 11.04, 11.05, 11.06, 11.12, 11.16, 18.01
Screening of the storage area with fence, berm, vegetation or placement on the lot.
Traffic to and from the facility will not travel on residential streets and the location shall not be located within ½ mile of a residential area.
9.03 Lot and Yard Regulations
All measurements shall be taken from the lot line to the building line (see definitions). A parking lot is not included as a portion of a side yard or rear yard (see 12.04).
Lot Area Lot Width Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard Maximum Height All Uses
NA
NA
35 feet
see #2
20 feet
see #3
30 feet
see #3
45 feet
see #1
Exceptions
#1 A conditional use permit will be required for any structure having a maximum height exceeding 45 feet.
#2 There shall be a required front yard on each street side of a double frontage lot. There shall be a required front yard on each street side of a corner lot.
28
#3 Side and rear yards shall have screening.
#4 See also Adjustment to Yard Regulations (Chapter 12) for other specific exceptions.
29
10
PD: PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
It is the intent of this district to provide flexibility from conventional zoning regulations with increased public review for planned development district projects in order to:
A. Encourage well-planned, efficient urban development.
B. Allow a planned and coordinated mix of land uses which are compatible and are harmonious, but previously discouraged by conventional zoning procedures.
C. Encourage more creative, higher quality and more ecologically sensitive urban design with special consideration given to projects which incorporate desirable design features, including but not limited to underground parking, orientation or design to take advantage of solar energy, environmental preservation, historic preservation, handicapped accessible structures, unique use of open spaces or other desirable design features.
D. Improve communication and cooperation among the City of Canton, land developers, and interested residents in the urbanization of new lands and the renewal of existing deteriorated areas.
10.01 Compliance with Comprehensive Plan
The developments within the planned development district shall comply with the policies and design standards of the Canton Comprehensive Plan. Said development shall be mutually compatible with adjacent projected developments.
10.02 Procedure
A. Initial development plan: When a petitioner wants to request a rezoning to the planned development district, it shall be submitted to the Authorized Official, showing the information specified in Section 10.03 below, a minimum of 30 days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which consideration is desired. After the planned development request has been reviewed, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the City Commission on the requested rezoning. The City Commission shall then act to approve or deny said request.
30
This request for rezoning is subject to the requirements for amendment of the zoning regulations specified in Chapter 17. No building permit shall be issued within the development until the final development plan is approved and the plat is filed.
B. Final development plan: Prior to construction on any lots in the planned development, the petitioner shall present a final development plan showing the information specified in Section 10.04 below, to the Planning Commission, who shall have the sole authority to approve, deny or amend said plan.
The final development plan may be submitted in conjunction with the initial development plan for concurrent approval on any subareas the developer is ready to commit to a final plan. All the information required for both an initial and final development plan must be shown for the area submitted for concurrent approval, except that the developer may reference the requirements of one of the traditional zoning districts as the development standard for a particular subarea.
At least one sign shall be posted on each accessible frontage of the property, signs provided by the Authorized Official for a continuous period of ten (10) days immediately prior to any public hearing held by the Planning Commission or City Commission to consider any final development plan.
C. Amendments:
1. Major Amendments. Major amendments to the initial and/or final development plan shall be required to be approved with a public hearing in the same manner as provided for in Section 10.05.
2. Minor amendments. Minor amendments to the initial and/or final development plan shall be required to be approved by the Planning Commission. Notice of such hearing shall be given by the posting of not less than two (2) signs provided by the Authorized Official for a continuous period of ten (10) days immediately prior to the public hearing. Before any action shall be taken by the Planning Commission, the applicant shall first file with the Authorized Official a certificate verifying that said signs have been posted at the proper location and for the time specified.
Minor amendments to the initial development plan may also be made by the submission and approval of a final development plan which is changed from the approved initial development plan. Any such amendments shall be shown as a change from the initial development plan on the final development plan.
3. Minimal amendments. Minimal amendments to the final development plan shall be submitted to the Authorized Official on a reproducible development plan showing the requested changes. The Authorized Official may then approve such change in writing if he/she deems it appropriate.
31
10.03 Initial Development Plan
Upon application for rezoning to planned development district, the petitioner shall present an initial development plan to the Planning Commission for review, and to the City Commission, for their approval showing the following information:
A. Project name and legal description.
B. A preliminary subdivision plan in compliance with Chapter 16.12 of the Subdivision Ordinance.
C. The proposed development scheme showing the following information:
1. The proposed land uses, including the number and type of proposed residential buildings, the proposed number of dwelling units per building, the number and type of any proposed nonresidential buildings and their square footage.
2. The proposed maximum density of the development.
3. The proposed minimum setbacks.
4. The proposed maximum height.
5. Proposed design features illustrating compatibility to the surrounding environment and neighborhood.
6. Anticipated subarea development sequence.
In addition the developer shall provide an 8 1/2 x 11 scaled rendering on mylar of the approved initial development plan showing each of the subareas.
10.04 Final Development Plan
Prior to construction on any lots in the planned development zoning district, the petitioner shall present a final development plan to the Planning Commission for their approval.
Final development plan approval shall expire one year from the date upon which it becomes effective if no work has commenced. Upon written request to the Authorized Official and prior to the final development plan approval expiration date, a time extension of up to 180 days for the final development plan approval may be granted.
The final development plan shall show the following information:
A. The subdivision name, the legal description and the individual project name (if any).
32
B. Boundaries of the subarea or subareas submitted for approval superimposed on the map of the initial development plan.
C. A subdivision plat of the subarea or subareas submitted for approval in compliance with Section 502 of the Subdivision Ordinance.
D. A scale drawing showing the following information will be required:
1. Size and location of proposed structures including height and number of units.
2. Calculated floor area for each structure and a generic listing of the uses within said structure.
3. Off-street parking lot arrangement designating all parking spaces, off-street loading spaces and any outdoor trash container.
4. Any parks, open spaces, sidewalks, bikeways or other paths.
5. Any outdoor lighting, type and location, except for standard street lights provided by the City.
6. Landscaping plans showing the type and location of any walls or fences, the placement, size and species of any trees or shrubs and berms in areas that will be sod or seeded.
7. All existing and proposed utilities, drainage ways, water courses and location of above ground existing utilities on adjacent property.
8. Proposed final ground contours.
9. Curb cuts and all private drives.
10. Adjacent, existing and proposed uses.
11. First floor elevation for any structure located in a flood hazard area.
12. Accurate building elevation of all proposed structures.
13. Documentation of the ownership and maintenance responsibility of any common open spaces, structures or facilities, including private streets.
14. Any subareas proposed for multiple residential development will be required to provide an open area for recreation. Said open spaces shall not be included in any required yard, but shall be located in the same subarea it is intended to serve.
33
15. Proposed parking and loading spaces which shall be in conformance with Chapters
11.04 and 11.05, except where unique physical, environmental or design characteristics make such requirements undesirable.
10.05 Amendments
A. Major amendments: The following changes in an initial and/or final development plan are considered major amendments:
1. Any change in the proposed land uses.
a. Should follow a rezoning process [Chapter 17].
2. An increase in density above that provided for in Section 10.05 (B) (5) below.
a. Should follow a rezoning process [Chapter 17].
B. Minor amendments: The following changes in an initial and/or final development plan are considered minor amendments:
1. Any adjustment in the size or shape of the building envelope (increasing the height or reducing the building setback).
2. Any change in the number or location of curb cuts.
3. Any decrease in the size of required open areas.
4. A minor change in the street pattern.
5. Any increase in density of a subarea:
a. Less than 25 percent for a subarea with less than eight units.
b. Less than 15 percent for a subarea with between nine and 20 units.
c. Less than eight percent for a subarea with 21 units or more.
6. Any change in the number of parking spaces.
7. Any minor change to on-premise signage.
C. Minimal amendments: The following changes in an initial and/or final development plan are considered minimal amendments:
1. Any adjustment of a building within a previously established building envelope.
34
2. A reduction in density and scale.
3. Any minimal change in the parking and loading requirements.
4. Any minimal change to on-premise signage.
5. Any minimal design changes including but not limited to adjustments to landscaping plans and other pre-approved design features.
10.06 Planned Development Districts
Planned development districts shall be as enumerated below:
35
11
ADDITIONAL USE REGULATIONS
11.01 Reserved
11.02 Visibility at Intersections and Driveways
A. Intersection safety zones: No monument style sign or other sign with its face less than twelve (12) feet above grade or any fence, wall, shrub, evergreen or coniferous tree or other obstruction to vision exceeding three (3) feet in height above the established street grade shall be erected, planted or maintained within a triangular area of a corner lot that is included by measuring straight lines along the curb lines at points 40 feet distant in each direction from the intersection of the curbs and a straight line connecting the first two lines. (See Figure 1)
B. Driveway safety zones: No monument style sign or other sign with its face less than ten
(10) feet above grade or any fence, wall, shrub, evergreen or coniferous tree or other obstruction to vision exceeding three feet in height above the established street grade shall be erected, planted or maintained within the area from the curb line to ten feet behind the curb line. (See Figure 1)
Figure 1
House
Intersectio Safety
ft
ft
Driveway Safety Zone
36
11.03 Accessory Buildings, Recreational Facility and Miscellaneous Structures
A. In general.
1. No accessory structure or use shall be constructed or developed on a lot prior to construction of the principal building.
2. Any structure placed within an easement that impedes the access or intended use of that easement may be removed by the City or the City’s representative at the owner’s expense.
3. Accessory buildings may not be used for dwelling purposes.
B. Residential districts.
1. Accessory buildings and detached private garages:
a. Shall be setback at least seven (7) feet from the side and rear property lines.
b. Shall not be located in front of the principal structure.
c. Cloth, canvas, plastic sheets and tarps and similar materials, corrugated
roofing or siding are not allowed as primary materials, except greenhouses are allowed to have sheeting (glass or plastic) of prescribed building
thickness as an outer covering. As an exterior material, steel siding and roofing is allowed provided it is architectural grade.
d. A detached private garage which is entered directly from an alley shall not be closer than fifteen feet to the alley.
e. The exterior finish of detached private garages shall be of materials compatible with the principal structure in color and texture.
f. The architectural design of detached private garages must be similar to the principal structure.
g. Shall not occupy more than 30 percent of the rear yard.
2. Miscellaneous structures.
a. Swing sets, sandboxes, play structures, dog kennels, satellite dishes and
similar structures shall not be located closer than five feet from the side or rear property lines, and shall not be located within the front yard setback.
37
3. Recreational facility.
1. Shall be set back at least five (5) feet from the side and five (5) feet from the rear property lines.
2. Shall not be placed on drainage, utility or other easements.
3. Shall not be located in front of the principal structure.
C. Nonresidential districts.
1. One accessory building is allowed. Exception: Picnic shelters, gazebos and similar structures may be allowed as additional accessory structures.
2. The maximum floor area allowed is 200 square feet. Exception: Size may be increased with a conditional use permit.
3. Exterior finish shall be of materials compatible with the principal structure in color and texture.
4. Architectural design must be similar to the principal structure.
5. Location of the accessory structure shall have minimal negative impact on the site and adjacent properties and shall meet the setbacks of the district.
6. Accessory structures shall not exceed the height of the principal structure.
7. Shall not be located in front of the principal structure.
11.04 Off-Street Parking
A. General Conditions
1. No parking spaces are permitted in the required front yard in an R or MH District except for portions of the front yard necessary for hard surfaced driveways or as otherwise provided in this Ordinance. Parking is permitted in a side yard or rear yard in an R District, provided it is not nearer than two (2) feet to the property line.
2. Driveways shall not exceed 36 feet in width. An exception for 40 feet driveways shall be allowed for businesses expecting tanker truck traffic.
3. Each parking space shall be directly accessible to an access aisle.
4. Except in conjunction with a legal nonconforming business it is unlawful for any person to park, store, leave, or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any commercial vehicle in a UR, R or MH Zoning District, unless the vehicle is parked in
38
connection with the performance of a service. The transferring of refuse from a smaller satellite vehicle to a large packer garbage truck is prohibited.
5. All parking, loading, and maneuvering and drive areas thereto shall be hard surfaced with asphalt or concrete.
6. The parking requirements in this section shall not be applicable to property in the CB Central Business District, except for residential uses which are authorized by a conditional use permit.
B. Required Parking Spaces
In computing the number of required off-street parking spaces the floor area shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use, excluding any floor or portion used for parking. Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be the nearest whole number. For the number of off-street parking and loading spaces required in all other districts, see TABLE 1 below:
TABLE 1: Minimum Off-Street Parking & Loading Requirements
USES & STRUCTURES MINIMUM PARKING REQUIREMENTS Single-family and two-family dwellings
Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit. Multiple-family dwellings
One and one-half (1 ½) spaces for each dwelling unit of one bedroom or less. Two spaces for each dwelling unit of two bedrooms or more. Rooming and boarding houses, sororities and fraternities
One (1) parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area (one space per two beds). Bowling alleys
Four (4) spaces per lane. Church or Temple
One (1) space for each four (4) seats in main setting area. Private club or lodge
One (1) parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area. High school
Four (4) spaces for each classroom or office room, plus one (1) for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of seating area in any auditorium or gymnasium or cafeteria intended to be used as an auditorium.
39
USES & STRUCTURES
MINIMUM PARKING REQUIREMENTS Elementary school
Two (2) spaces for each classroom or office room, plus one (1) for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of seating area in any auditorium or gymnasium or cafeteria intended to be used as an auditorium. Eating and drinking places
One (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area or one (1) space for each three seats, whichever is greater. Hospitals
One (1) space for each bed. Nursing, convalescent and rest homes
One (1) space for each three (3) beds. Auditoriums, theaters and places of public assembly
One (1) space for each four (4) seats of design capacity. Hotels and motels
One (1) space for each two (2) rental rooms. Mortuaries
One (1) space for each four (4) seats in the chapel. Retail sales establishments
One (1) space for each three hundred
(300) square feet of floor area. Medical and dental clinics
One (1) space for each two (2) staff members and full-time employees, plus one (1) space for each six hundred (600) square feet of gross floor area. Manufactured home parks
Two (2) spaces for each manufactured home lot. Industrial uses
One (1) space for each two (2) employees on the maximum working shift. Service establishments
One (1) space for each three hundred
(300) square feet of floor area. Wholesale and distribution establishments
One (1) space for each two (2) employees on the maximum working shift.
40
All other uses not specified above shall have minimum off-street parking and off-street loading spaces as determined by the Planning Commission.
11.05 Off-Street Loading Requirements
There shall be provided at the time any building is erected or structurally altered, off-street loading spaces for the following uses.
Use Gross square feet floor area Number of Off-street loading spaces Office Buildings
25,000 - 50,000
every additional 75,000
One 14' x 35' space
Add one 14' x 35' space Retail, Service and Trade Establishments and Industrial and Wholesale Commercial
5,000 - 20,000
20,000 - 100,000
Every additional 75,000
One 14' x 35' space
Two 14' x 35' spaces
Add one 14' x 35' space
11.06 On-Premise Signs
Districts Permitted Signs Sign Area (maximum) Sign Height (maximum) UR, R, MH, for specified uses only*
Freestanding
15 square feet
6 feet above grade R & MH
Wall
1 square foot
On wall only CB & GB
Wall, roof, and projecting
2 square feet per 1 foot of lineal street frontage with a
maximum of 200 sq. ft.
Wall = on wall only
Roof and projecting = 5 feet above roof line CB & GB
Freestanding
1 square foot per 1 foot of lineal street frontage with a
maximum of 200 sq. ft.
GB = 15 feet above grade CB = 18 feet above grade LI & HI
Freestanding
1 square foot per 3 lineal feet of street frontage with a
maximum of 100 sq. ft.
20 feet above grade LI & HI
Wall, roof, and projecting
1 square foot per 3 lineal feet of street frontage with a
maximum of 100 sq. ft.
Wall = on wall only
Roof and projecting = 5 feet above roof line
* Specified uses are listed within the district’s permitted uses applicable standard tables (sections 3.01, 3.02, 4.01, 4.02, 5.01, and 5.02)
11.07 Off-Premise Signs
Off-premise signs are allowed in the GB, LI, and HI Districts subject to the following regulations:
41
A. Off-premise signs will be allowed a maximum size of 200 square feet.
B. Signs will be allowed a maximum height of 40 feet; and a minimum height of 12 feet.
C. There will be a minimum setback for the sign face of 10 feet and a minimum setback for the sign structure of 22 feet.
11.08 Other Permitted Signs
The following types of signs shall be permitted in all zoning districts unless otherwise prohibited:
A. Temporary signs
1. Contractor’s Signs - Signs identifying individual contractors associated with any residential constructions shall be limited in size to 12 square feet.
2. Construction Signs - Construction signs which identify the architects, engineers, contractors and other individuals or firms involved with the construction but not including any advertisement of any product, and signs announcing the character of the building enterprise or the purpose for which the building is intended, during the construction period, to a maximum area of 32 square feet. No sign shall be located within any right-of-way nor shall any sign be located so as to obstruct visibility. Additionally, the placement of all signs shall conform with the provisions of Section
11.02. The sign shall be confined to the site of construction and shall be removed within ten (10) days of the beginning of the intended use of the project. In the case of a building intended for multiple tenants, the construction sign shall be removed upon the occupancy of 50 percent of the gross floor area.
3. Real Estate Signs - Real estate signs not exceeding twelve (12) feet in area advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the premise or part of the premise on which the signs are displayed and shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet to any lot line. All such signs shall be removed within ten (10) days of the sale, rental, or lease, and shall be placed only on the property which is for sale or lease.
4. Temporary Subdivision Construction Signs -
a. One temporary sign at each street entrance to a new subdivision is permitted. Such signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet and shall be limited to the name of the subdivision, the developer and the developer’s address and telephone number.
b. No temporary subdivision sign shall be erected prior to receiving preliminary plat approval by the City Commission. Temporary subdivision signs are permitted for a period of one (1) year from the date of construction, provided that they shall be removed upon the erection of permanent subdivision
42
identification signs. Temporary subdivision signs are subject to permit requirements.
B. Political Campaign Signs - Political campaign signs announcing candidates seeking public offices, issues and other data pertinent thereto. There shall be no limit to the number of signs per premise. These signs shall be confined within private property and not within the street right-of-way.
C. Banners - Banners advertising public, church, or service organization entertainment or events may be approved by the Authorized Official. Banners will be allowed during and for fourteen (14) days before and three (3) days after the event.
D. Grand Opening Signs - Grand opening signs announcing the commencement of new business entities shall be allowed for a period of fourteen (14) days prior to and fourteen
(14) days after the announced opening date for the business. Such signs require a permit, but shall be exempt from fees.
E. Portable Signs - Portable signs with message boards advertising special products or otherwise promoting business or individuals are not permitted, except as follows:
1. The Authorized Official may issue a fourteen (14) day permit for a portable sign to be established at an approved location as a temporary portable sign upon an application stating that such request is for a special event or promotion.
F. Temporary Uses and Special Events - Signs associated with events and temporary uses operated by nonprofit and not for profit entities shall conform to the provisions of this chapter including permit requirements. However, these signs shall be exempt from fees.
G. Individual Sale Signs - Signs advertising garage sales, rummage sales, yard sales, and similar types of sales do not require permits. Said signs shall be four (4) square feet or less and shall not be located in any right-of-way. Individual sale signs shall be allowed only during the actual days of the sale and shall be removed by the operator after the sale.
H. Roadside Sales Stand - Signs identifying roadside sales stands are permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the following:
1. One sign shall be permitted off-site to advertise the sales stand, provided that the sign does not exceed twelve (12) square feet and is not located in a public right-of-way. Additionally, written evidence of the property owner’s permission to erect the sign must be presented with the permit application.
2. Signs for roadside sales stands are permitted only for the season during which the stand is open.
I. Public signs - Public building bulletin boards not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area, traffic and public signs, no trespassing or similar signs and legal notices.
43
J. Menu signs - Signs that give menu items and prices for drive-up windows shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet.
K. Electronic signs - Electronic signs are permitted by conditional use.
11.09 Fences
Fences may be erected in required yards, provided they meet or exceed the following requirements:
A. No barbed wire fence shall be erected or maintained.
B. No fence shall be erected or maintained in such manner as to unreasonably obstruct the view of others or their access to light or air.
C. For R, MH or CB District - Fences not more than eight (8) feet in height may be
erected on any part of a lot other than in the required front yard. Fences not more than four
(4) feet in height may be located on any part of the lot.
D. On double frontage and corner lots used residentially, fences not more than six (6) feet in height may be placed in a required front yard abutting an arterial or collector street where:
1. The required front yard abutting an arterial or collector street is not used as the front yard.
2. The fence is set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the property line abutting the arterial or collector street.
3. Intersection safety zones are maintained.
E. For GB, LI or HI District - Fences not more than eight (8) feet in height may be erected on any part of a lot other than in the required front yard except any yard adjacent to a residential use. Whenever outside storage is permitted an opaque fence is required.
F. No fence shall be erected which violates 11.02 - Visibility at Intersections.
G. To preserve the neighborhood character of the Residential districts, fences along the perimeter of a front yard shall be at least 50% open and consist of an ornamental-type fence, including aluminum/iron, picket or split-rail.
H. The maximum fence height for golf courses, public swimming pools, school track and field areas, parks and ball parks shall be eight (8) feet and for public tennis courts twelve (12) feet on any portion of the lot. Fences associated with these uses shall not be more than 30 percent solid.
44
I. Fences that are adjacent to alleys shall be set back five (5) feet from the street/boulevard right-of-way.
J. The side of the fence considered being the face (facing as applied to fence post) should face abutting property.
K. The installation of a fence shall be in a manner as to which access to the City for the purposes of reading or maintaining utility meters is provided.
L. Fences that are adjacent to sidewalks shall be one (1) foot away from the sidewalk.
11.10 Telecommunications Tower, Antenna Support Structures and Wireless Communications Facilities
Regulations regarding development of telecommunications towers, antenna structures and wireless communications facilities are intended to encourage the development of a competitive wireless communications marketplace while protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the public and maintaining the aesthetic integrity of the community. The regulations cover the placement, construction, and modification of telecommunications facilities.
A. A minimum distance of three hundred (300) feet from the telecommunications tower to any residentially zoned or used property measured from the base of the telecommunications tower to the property line.
B. A minimum distance of ½ mile between telecommunications towers measured from the base of one telecommunications tower to the base of another except when an existing antenna support structure is used to co-locate a wireless communication facility.
C. Building permit shall include documented Federal Communications Commission (FCC) approval prior to permit issuance.
D. The maximum height for telecommunications towers and wireless communications facilities shall not exceed 100 feet for single users or 200 feet for two or more users. When such structure is located in an airport approach zone, Federal Aviation Administration approval will be required prior to permit issuance.
E. The tower shall be constructed in a manner that will make it inaccessible for any unauthorized person to climb.
11.11 Site-Built Single-Family and Multi-Family Dwelling Standards
A. All dwellings must be placed on a permanent foundation and the space between the foundation and the bottom of the home must be enclosed by concrete or approved concrete products.
45
B. All single-family dwellings shall be oriented on the lot, so that the primary pedestrian entrance faces the street or access easement.
C. The pitch of the main roof shall not be less than one foot of rise for each four feet of horizontal run. Use of flat or corrugated sheet metal for roofing shall not be permitted.
D. Roofing materials shall be wood shingle or shake, composition, asphalt laminate, clay or architectural metal. Exposed fastener corrugated metal or corrugated fiberglass roofing is not permitted. Roofing material requirements may receive a variance.
E. Eaves and gable ends must be a minimum of twelve inches. This is not applicable to re- roofing or additions to existing structures.
F. The primary exterior finish of each residence shall be sided with hardboard siding, aluminum siding, steel siding, vinyl siding, stucco, brick, rock, wood or similar material. The use of corrugated sheet metal for exterior walls is prohibited.
G. No dwelling shall be constructed, installed, or moved into the area under the jurisdiction of these regulations, unless said dwelling is constructed upon, installed on or moved onto a permanent foundation as defined in these regulations, excepting manufactured homes placed in an approved MH district. The Authorized Official or his or her designee shall inspect and authorize all dwellings moved into the City of Canton. For the purposes of these regulations, manufactured housing shall be allowed only in the MH Manufactured Housing Residential District.
H. The minimum width of the main body of the site-built dwelling shall not be less than twenty (20) feet, as measured across the narrowest portion.
11.12 Landscaping Standards
It is the desire of the City of Canton to encourage development which is environmentally sensitive and aesthetically pleasing. To assist in these objectives, a minimum standard for landscaping is prescribed.
A. Within any zoning district, at least 90 percent of the required front yard setback shall be landscaped and maintained with living ground cover except for the portion of the front yard necessary for hard surfaced driveways or sidewalks (see 11.04).
B. Within GB, LI and HI districts, one tree per 50 feet of lot width is required. No more than 25 percent of the required trees may be deciduous ornamental, evergreen, or coniferous trees. To prevent the spread of disease and tree loss, local ordinances may from time to time prohibit the planting of specific types of trees.
C. Each existing tree of at least 1 3/4-inch caliper in size shall count toward the tree requirement.
46
D. The unpaved portion of a dedicated public right-of-way abutting any development shall be landscaped with sod, seed, or other living ground cover.
E. Landscape areas must be capable of providing a substantially full expanse of foliage within three years after planting. All deciduous trees shall be 1 3/4 inch caliper and all deciduous ornamental shall be 1 1/4 inch caliper. These requirements are considered to be minimum requirements, and under no circumstances shall these measurements be lowered.
F. Screening: A fence, wall, or shrubbery six (6) feet in height and of a character necessary for adequate screening shall be installed or planted when a parking lot is located adjacent to residentially used property or across the right-of-way from residentially used property (unless the right-of-way is an arterial street). Berms or other landscaping techniques may be used for all or part of the six foot screening if they have a maximum grade of three feet horizontal to one-foot vertical and sodded or planted with other acceptable living ground cover.
G. Parking Lot Buffer Areas: A setback of at least five (5) feet shall be provided between a parking lot and residentially zoned property.
Exception: If proper screening is provided, the setback may be two (2) feet.
H. Lighting Standards: When property is adjacent to or within 150 feet of residentially used or zoned property, the following lighting standards apply:
1. The maximum light level shall be no greater than three (3) foot candles field measured at the property line (ground level).
2. The maximum height of light luminaries shall be 25 feet above the ground.
3. Canopy luminaries and other on-site lighting with luminaries greater than 2000 lumens shall include a 90-degree cut-off type, deflector, refractor, or forward throw light fixture.
4. The maximum number of canopy luminaries shall be determined by the following industry standard:
Canopy length (in feet) x canopy width (in feet) x 3 = Maximum No. of Luminaries Lamp wattage
All other light luminaries shall have a maximum height of 38 feet above the ground. Submittal of photometric plans shall be required with all site plan checks for building projects on property with lighted parking lots or lighted canopies.
The following structures or uses are exempt from these lighting standards: public recreation facilities, parks, pedestrian walkways, illuminated flags or statues, airport runways, telecommunication towers, broadcast towers, and historic period lighting.
47
11.13 Home Occupations
A. Criteria and Standards. All home occupations shall meet the following criteria and standards:
1. The occupation must be conducted within a dwelling unit. The use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit, except family day cares. No other employees shall be hired.
2. The area set aside for a home occupation shall not exceed 20% of the total floor area of the residence, including garages. The permissible floor area includes that space necessary for storage of goods or products associated with the home occupation.
3. The operation of the home occupation shall not cause or encourage excess vehicular or pedestrian traffic not ordinarily associated with the residential area in which the home occupation is conducted.
4. Merchandise offered for sale shall be clearly incidental to the home occupation provided however, that, orders may be taken for later delivery off the premises.
5. On-premises advertising shall be limited to 1 non-illuminated sign not exceeding 1 square foot. The legend shall show only the name of the occupant and type of occupation and shall be neutral in color.
6. Such occupations shall not require substantial internal or external alterations or involve construction features not customary in a dwelling. No home occupation shall require external alteration of the residence or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation.
7. No toxic, explosive, flammable, combustible, corrosive, radioactive or other restricted material shall be stored on site.
8. No activity shall be conducted which would interfere with radio or television transmission in the area, nor shall there be any offensive noise, smoke, dust or heat noticeable beyond the premises.
9. Home occupations shall be restricted to the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
10. The operation of a family day care with no more than six (6) children or adults.
B. Major home occupations. Any proposed home occupation which does not meet the criteria as established in this Section 11.13(A) is deemed a major home occupation and shall require a conditional use as established by Section 18.01.
48
11.14 Manufactured Home Requirements
A. The manufactured home shall meet or exceed the current federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards.
B. Each manufactured home shall be properly secured to the ground with either a permanent foundation extending no less than four (4) feet below grade, or with tie downs installed as recommended by the manufacturer, but in no event more than twelve (12) feet apart along the perimeter of the structure. Such tie downs shall extend down no less than four (4) feet below grade.
C. Each manufactured home shall be skirted with material approved by the Zoning Administrator. Skirting shall be installed as recommended by the manufacturer. Skirting shall be of a material which is compatible with the appearance and condition of neighboring dwelling units. Appropriate materials shall include commercially manufactured colored steel, fiberglass, plastic or masonry materials. Tie downs and skirting shall be installed prior to occupancy.
D. Each manufactured home shall be connected to the municipal wastewater collection system and municipal water supply system.
E. The manufactured home shall be aesthetically compatible with neighboring dwelling units, including but not limited to the following factors: width, length, area, number of stories, siding and roofing materials, roof style and pitch, and condition.
F. No manufactured home placed within the City limits of Canton may exceed twenty years from the date of manufacture.
11.15 Bed and Breakfast Establishments
A. Bed and Breakfast establishments shall be limited to a residential structure.
B. They shall be in compliance with applicable state laws including South Dakota Department of Health, maintaining a guest list and providing a smoke detector in each sleeping room.
C. Such uses shall be an incidental use with an owner-occupied principal dwelling structure provided that not more than four (4) bedrooms in such dwelling structure shall be used for such purpose.
D. Off-street parking requirements shall be one space per guest room and shall be in addition to parking requirements for the residence.
E. The length of stay shall not exceed 14 days during any 120 day consecutive period.
F. Meals shall be limited to breakfast which is prepared in a common facility (household kitchen). Meals may be served only to overnight registered guests and cooking is not
49
permitted in the sleeping rooms.
11.16 Airport Approach Zones
A. Approach Zone:
1. Within the air space above the approach zone to each end of a runway designed to be used for instrument landings, no building, structure or growth shall be erected, altered or permitted to project above a plane with a slope of one (vertical) to fifty (horizontal) projected from a point 200 feet beyond the end of a runway for a distance of 10,000 feet, said plane to be in the shape of symmetrical trapezoid 1,000 feet in width at its lowest point and 4,000 feet in width at its highest point; combined with a second plane with a slope of one (vertical) to forty (horizontal) extending from the upper edge of the first plane for an additional distance of 40,000 feet, said plane to be in the shape of a symmetrical trapezoid 4,000 feet in width at its lowest point and 16,000 feet in width at its highest point.
2. Within the air space above the approach zone to each end of a runway not designed to be used for instrument landings, no building or structure shall be erected or altered to project above a plane with a slope of one (vertical) to forty (horizontal) projected from a point 200 feet beyond the end of the runway for a distance of 10,000 feet, said plane to be a symmetrical trapezoid (*) feet wide at its lowest point and (*) feet wide at its highest point.
B. Transition Zones. Within the established transition zones adjacent to each instrument and non-instrument runway and approach zone, no building, structure or growth shall be erected, altered or permitted to project above a plane with a slope of one (vertical) to seven (horizontal). Transition zones extend outward and upward from a line (*) feet on either side of the center line of non-instrument runways for the length of such runway plus 200 feet on each end; to a height 150 feet above the elevation of the airport reference point. In addition, transition zones are established adjacent to both instrument and non-instrument approach zones which flare outward and upward symmetrically along the entire length of each approach zone to where they intercept to the surfaces of the horizontal and conical zones.
C. Conical Zone. Within (*) feet from the established airport reference point, no building or structure shall be erected or altered to project above a horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation. This horizontal zone does not include the approach or transition zones. Within the conical zone, which commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward there from a distance of (*) feet, no building or structure shall be erected or altered to project above a plane with a slope of one (vertical) to twenty (horizontal). Exception: Nothing in this subparagraph shall be construed as prohibiting the growth, construction, or maintenance of any tree or structure to a height up to twenty feet above the surface of the land.
50
D. Runway Object Free Area. No construction shall occur in the runway object free area, except for objects that need to be located for navigation or aircraft ground maneuvering purposes.
E. Runway Protection Zone. The following uses shall not be allowed in the Runway Protection Zone:
1. Fuel storage facilities.
2. Residential structures (homes, condominiums, apartments and manufactured housing parks).
3. Places of public assembly (places of worship, schools, hospitals, office buildings, shopping centers or other uses with similar concentrations of people).
(*) The applicable distance in feet (referenced in this Section) must be based on runway length as set forth in Section 77.27 of Part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations.
51
12
ADJUSTMENTS TO YARD REGULATIONS
12.01 Adjustment to Front Yard Requirements
A front yard may be adjusted to an average of the adjacent structures’ front yards where existing adjacent structures have a front yard less than required.
12.02 Adjustment to Side Yard Requirements
Buildings constructed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance with side yard setbacks of less than required by this Ordinance, may have additions erected in line with the existing building and provided further that said addition will be erected no closer to the lot line than the existing building.
12.03 Projection From Buildings
Every part of any required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed except:
A. Eaves may project into a front, side, or rear yard;
B. Ordinary projection of sills, belt courses, cornices, vertical solar screen, ornamental features which may project twelve (12) inches;
C. Air conditioners may project into a required side or rear yard setback;
D. Solar collectors which are a part of the main building may extend into a required rear yard for a distance not to exceed ten feet;
E. An open, unenclosed porch may project into a required front yard for a distance not exceeding ten feet. Balconies and paved terraces may project into a required front yard for a distance not exceeding six feet. An enclosed vestibule containing not more than 40 square feet may project into a required front yard for a distance not to exceed four feet; and
F. Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms, decks, and ornamental features which do not extend above the level of ground (first) floor may project into a required yard, provided these projections be distances at least five feet from the adjacent side or rear lot line.
52
13
NON-CONFORMING AND NON-STANDARD USES
13.01 Uses and Structures
A lawful use or structure existing at the time this Ordinance is adopted or amended may continue even though such use does not conform to the district regulations subject to the following provisions:
A. Whenever a nonconforming use or structure has been changed to a more restricted or conforming use, it shall not be changed back to a less restricted use.
B. Should any nonconforming use or structure be destroyed by any means to the extent of more than 50% of its replacement cost, such nonconforming use shall not continue.
C. When a nonconforming use or structure is discontinued for a period of one year, the City Commission may adopt, after notice by certified mail to the property owners, an amortization schedule to bring about the gradual elimination of such nonconforming use.
D. Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any part of a structure which was arranged or designed for such use previous to the adoption of this ordinance, but shall not be extended outside such structure.
E. No existing nonconforming use or structure shall be enlarged, moved, or structurally altered except to change to a permitted use. This is not to include normal repairs and maintenance which do not enlarge, move or structurally alter a nonconforming use.
13.02 Continuation of Non-Standard Uses
Nonstandard uses existing immediately prior to the effective date of this Ordinance may be continued, although such uses do not conform to the provisions hereof. Nonstandard buildings or structures may be enlarged or extended, converted, reconstructed, or structurally altered as follows:
A. Enlargements, extensions, conversions or structural alterations may be made as required by law or ordinance.
53
B. Structural alteration of buildings or structures may otherwise be made if such changes do not encroach into an existing front yard, side yard or rear yard which is less than the minimum required yards for the district in which they are located.
C. Enlargement, extension, conversion of buildings or structures may otherwise be made if such changes comply with the minimum required yards, lot area, height, landscaping, parking and density for the district in which they are located.
54
14
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
14.01 Appointment
The Authorized Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and establish rules for its administration. For such purposes he or she shall have the powers of a law enforcement officer. The Authorized Official shall be a City employee, with work week, hours of work and salary to be determined by the City Commission or another person approved by the City Commission. The City Commission shall appoint the Authorized Official.
14.02 Powers and Duties
The Authorized Official shall have the power to render interpretations of this Ordinance. Such interpretations shall be within the intent and purpose of the Zoning Ordinance, and be set forth in writing. In addition, the Authorized Official may appoint or solicit technical advice, inspectors, city officials and other city employees to assist with the administration of the Zoning Ordinance.
14.03 Right of Entry
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this Ordinance, the Authorized Official and authorized representatives may enter such building and onto such premises at all reasonable times to inspect. If such building or premises is occupied, the Authorized Official or authorized representative shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building or premises is unoccupied, the Authorized Official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the Authorized Official or authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
When the Authorized Official or authorized representative shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry of the building or premises, no owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect to promptly permit entry.
14.04 Stop Order
Whenever any work or use is being done contrary to the provisions of this title, the Authorized Official may order the work or use stopped by notice in writing served on any person engaged in
55
the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work or use until authorized by the Authorized Official to proceed with the work or use.
56
15
BUILDING PERMITS AND FEES
15.01 Building Permits
No new development, change of use, moving in/moving out of structures, demolition, or other action which may be regulated by the provisions of this Ordinance including use, height, number of occupants, lot area, off-street parking or yard requirements, shall occur without a Building Permit issued by the Authorized Official, or his or her authorized designee, of the City of Canton.
A. An Application for Building Permit, available from the Authorized Official of the City of Canton, shall be completed by the landowner, landowner’s representative or contractor requesting the Building Permit. Completed applications shall be returned to the Authorized Official of the City of Canton for review. To be considered complete, the application form shall be accompanied by the following additional items:
1. Any required attachments and City fees;
2. One copy of plans drawn to scale, showing the dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any; and the location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration;
3. Any additional information, as requested by the Authorized Official of the City of Canton, as lawfully may be required to determine conformance with and provide for the enforcement of this Ordinance.
B. A copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant, after the Authorized Official of the City of Canton has marked such copy as either approved or disapproved, and attested to the same by signing said copy of the plans. A copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the Authorized Official of the City of Canton for City records.
C. If the Authorized Official of the City of Canton determines the proposed action would not be in compliance with the provisions of these regulations, a Building Permit may not be issued, except upon completion of one of the following processes established in these regulations, as may be applicable to such proposed action. The Authorized Official of the City of Canton shall inform the applicant when one of the following processes may be applicable:
1. Variance
57
2. Amendment
3. Conditional Use Permit
Issuance of a Building Permit shall indicate that, in the opinion of the Authorized Official of the City of Canton, the proposed use and/or alterations of existing use are in compliance with the requirements of these Zoning Regulations. Issuance of a Building Permit shall not be construed as waiving any provisions of these regulations. Proposed uses and/or alterations of existing uses which are not in compliance with the requirements of these Zoning Regulations shall not be issued a Building Permit.
15.02 Fees
A schedule of fees, charges, and expenses for permits, change of zone, appeals, and other matters pertaining to this Zoning Ordinance shall be established by resolution of the City Commission.
The current fee schedule shall be available from the Authorized Official of the City of Canton. All fees shall be the property of the City and shall be paid over to the Authorized Official of the City of Canton for credit to the General Fund of the City which under no condition shall be refunded. Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
15.03 Expiration of a Building Permit
Every building permit issued under the provisions of this Chapter shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work or use authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the work or use authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall first be obtained to do so, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year.
Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which he may commence work under that permit when he is unable to commence work within the time required for this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The Authorized Official may, except as otherwise provided herein, extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 180 days upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than once.
58
16
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
16.01 Establishment
A Board of Adjustment is hereby established for the City of Canton, which shall consist of the members of the Planning Commission, pursuant to SDCL 11-4-13.
16.02 Powers and Duties
The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers and duties:
A. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any requirement or determination made by the Authorized Official of the City of Canton in the enforcement of this Ordinance.
B. To hear and decide upon petitions for variances to vary the strict applications of the height, area, setback, yard, parking or density requirements as will not be contrary to the public interest. A variance shall not be allowed to vary the use regulations.
16.03 Appeal Procedure
A. Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the municipality affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Such appeal shall be filed with the Authorized Official of the City of Canton and with the Board of Adjustment. The Authorized Official shall transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. Such notice of appeal shall be presented to the Authorized Official and the Board of Adjustment within ten (10) days after the filing of the decision in the office of the Authorized Official.
B. The Board of Adjustment shall keep a public record of all findings and decisions. All meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman or City Manager and at such other times as necessary. Each session at which an appeal is to be heard shall be a public meeting. No less than ten (10) days before the public hearing, the Authorized Official of the City of Canton shall publish notice of the public hearing in a legal newspaper of the City and shall provide notice of the hearing by mail to the appellant.
C. The public hearing shall be held. The appellant may appear in person, or by agent or attorney. Minutes of the public hearing shall be recorded and kept in the records of the Board of Adjustment. Written findings certifying compliance with the specific rules
59
governing the action considered at the public hearing shall be completed by the Board. The concurring vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to approve any appeal or arrive at any determination.
16.04 Variances
A. The Board of Adjustment shall have the jurisdiction to hear and decide upon petitions for variances to vary the strict application of the height, area, setback, yard, parking or density requirements as will not be contrary to the public interest. For purposes of these regulations, public interest shall include the interests of the public at large within the City, not just neighboring property owners. At all times, the burden shall be on the applicant to prove the need for a variance. The following issues are to be considered, each and all of them, as determining factors in whether or not the issuance of a variance is justified:
1. An unnecessary hardship must be established by the applicant who applies for the variance. For purposes of this Chapter, an unnecessary hardship is a situation where, in the absence of a variance, an owner can make no feasible or reasonable use of the property. Convenience, loss of profit, financial limitations, or self-imposed hardship shall not be considered as grounds for approving a variance by the Board of Adjustment.
2. Literal interpretation of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this Ordinance.
3. The variance requested is the minimum variance that will alleviate the hardship.
4. Granting of the variance will comply with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance, and will not be offensive to adjacent areas or to the public welfare.
5. No nonconforming use or structure in the same district and no permitted or nonconforming use or structure in other districts shall be considered the sole grounds for the issuance of a variance.
6. Exceptional and extraordinary circumstances apply to the property that do not apply to other properties in the same zone or vicinity and that result from lot size or shape, topography or other circumstances which are not of the applicant’s making.
B. In order to preserve the intent of these Zoning Regulations and to protect the public interest, the Board of Adjustment may attach conditions to a Variance. A Variance shall remain valid only as long as the property owner complies with any terms and conditions of the Variance, as attached by the Board of Adjustment.
C. An Application for a Variance, available from the Authorized Official of the City of Canton, shall be completed by the landowner requesting the Variance. Completed
60
applications shall be returned to the Authorized Official for review. To be considered completed, the application shall contain the following information:
1. Legal description of the land on which such variance is requested, together with local street address;
2. Name and address of each owner of the property;
3. Signature of at least one of the owners of the property;
4. Name, address, phone number and signature of the applicant;
5. Zoning district classification under which the property is regulated at the time of such application;
6. Description of the variance sought from the Zoning Regulations; and
7. Be accompanied with a site plan, unless waived by the Authorized Official.
D. The Authorized Official shall review the application, and shall make a recommendation to the Board of Adjustment to either approve or not approve said application. The Authorized Official’s recommendation shall include a summary of the application, and the reasons and justification for either approval or disapproval of the application.
E. The Authorized Official shall set the date, time and place for a public hearing to be held by the Board of Adjustment. The Authorized Official shall notify the landowner by mail, and shall post notices of the public hearing at the City Office and on the property affected by the proposed Variance no less than ten (10) days prior to the scheduled public hearing. No less than ten (10) days before the public hearing, the Authorized Official shall publish notice of the public hearing in a legal newspaper of the city.
F. The public hearing shall be held. The applicant may appear in person, or by agent or attorney. If no one is present who can answer questions from the Board of Adjustment, the decision can be tabled to a later time or date until questions can be answered. Minutes of the public hearing shall be recorded and kept in the records of the Board of Adjustment. Written findings certifying compliance with the specific rules governing the action considered at the public hearing shall be completed by the Board. The concurring vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to approve any variance or arrive at any determination.
16.05 Court Review
Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board, or bureau of the municipality, may present to a court of record a petition duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal,
61
in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within thirty days after the filing of the Board’s decision as provided in SDCL 11-4-25.
62
17
AMENDMENTS AND CHANGE OF ZONE
17.01 Procedure
Zoning amendments and change of zones are changes to the City of Canton's Zoning Regulations. Applications for amendment may be submitted by either the City or any owner of land within the City. The regulations, restrictions and boundaries set forth in this Ordinance may from time to time be amended, supplemented, or repealed, provided however, that no such action may be taken until after public hearings, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard.
The following procedure for requesting an amendment shall be followed:
A. The Authorized Official of the City of Canton shall review the application for amendment or change of zone and forward the application and his/her comments to the Planning Commission for review.
B. The Authorized Official of the City of Canton shall set the date, time and place for a Planning Commission public hearing. The Authorized Official of the City of Canton shall publish notice of the public hearing in a legal newspaper of the City once not less than 10 days prior to the public hearing. At least one sign shall be posted on the property for a continuous period of ten (10) days immediately prior to any public hearing held by the Planning Commission to consider any rezoning application.
C. The public hearing shall be held. Any applicant may appear in person, or by agent or attorney. Minutes of the public hearing shall be recorded and kept in the records of the Planning Commission.
D. The Planning Commission shall either recommend or not recommend approval of the amendment to the City Commission.
E. The Authorized Official of the City of Canton shall set the date, time and place for a City Commission public hearing. The Authorized Official of the City of Canton shall publish notice of the public hearing in a legal newspaper of the City once not less than 10 days prior to the public hearing. At least one sign shall be posted on the property for a continuous period of ten (10) days immediately prior to any public hearing held by the City Commission to consider any rezoning application.
63
F. The City Commission shall either approve or not approve the ordinance describing the proposed amendment or change of zone to these Zoning Regulations, in accordance with standard procedures for reading, approval, publication and effective date.
G. When a proposed amendment or change of zone is approved by the City Commission, the amendment shall take effect twenty days after publication, unless the referendum shall have been invoked or unless a written protest be filed with the Finance Officer, signed by at least 40 percent of the owners of equity in the lots included in any proposed district and the lands within 250 feet from any part of such proposed district. A corporation shall be construed to be a sole owner, and when parcels of land are in the name of more than one person, owner representation shall be in proportion to the number of signers who join in the petition in relation to the number of owners. If a protest is filed, the ordinance does not become effective unless the ordinance is approved two-thirds of the governing body of the municipality. The protest provisions of this section do not apply to any ordinance regulating or establishing floodplain areas
H. No application shall be heard by the City on a request for a zoning district classification change on any real property that is entirely or substantially the same as that which had previously been denied by the City Commission before the expiration of six months from the date of final action by the City Commission, or before the expiration of one year from the from the date the prior application failed to receive approval after a protest had been filed by the surrounding owners. It shall be an exception to the one year waiting period if the applicant files a written consent signed by the owners of at least sixty (60) percent of the aggregate area having the right of protest as set forth in 17.01(G) or if the request is for a different zoning classification than the prior application.
64
18
CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
18.01 Conditional Uses
Any conditional use approved by the Planning Commission shall conform to the standards set forth for such uses below. These standards shall be construed to be the minimum requirements for any of the specified conditional uses, and the Planning Commission may require additional reasonable stipulations at their discretion. In all cases, the impact of the proposed use on adjacent properties shall be a major consideration.
A. Procedure
The Planning Commission may authorize by Conditional Use Permit those uses specifically designated as Conditional Uses in Chapters 3 through 9. The Planning Commission shall impose such conditions as are appropriate and necessary to insure compliance with the Comprehensive Plan and protect the health, safety and general welfare in the issuance of such Conditional Use Permit.
B. Application
To obtain a Conditional Use Permit, the applicant shall file an application with the Authorized Official on a form furnished by the City. Every application shall contain the following information:
1. Legal description of the land on which such Conditional Use is requested, together with local street address.
2. Name and address of each owner of the property.
3. Signature of at least one owner of the property.
4. Name, address, phone number and signature of the applicant.
5. Zoning district classification under which the property is regulated at the time of such application.
6. Be accompanied with a site plan, unless waived by the Authorized Official.
7. Any other information concerning the property as may be requested by the Authorized Official or the Planning Commission.
C. Fees
Upon the filing of any application for a Conditional Use Permit with the Authorized Official, the applicant shall pay to the City the appropriate fee as designated by Resolution
65
of the City Commission.
D. Information on Site Plan
In addition to the following information, plans shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper or provided electronically and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature, and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this Chapter and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. The Authorized Official may waive the submission of plans, if he or she finds that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of plans is not necessary to obtain compliance with this Chapter.
1. The address of the property and the legal description.
2. The name of the project and/or business.
3. The scale and north arrow.
4. All existing and proposed buildings or additions.
5. Dimensions of all buildings.
6. Distance from all building lines to the property lines at the closest points.
7. Building height and number of stories.
8. Dimensions of all property lines.
9. Parking lots or spaces; designate each space, give dimensions of the lot, stalls and aisles.
10. Screening; show height, location, and type of material to be used.
11. The landscaped setback and trees; indicate species of trees and material to be used for landscaping.
12. Name and location of all adjacent streets, alleys, waterways and other public places.
Approved plans shall not be changed, modified, or altered without authorization from the Planning Commission giving final approval, and all work shall be done in accordance with the approved plans.
E. Review and Public Hearing Procedure
Prior to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit, the Authorized Official shall meet with the applicant to review the application. After review of the application, the Authorized Official shall make a recommendation to the Planning Commission to either approve or not approve said application. The Authorized Official’s recommendation shall include a summary of the application, and the reasons and justification for either approval or disapproval of the application.
The Authorized Official shall set the date, time and place for a public hearing to be held by the Planning Commission. No less than ten (10) days prior to the scheduled public hearing, the Authorized Official shall notify the landowner by mail, post notices at the City Office and on the property affected by the proposed Conditional Use Permit and publish notice of the public hearing in the legal newspaper of the City.
66
The following procedure shall be followed by the Planning Commission in considering the recommendation of the Authorized Official:
1. The public hearing shall be held. Any applicant may appear in person, or by agent or attorney. Minutes of the public hearing shall be recorded and kept in the records of the Planning Commission.
2. Before any Conditional Use Permit shall be granted, the Planning Commission shall make written findings certifying compliance with the specific rules governing individual Conditional Uses and that satisfactory provision and arrangement has been made concerning the following, where applicable:
a. Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon, with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or catastrophe;
b. Off-street parking and loading areas where required;
c. Refuse and service areas, with particular reference to (a) and (b) above;
d. Utilities, with reference to locations, availability and compatibility;
e. Screening and buffering with reference to type, dimensions and character;
f. Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic safety, economic effect and compatibility and harmony with other properties in the district;
g. Required yards and other open space;
h. General compatibility with adjoining properties and other property in the zoning district in which such use is to be located;
i. The goals and objectives of the most recently adopted Comprehensive Plan.
The Planning Commission shall decide whether to grant the conditional use with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate or to deny a conditional use when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of these regulations. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final unless an appeal is filed in accordance with Chapter 18.01(F).
F. Appeal of Planning Commission Decision
The decision rendered by the Planning Commission on a conditional use permit may be appealed to the City Commission. The applicant or any other person aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Commission shall file a written appeal with the Authorized
67
Official within five working days of the Planning Commission’s oral decision. When an appeal is filed, the Authorized Official shall present the Planning Commission's decision to the City Commission for review. The Authorized Official shall set the date, time and place for a public hearing to be held by the City Commission. No less than ten (10) days prior to the scheduled public hearing, the Authorized Official shall notify the landowner by mail, post notices at the City Office and on the property affected by the proposed Conditional Use Permit and publish notice of the public hearing in the legal newspaper of the City. The City Commission shall vote to uphold, overrule or amend the decision of the Planning Commission.
G. Expiration
A conditional use permit shall expire one year from the date upon which it becomes effective if no work has commenced. Upon written request to the Authorized Official and prior to the conditional use permit expiration date, a one-year time extension for the conditional use permit may be granted by the Authorized Official.
A conditional use permit approved in accordance with Chapter 18 shall expire one year after the use discontinues on the premises, or the use is changed to another permitted use in the underlying district.
68
19
DEFINITIONS
19.01 Purpose
In the application of this Ordinance, the rules and definitions contained in this section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly indicates otherwise.
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the past and future.
B. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number and the plural, the singular.
C. The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary.
D. The word “may” is permissive.
E. The words “used” or “occupied” shall include the words “intended,” “designed,” or “arranged to be used or occupied.”
F. The word “lot” shall include the words “plot,” “parcel,” or “tract.”
G. The word “person” shall include a “firm,” “association,” “organization,” “partnership,” “trust,” “company,” or “corporation” as well as an “individual.”
H. The word “building” shall include the words “structure” and “premises.”
I. Any word not herein defined shall be as defined in any recognized standard English dictionary.
19.02 Definitions
ABUTTING - Abutting shall mean adjacent or contiguous and shall include property separated by an alley. The term “abutting” implies a closer proximity than the term “adjacent.”
ACCESSORY USE - As applied to use, accessory means customarily subordinate or incidental to that of the main building or to the main use of the premises, and located on the same lot with such use or structure.
69
ACCESSORY BUILDING - A subordinate detached building of which is located on the same lot on which the main building or use is situated and which is reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary use of such main building or use. Unenclosed playhouses and/or gazebos, uncovered swimming pools or decks shall be excluded from the definition of the term “accessory buildings”.
ACTIVITY - Any application for a permit under this Ordinance or any development or use encompassed within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance.
ADULT ARCADE - Any place to which the public is permitted or invited and in which coin- operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are maintained to show images involving specific sexual activities or specific anatomical areas to persons in booths or viewing rooms.
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR VIDEO STORE - A commercial establishment that offers for sale or rent any of the following as one of its principal business purposes:
1. Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or reproductions or slides, or other visual representations that depict or describe specific sexual activities or specific anatomical areas.
2. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specific sexual activities.
ADULT CABARET - Any nightclub, bar, restaurant, or other similar commercial establishment that regularly features:
1. Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.
2. Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specific anatomical areas or specific sexual activities.
3. Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specific sexual activities or specific anatomical areas.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER - A commercial establishment in which, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other similar photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specific sexual activities or specific anatomical areas are predominantly shown.
ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS - Any adult arcade, adult bookstore or video store, cabaret, adult live entertainment establishment, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, massage establishment that offers adult service, or nude model studios.
70
ADULT SERVICE - Dancing, serving food or beverages, modeling, posing, wrestling, singing, reading, talking, listening, or other performances or activities conducted for any consideration in an adult oriented business by a person who is nude or seminude during all or part of the time that the person is providing the service.
ADULT THEATER - A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that predominantly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or who engage in live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specific anatomical areas or specific sexual activities.
AGRICULTURE - The production, keeping, or maintenance, for sale, lease or personal use, of plants and land useful to man, including but not limited to: forages sod crops; grains and seed crops; trees and forest products; fruits of all kinds, including grapes, nuts and berries; vegetables; nursery, floral, ornamental and greenhouse products; or lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management program.
AIRPORT - A place where aircraft can land and take off, usually equipped with hangars, facilities for refueling and repair, and various accommodations for passengers, including Heliports.
ALLEY - An alley is a public right-of-way that is used primarily for vehicular service accesses to the backs or sides of properties which otherwise abuts on the streets.
ANTENNA - Any device that radiates or captures electromagnetic wave signals, including digital voice and data signals, analog voice and data signals, video signals or microwave signals, and is mounted on a structure that allows freedom from obstruction for the radiation and capture of the electromagnetic signals.
AQUIFER - A geologic formation, group of formations, or part of a formation capable of yielding, storing, or transmitting a usable amount of groundwater to wells or springs for domestic or animal use.
ARCADE - A building or structure, open to the public, which contains coin operated games and similar entertainment and amusement devices, as the primary use or with five (5) or more games as an accessory use.
ASSISTED-LIVING CENTER AND CONGREGATE CARE FACILITY - A licensed health
care facility to provide 24-hour supervision of the frail elderly that provide rooms, meals, personal care, and supervision of self-administrated medication. They may also provide services, such as recreational activities, financial services, and transportation.
AUTHORIZED OFFICIAL - The person, officer or official and his or her authorized representative designated by the City Commission to administer these regulations.
71
AUTOMOBILE STORAGE YARD - The temporary storage of vehicles which are impounded, licensed, and operable, in an unroofed area.
AWNING/CANOPY - A roof-like cover, retractable or permanent, that projects from the wall of a building.
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT - A private single-family residence which is used to provide limited meals and temporary accommodations for a charge to the public.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT - Public and quasi-judicial agency charged with duty to hear and determine zoning appeals.
BOARDINGHOUSE - A building, other than a hotel or apartment hotel, where for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, lodging, meals, or lodging and meals are provided for three or more persons.
BROADCAST TOWER - Shall mean a structure, not including offices or studio, for the transmission of radio or television broadcast communications.
BUFFER ZONE FENCING - Fencing should be of privacy type.
BUILDABLE AREA - The three-dimensional space within which a building is permitted to be built on a lot and which is defined by maximum height regulations and yard setback regulations.
BUILDING - Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind, and which is constructed or erected on the ground and which is permanently affixed to the land. When any portion thereof is completely separated from every other portion by masonry or firewall without any window, which wall extends from the ground to the roof, then such portion shall be deemed a separate building.
BUILDING, DETACHED - A building surrounded by open space on the same lot.
BUILDING ENVELOPE - The setback lines that establishes an area on a lot in which building can occur.
BUILDING, HEIGHT - The vertical distance above grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height of the highest roof, or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched, hipped, or shed roof. The measurement shall be taken from the average elevation of the finished grade within ten feet of the structure.
BUILDING LINE - A line parallel to the curb line touching that part of a building or parking lot closest to the street.
BUILDING PERMIT - A document signed by the Authorized Official of the City of Canton, or designee, as a condition precedent to the commencement of a use or the erection, construction,
72
re-construction, restoration, alteration, conversion, or installation of a building, which acknowledges that such use or building complies with the provisions of the municipal zoning ordinance or an authorized variance therefrom.
BUILDING, RESIDENTIAL - A building which is arranged, designed, used or intended to be used for residential occupancy by one or more families or lodgers, and which includes, but is not limited to, the following types:
1. Single-family detached dwellings;
2. Single-family attached dwellings;
3. Multiple-family dwellings (including apartment hotels);
4. Lodging houses; and
5. Fraternity and sorority houses.
BUS PASSENGER TERMINAL - A place where the transfer of people between modes of transportation takes place.
BUS/TRUCK TERMINAL - An area and building where buses, trucks, and cargo is stored; where loading and unloading is carried on regularly; and where minor maintenance of these types of vehicles is performed.
BUS/TRUCK WASH - Any building or portions thereof used for washing buses and/or trucks.
CAMPGROUND, TRAVEL TRAILER PARKING AREA - Shall mean a plot of ground for public use upon which two or more campsites are located, established, maintained, advertised, or held out to the public, to be a place where camping units can be located and occupied as temporary living quarters.
CAR WASH - Any building or portions thereof used for washing automobiles.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY - A document issued by the proper authority allowing the occupancy or use of a building and certifying that the structure or use has been constructed or will be used in compliance with all the applicable municipal codes and ordinances.
CHANGE OF USE - Substitution of one thing for another specifically regarding use of land or use of a building.
CHURCH - A building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures, which by design and construction are primarily intended for the conducting of organized religious services and accessory uses associated therewith.
CITY - Means City of Canton, South Dakota.
CITY COMMISSION - Means Board of City Commission Members, Canton, South Dakota.
73
CLEAR ZONE - Means a buffer area established at each end of the airport runways as legally described and recorded at the Lincoln County Courthouse.
CLINIC - An establishment where patients are admitted for examination and treatment by one or more physicians, dentists, psychologists, optometrists, social workers, etc., and where patients are not usually lodged overnight.
CLUB - Building and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person, or persons for a social, educational, or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit and not primarily to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business.
CODES - Means any codes or other regulations that the City Commission has adopted which include, but are not limited to the fire code, health code, building code, plumbing, heating and electrical codes.
COMMERCIAL PARKING LOT/FACILITY - An approved open or enclosed off-street hard surfaced parking area or structure where licensed and operable motor vehicles are temporarily stored for a fee.
COMMISSION - Means City Planning Commission of Canton, South Dakota.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN - The adopted long-range plan intended to guide the growth and development of the community and region, including analysis, recommendations and proposals of the community’s population, economy, housing, transportation, community facilities and land use.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT - A permit issued by the Planning Commission stating that a Conditional Use complies with the conditions and standards set forth in this Ordinance.
CONTRACTOR’S SHOP AND STORAGE YARD - Use of land or buildings for storage and preparation of materials used by that same individuals in conducting the business of construction and repair work, generally completed at some other on-site location.
CONTAMINANT - Any “regulated substance,” as defined by SDCL 34A-12-1(8), as in effect on the date of passage of this Ordinance and as amended from time to time, and all petroleum products, including gasoline, oil, waste oils, and other fuels as well as their hazardous constituents.
CONVENT AND MONASTERY - A place of residence for bona fide members of a religious order who carry on religious, medical, educational, or charitable work in adjacent institutions.
COVENANT OR RESTRICTIVE COVENANT – Means a legal restriction on use of property or a contract between the seller and the buyer of the land affecting use of the land.
CURB LINE - The outside lines of the pavement or roadway.
74
DAY CARE - The providing of care and supervision of children/adults as a supplement to regular parental/home care, without transfer of legal custody or placement for adoption, with or without compensation, on a regular basis for a part of a day.
DAY CARE, CENTER - A facility used only for providing adult or child day care, and is limited in number over twelve (12) by the square footage of usable space available. The ratio is thirty- five (35) square feet per person indoors and fifty (50) square feet per person outdoors.
DAY CARE, FAMILY - Care is provided in a dwelling. The number of persons cared for is limited to a maximum of twelve (12) adults or children. Included in that count are the providers’ own children six (6) years and under. See (Home Occupation).
DENSITY - The number of families, individuals, dwelling units, or housing structures per unit of land.
DEVELOPMENT - The carrying out of any construction, reconstruction, alteration of surface, structure, change or land use or intensity of use, and including but not limited to the deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste, any mining or drilling operation, or work relating to the creation of a road, street, or parking area.
DISTILLATION OF PRODUCTS - A building or premises used for the purification and concentration of a substance by volatilization or evaporation and subsequent condensation.
DISTRICT - A part, zone, or geographic area of the City of Canton within which certain zoning or development regulations apply.
DRIVE-UP SERVICE WINDOW/DEVICE - An establishment which accommodates the patron's motor vehicles, from which the occupants may obtain or receive a service or obtain a product through a service window or automated device.
DWELLING - A building, or portion, thereof, used exclusively for human habitation, including single-family, two-family, and multiple-family dwellings, but not including hotels, motels, or lodging houses.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY - A building, or portion thereof, containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED - A dwelling which is designed for and occupied by not more than one family and is surrounded by yards and is not attached to any other dwelling by any means.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY FARM - Single family dwelling located on a farm which is used or intended for use by the farm's owner.
75
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE - One of a group or row of two or more attached single-family dwellings designed and built as a single structure facing upon a street in which the individual townhouse may or may not be owned separately. The townhouse need not face upon a street if otherwise specifically provided in this title. For the purpose of side yard regulations, the structure containing the row or group of townhouses shall be considered as one building occupying a single lot.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY - A detached building designed to be occupied by two families living independently of each other, exclusive of auto or trailer courts or camps, hotels or resort- type hotels.
DWELLING UNIT - One or more rooms, designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as a separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single family maintaining a household.
EASEMENT - Means a right granted to another person or persons for the use of land for a limited purpose.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE OR GRAPHIC SIGNS - Signs on which displays may be changed at periodic intervals by gradual entry and exit display modes provided that messages and animation shall be displayed at periodic intervals by various modes; such as fad dissolve, scrolling or traveling.
ELECTRICAL SUBSTATION - A premises which may or may not contain buildings, where the interconnection and usual transformation of electrical service takes place between systems. An electrical substation shall be secondary, supplementary, subordinate, and auxiliary to the main system.
EXISTING ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE - Any existing structure that supports wireless communications facilities, such as but not restricted to, telecommunications and broadcast towers, buildings, clock towers, steeples and light poles.
FAMILY - One or more individuals, related by blood or law, occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single household unit. A family shall not include more than three adults who are unrelated by blood or law. In addition to the persons actually related by blood or law, the following persons shall be considered related by blood or law for the purposes of this title:
1. A person residing with the family for the purpose of adoption;
2. Not more than six persons under eighteen years of age, residing in a foster home licensed or approved by a governmental agency;
3. Not more than four persons eighteen years of age or older residing with the family for the purpose of receiving foster care licensed or approved by a governmental agency;
76
4. Any persons living with the family at the direction of a court; and
5. Twenty four hour supervised living of persons with physical or mental disabilities, but not including group homes for drug and alcohol rehabilitation or halfway houses for persons adjudicated by a court. Such residential facilities shall be licensed by the State of South Dakota and proof of such licensing shall be required prior to zoning certificate approval.
FARM - A parcel of land used for agricultural purposes, with a minimum of ten acres in size.
FARM IMPLEMENT DEALER - The use of any building or land area for the display and sale of new and used farm implements, including any warranty repair work and other repair service conducted as an accessory use.
FARMSTEAD - The area of a farm in which the out buildings sit and is normally protected by a grove(s) and not used for crops or grazing.
FARM STORE/FEED STORE - A retail store selling primarily agricultural products, including the bulk storage of fertilizers and related agro-chemicals.
FENCE - An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
FLOOR AREA - The square feet of floor space within the outside line of walls and includes the total of all space on all floors of a building. It does not include porches, garages, or space in a basement, or cellar when said space is used for storage or incidental uses.
FREESTANDING SIGN (Ground Sign) - A sign supported by one or more uprights, poles, or braces in or upon the ground and not attached to any building.
FRONTAGE - That side of a lot abutting on a street; the front lot line.
FRUIT/VEGETABLE CANNING AND PROCESSING - A commercial establishment in which food is processed or otherwise prepared for human consumption but not consumed on the premises.
GARAGE, PRIVATE - A building or a portion of a building in which motor vehicles owned or leased by the occupants of the principal buildings are stored or kept.
GARDEN CENTER - Garden center shall mean a building or premises used primarily for the retail sale of items useful in the culture, display, or decoration of lawns, gardens, or indoor plants; including books, appliances, and tools, but not including power tools or tractors.
77
GAS DISPENSING STATION - Any building or premises which provides for the retail sale of gasoline or oil. No automobile repair work or sale of auto accessories, or testing may be done. Gasoline pumps and islands shall be located more than twelve feet from the nearest property line.
GENERAL MANUFACTURING - Those manufacturing processes including light manufacturing which have the potential to be a nuisance due to dust, odor, noise, vibration, pollution, smoke, heat, glare, or the operation of the processes outside the building.
GOLF COURSE - A tract of land for playing golf, improved with tees, greens, fairways, hazards, and which may include clubhouses and shelters.
GRADE - The average elevation of the land around a building. GRAIN TERMINAL - A facility for the storage of agricultural grains.
GREENHOUSE - A building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass or other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of delicate or out-of-season plants for subsequent sale or for personal enjoyment.
GROUP HOME - A supervised living or counseling arrangement in a family home context providing for the twenty-four (24) hour care of children or adults.
GROUNDWATER - Subsurface water that occurs in soils and geologic formations that are fully saturated.
HARDSHIP - A hardship exists if the property owner was forced to comply with the provisions of an ordinance, and he or she would be unable to make “reasonable” use of the property. The hardship does not include a personal hardship caused by failure to comply with the ordinance. The hardship must be created by the unique attributes of the property, not by personal problem or needs of the owner.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL - Any contaminant as defined in this Ordinance, and any hazardous chemical for which a material safety data sheet must be filed under 42 USC 11021 and 11022 as in effect on the date of publication of this Ordinance.
HOME OCCUPATION - A home occupation is any occupation carried on by a member of the immediate family residing on the premises, in accordance with Section 11.13 of these zoning regulations.
HOSPITAL - An institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, and other abnormal physical or mental conditions, and including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities, or training facilities.
78
HOTEL, MOTEL, MOTOR COURT, MOTOR LODGE, OR TOURIST COURT - Any building
or group of buildings containing guest rooms or dwelling units, some or all of which have a separate entrance leading directly from the outside of the building with garage or parking space conveniently located on the lot, and designed, used or intended wholly or in part for the accommodation of automobile transients.
JUNKYARD - Any lot, land, parcel or portion thereof, used for the storage, wrecking, dismantling, salvage, collection, processing, purchase, sale, or exchange of abandoned or discarded vehicles, goods, waste, and scrap materials, including but not limited to: two or more abandoned or inoperable motor vehicles, waste paper, rags, glass, tires, wood, lumber, appliances, machinery, or automotive and mechanical parts. A junkyard does not include operations entirely enclosed within buildings.
KENNEL - Any premise, or portion thereof, where dogs, cats, and other household pets are maintained, boarded, bred, or cared for, in return for remuneration, or are kept for the purpose of sale.
LANDSCAPED AREA/LIVING GROUND COVER - An area that is permanently devoted and maintained in blue grass/ creeping red fescue, herbaceous perennials, trees, shrubbery, and flowers.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING - Those manufacturing processes which are not obnoxious due to dust, odor, noise, vibration, pollution, smoke, heat or glare. These commercial and industrial uses are characterized by generally having all aspects of the process carried on within the building itself.
LOADING SPACE - A space within the main building or on the same lot for the standing, loading, or unloading of trucks.
LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET - Off-street loading space means a space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled. Required off-street loading space is not to be included as off-street parking spaces.
LOT - A legally recordable tract of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use permitted in this Ordinance, which may include one (1) main building together with its accessory buildings, the open spaces and parking spaces required by this Ordinance, and having its principal frontage upon a street or upon an officially approved place.
LOT AREA - The lot area is the area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear lot lines.
LOT, CORNER - A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection, or upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
79
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE - A lot which abuts a street on two opposite sides (not a corner lot).
LOT, FRONTAGE - The length of the front lot line measured at the street right-of-way line. LOT, INTERIOR - A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE - A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from another lot or from a public or private street or any other public space.
LOT LINE, FRONT - The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way.
LOT LINE, REAR - The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line; or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a line ten feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. In no case, shall any structure be closer than five (5) feet to any lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE - Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD - A lot of record is a lot which is part of a subdivision or a certified survey map which has been recorded in the office of the County Register of Deeds; or a parcel of land, the deed to which was recorded in the office of said Register of Deeds prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.
MANUFACTURE OF: ACID, ALCOHOL, AMMONIA, ASPHALT, BLEACH, CEMENT, CHLORINE, DYESTUFFS, EXPLOSIVES, FERTILIZER, GLUE, GYPSUM, LIME, OILS, PLASTER OF PARIS, SHELLAC, SIZING, TURPENTINE OR YEAST, ETC. –
Establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products including the assembling of component parts, the manufacturing of products, and the blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins, or liquors.
MANUFACTURED HOME - A dwelling unit which is fabricated in one or more sections at a location other than the home site by assembly line-type production techniques or by other construction methods unique to an off-site manufacturing process. A manufactured home is designed to be towed on its own chassis or be site delivered by alternative means. Every section shall bear a label certifying that it is built in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards.
For manufactured homes built prior to June 15, 1976, a label certifying compliance to the Standard for Mobile Homes, NFPA 501, ANSI 119.1, in effect at the time of manufacture is required.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, LICENSED - A contiguous parcel of land operated as a unit, under the same ownership where six or more lots are rented for the temporary placement of
80
manufactured homes, with all necessary facilities and services, and is licensed by the City of Canton.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT - An establishment in which a person, firm, association, or corporation engages in or permits massage activities, including any method of pressure on, friction against, stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical apparatus or electrical apparatus or appliance. This subdivision does not apply to:
1. Physicians who are licensed pursuant to SDCL Ch. 36-4 or a podiatrist licensed pursuant to SDCL Ch. 36-8.
2. Registered nurses or licensed practical nurses who are licensed pursuant to SDCL Ch. 36-9.
3. Physician assistants who are licensed pursuant to SDCL Ch. 36-4A or certified nurse practitioners and certified nurse midwives who are licensed pursuant to SDCL Ch. 36-9A.
4. Physical therapists licensed pursuant to SDCL Ch. 36-10.
5. Athletic trainers licensed pursuant to SDCL Ch. 36-29.
6. Massage therapists licensed pursuant to SDCL Ch. 36-35.
7. Chiropractors licensed pursuant to SDCL Ch. 36-5.
MODULAR HOME - A pre-built structure which can be transported on a steel undercarriage. The steel undercarriage is not permanent, not a necessary structural component of the structure and is removed when the structure is placed on a permanent foundation.
MORTUARY - A place for the storage of human bodies prior to their burial or cremation.
MOTEL - A motel is an establishment consisting of a group of attached living or sleeping accommodations with bathroom and closet space, located on a single zoning lot, and designed for use by transient automobile tourists. A motel furnishes customary hotel services such as maid service and laundering of linen, telephone, and secretarial or desk service, and the use and upkeep of furniture. In a motel, less than fifty percent (50%) of the living and sleeping accommodations are occupied or designed for occupancy by persons other than transient automobile tourists. See (Hotel/Motel).
MOTOR VEHICLE - Any vehicle which is designed to travel along the ground or in the water and shall include but not be limited to automobiles, vans, buses, motorbikes, trucks, trailers, go carts, golf carts, boats, ATVs, snowmobiles and campers.
81
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR - Any building or premises involving the repair and/or painting of motor vehicle bodies or parts thereof and the rebuilding and/or overhauling of engines or transmissions.
MOTOR VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL - Any vehicle which has more than 16 square feet of signage or which is adapted, designed, equipped, and used to perform a specific commercial function and which does not meet the definition of Motor Vehicle, Personal/Passenger as defined herein.
MOTOR VEHICLE, INOPERABLE - A motor vehicle which is not in operating condition due to damage, removal, or inoperability of one or more tires and/or wheels, engine, or other essential parts, or which is not in operating condition due to damage or removal of equipment as required by the State of South Dakota for its lawful operation, or which does not have lawfully affixed thereto a valid state license plate, or which constitutes an immediate health, safety, fire or traffic hazard.
MOTOR VEHICLE, PERSONAL/PASSENGER - Any car, pickup-truck, or van which has no more than 16 square feet of signage and which is designed and facilitates personal/passenger travel and has not been externally altered with features not customary to personal usage.
MOTOR VEHICLE, RECREATIONAL - Any vehicle which is adapted, designed, and equipped to facilitate leisure time activities including but not limited to the following: ATVs, boats, motor bikes, and snowmobiles, along with trailers to haul said vehicles; RVs and travel trailers.
MOTOR VEHICLE SALES, DISPLAY, AND RENTAL - The use of any building, land area, or premises, for the display, sale, or rental of new or used motor vehicles, and including any warranty repair work and other repair service conducted as an accessory use. The sale or display of inoperable motor vehicles is not allowable as part of this use category, see “JUNKYARD.”
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION - Any building or premises which provides for the retail sale of gasoline, oil, tires, batteries and accessories for motor vehicles and/or for certain motor vehicle services, including washings, tire changing, repair service, battery service, radiator service, lubrication, brake service, wheel service, and testing or adjusting of automotive parts.
Motor vehicle repair work may be done at a motor vehicle service station provided that no rebuilding of engines, spray paint operations, or body or fender repair is conducted. Gasoline pumps and gasoline pump islands shall be located more than 12 feet from the nearest property line.
NEIGHBORHOOD UTILITY FACILITY - Telephone, electric, and cable television lines, poles, and equipment; water or gas pipes, mains and valves; sewer pipes and valves; lift stations; telephone exchanges and repeaters; and all other facilities and equipment (excluding buildings, facilities and above ground structures that exceed 120 square feet of area) necessary for conducting a service by a government or a public utility.
82
NONCONFORMING USE - A use of land, buildings, structures, or premises that lawfully existed prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment to this title, but which fails, by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment, to conform to the present use restrictions of the zoning district in which it is located.
NONSTANDARD USE - The category of nonconformance consisting of lots occupied by buildings or structures or uses which existed immediately prior to the effective date of this title which fail to comply with any of the following: minimum lot requirements for the area, density, width, front yard, side yard, rear yard, height, unobstructed open space, or parking for the district in which they are located, even though the use of the premises conforms to the permitted uses within the district as set out in the provisions of this title.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO - A place in which a person who appears in a state of nudity or who displays specific anatomical areas is observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted by other persons who pay money or other considerations. The term, nude model studio, does not include a proprietary school that is licensed by this state, a college, or a university that is supported entirely or in part by taxation, a private college or university that maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college or university that is supported entirely or in part by taxation or a structure to which the following apply:
1. A sign is not visible from exterior of the structure and no other advertising appears indicating that a nude person is available for viewing.
2. A Student must enroll at least three days in advance of a class in order to participate.
3. No more than one nude or seminude model is on the premises at any time.
NUDE, NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY - Any of the following:
1. The appearance of a human anus, genitals, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
2. A state of dress that fails to opaquely cover a human anus, genitals, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
NURSERY - Land or greenhouses used to raise flowers, shrubs, and plants for sale. See (Greenhouse).
NURSING HOME - An extended or intermediate care facility licensed or approved to provide full-time convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves.
OFFICE BUILDING - A building designed for or used as the office of professional, commercial, industrial, financial, religious, institutional, public, or semipublic persons or organizations.
83
Broadcast stations, offices, and studios shall be considered to be office buildings; broadcast towers as defined in this title shall not be so considered.
OFF-SALE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENT - Any use which has been licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises where sold.
ON-SALE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENT - Any use which has been licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption upon the premises where sold, except for special one-day liquor or special malt beverage licenses.
OUTDOOR STORAGE - The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than twenty-four (24) hours. Goods, material, merchandise, or vehicles shall not include items listed, nor be of a nature as indicated in the definition of junkyard as defined herein.
PARKING SPACE - A hard-surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to park one motor vehicle. A parking space must be provided an unobstructed means of access, and all spaces shall meet the minimum criteria as prescribed by City Ordinance.
PARTY WALL - A common shared wall between two separate structures, buildings, or dwelling units.
PERMANENT FOUNDATION - A continuous foundation around the perimeter of a structure, which, at bottom, extends no less than 48 inches below the surface of the ground.
PERMITTED USES - Any permissive or conditional uses allowed in a zoning district subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district.
PERSONAL SERVICES - Establishments primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or their apparel. Including, but not limited to: laundry or dry cleaning, receiving station; garment services; coin-operated laundries; photographic and art studios; beauty shops; barber shops; shoe repair; reducing salons and health clubs; clothing rental.
PLACE OF WORSHIP - A structure where persons regularly assemble for worship, ceremonies, rituals, and education relating to a particular form of religious belief and which a reasonable person would conclude is a place of worship by reason of design, signs, or architectural or other features.
PLANNING COMMISSION - The duly designated planning board of the municipality responsible for reviewing and approving applications for development and preparation of master plans and ordinances.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING - A building in which is conducted the primary or predominant use of the lot on which it is located.
84
PRINCIPAL USE - The primary or predominant use or building of any lot.
PRINTING PLANT - A commercial printing operation which makes reproductions involving the use of a printing press and the making of photographic plates.
PRIVATE CLUB - A group of people organized for a common purpose to pursue common goals, interests, or activities, and usually characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, regular meetings, and a constitution and bylaws.
PROJECTING SIGN - A sign other than a wall sign which is attached to and projects from a structure or building face.
PROPERTY LINE - See (Lot Line).
PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY - Government facilities and uses that provide an essential public purpose or service including, but not limited to, a police station, judicial court, fire station, ambulance service, transit or transportation transfer station, library, community center, public recreation facility, or office, but not including public utility or treatment stations, maintenance facilities, sanitary landfills or facilities for incarcerated persons.
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES - See (Neighborhood Utility Facilities). The definition is the same as the Neighborhood except that buildings, structures, and facilities that exceed 120 square feet in area are allowable.
QUARRY - A surface excavation used for the removal of rock, stone, sand, gravel, and fill dirt for sale or use off-site and includes sifting, crushing, and washing and bagging.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY - A facility that is located on or next to the ground, including but not limited to: swimming pools, putting greens, volleyball, tennis and basketball courts; batting, pitching soccer and golf cages and nets; hockey and ice rinks, skate board ramps, trampolines, portable flooring for aerobics, dance, and weight lifting.
RECREATION FACILITY, COMMERCIAL - A place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure-time activities, and other customary and usual recreational activities, either active or passive and operated as a business and open to the public for a fee.
RECREATION FACILITY, PUBLIC - A recreation facility operated by a governmental agency and open to the general public with or without fees.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS - Materials or products that may be readily separated from the solid waste stream and may be used or reused as a substitute for raw materials or other items, including but not limited to, aluminum, paper, glass, steel, and plastic.
RECYCLING COLLECTION FACILITY - An established facility where recyclable materials are collected for shipment off site, with no processing such as grinding or crushing of the
85
materials. Fully enclosed automated self-service aluminum collection machines not more than 750 square feet are considered recycling collection facilities regardless of whether they contain a crusher or grinder. Facilities which handle recyclable hazardous materials, or waste petroleum products as a primary or substantial portion of their business are not included.
RECYCLING PROCESSING FACILITY - An established facility where recyclable materials are collected and/or processed for shipment off site, including processing operations such as grinding or crushing of the materials. No on-site sales of materials, nor salvage-type automobiles may be processed at these types of facilities. Facilities which handle recyclable hazardous materials, or waste petroleum products as a primary or substantial portion of their business are not included.
REPAIR SHOP - Repair shop means a structure where activities may include major mechanical, minor welding or other work involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke or other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found in a filling station.
RESIDENCE - A permanent dwelling place.
RETAIL SERVICES AND TRADE - Establishments engaged in selling products, goods, or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption; and establishments engaged in providing services or entertainment to the general public including eating establishments, hotels, motels, repair shops, indoor amusement, copying services, health, professional, educational, and social services, and other miscellaneous services but does not include on-sale alcoholic beverage establishments.
RESTAURANT - An establishment where food and drink is prepared, served, and consumed primarily within the principal use.
ROOF SIGN - Any sign erected upon, against, or directly above a roof or on top of the parapet of a building.
ROOMING/BOARDING HOUSE - See (Boarding House).
RUNWAY OBJECT FREE AREA - An area 125 feet horizontally, from each side of the airport runway center line, and 240 feet horizontally from the end of each existing and future airport runway.
RUNWAY PROTECTION ZONE - An area starting 200 feet and extending to 1200 feet from the approach end of each existing or future airport runway. The width of the area is 125 feet horizontally from the airport runway center line, 200 feet from the approach end and extending to 225 feet horizontally from the airport runway center line, 1200 feet from the approach end of the runway.
86
SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY OR SECONDARY (HIGH SCHOOL) - Any building or part
thereof, whether public or private, which is designed, constructed, or used for instruction in elementary or secondary (high school) education.
SEMINUDE - A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, as well as portions of the body that are covered by supporting straps or devices.
SETBACK/SETBACK LINE - That line that is the required minimum distance from any lot line that establishes the area within which the principal use must be erected or placed.
SHALLOW/SURFICIAL AQUIFER - An aquifer in which the permeable media (sand and gravel) starts near the land surface immediately below the topsoil. The shallow aquifer is further defined as an aquifer within fifty (50) feet or less below the land surface within fifteen (15) feet or less of continuous overlying, extremely low permeability material, such as clay, till or shale. Weathered till or highly fractured weathered shale is not an extremely low permeability material for purposes of this Ordinance; or, the aquifer is greater than fifty (50) feet but less than one hundred (100) feet below the land surface with thirty (30) feet or less of continuous overlying low to extremely low permeability geological material that may be a combination of weathered and unweathered till, shale, or till and shale.
SIGN - Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or visible from outdoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. This definition does not include signs not exceeding 12 square feet for advertising the sale or lease of real estate, national or state flags or their emblem or insignia, interior window displays, athletic scoreboards, or the official announcements or signs of government.
SIGN, PORTABLE - A sign used for temporary advertising which is on wheels and portable
SIGN AREA - The area of the largest single face of the sign within a perimeter which forms the outside shape including any frame which forms an integral part of the display, but excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which the sign may be placed. If the sign consists of more than one section or module, all areas will be totaled.
SIGN FACE (DISPLAY SURFACE) - The entire area of sign on which copy could be placed. See (“Sign Area”).
SIGN (OFF PREMISE) - A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located.
87
SIGN (ON PREMISE) - A sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted, or to a commodity or service sold, offered or manufactured, or to an entertainment offered on the premises where the sign is located.
SIGN STRUCTURE - Any structure which supports, has supported, or is capable of supporting a sign.
SIGN, WALL - A sign attached to or erected against a wall of a building and projecting no more than twelve (12) inches with the face in a parallel plane to the plane of the building wall.
SLAUGHTERHOUSE - A facility for the slaughtering and processing of animals and the refining of their by-products.
SOLID WASTE TRANSFER FACILITY - A fixed facility where solid waste from collection vehicles is consolidated and temporarily stored for subsequent transport to a permanent disposal site. This does not include an infectious waste incineration facility.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS - Any of the following:
1. A human anus, genitals, the pubic region, or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola that is less than completely and opaquely covered.
2. Male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIC SEXUAL ACTIVITIES - Any of the following:
1. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
2. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy.
3. Fondling or other erotic touching of the human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breast.
4. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities under subsection (1), (2), or (3) of this subdivision.
STORY - Story is that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a basement, cellar, or unused underfloor space is more than six (6) feet above grade as defined herein for more than 50 percent of the total perimeter or is more than twelve (12) feet above grade as defined herein at any point, such basement cellar or unused under-floor space shall be considered a story.
88
STREET - A public way which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
STREET, ARTERIAL - A principal traffic artery, more or less continuous across the city, which acts as a principal connecting street with state and federal highways and includes each street designated as an arterial street on the Major Street Plan.
STREET, COLLECTOR - A street which carries traffic from local streets to arterial streets or highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation in such development.
STREET, LOCAL - A street intended to provide access to other streets from individual properties and to provide right-of-way beneath it for various utilities but not intended to be used for through traffic.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION - Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members of an existing building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, or any complete rebuilding of the roof or the exterior walls.
STRUCTURE - Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the ground with a fixed location on the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground.
Among other things, structures, include buildings, walls, fences, signs, docks, dams, manufactured homes, and sheds.
TANK FARM - An open air facility containing a number of above-ground, large containers for the bulk storage in liquid form of petroleum products.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER - A self-supporting lattice, guyed-lattice, or monopole structure which supports wireless communications facilities. The term includes new and existing towers that are used for services such as microwave, common carrier, cellular telephone, personal communication services, two-way radio paging, and other similar services. The term telecommunications tower does not include amateur radio operators' equipment, as licensed by the Federal Communications Commission.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER HEIGHT - The vertical distance above grade to the highest point of the telecommunications tower, including the base pad and any antenna.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER SITE - The telecommunications tower site shall be the lot of record for which the telecommunications tower is located.
TEMPORARY SIGN - A banner, pennant, poster, or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, plastic, wallboard, or other like materials, and intended to be displayed for a limited period of time.
TRAVEL TRAILER - Means any of the following:
89
1. Travel Trailer. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses, permanently identified "travel trailer" by the manufacturer of the trailer and, when factory equipped for the road, it shall have a body width not exceeding eight (8) feet, and a body length not exceeding thirty (30) feet.
2. Pick-up Coach. A structure designed to be mounted on a truck chassis for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation.
3. Motor-Home. A portable, temporary dwelling to be used for travel, recreation, and vacation, constructed as any integral part of a self-propelled vehicle.
4. Camping Trailer. A canvas, folding structure, mounted on wheels and designed for travel, recreation, and vacation use.
TREE, REQUIRED - A tree which is required by this Ordinance and meets or exceeds the minimum specifications according to tree type.
USE, ACCESSORY - See (Accessory Building or Use).
USE, PERMITTED - A permitted use is a use which may be lawfully established in a particular district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements and regulations of such district in which such use is located.
USE, PRINCIPAL - A principal use is the main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use. A principal use includes off-premise advertising.
VARIANCE - The authorization, following a hearing, for a property owner to depart from the requirements of a zoning ordinance, within the limits as set for the variance as authorized by this Ordinance.
WAREHOUSE - A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.
WASTE - Any garbage, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, waste supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility and other discarded materials, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, or agricultural operations, or from community activities, but does not include solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges which are point sources subject to permits under Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended to January 1, 1986, or source, special nuclear or by-product material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1, 1986.
WHOLESALE MERCHANDISING /WHOLESALE TRADE - Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial,
90
institutional, or professional business users, or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES - Any cables, wires, lines, wave guides, antennas, antenna arrays, and any other equipment associated with the transmission or reception of telecommunications signals which a person seeks to locate or have installed upon or near a telecommunications tower or antenna support structure.
YARD, FRONT - A yard across the full width of the lot extending from the front line of the main building to the front line of the lot.
YARD, REAR - A yard extending a full width of the lot between a principal building and the rear lot line.
YARD, REQUIRED FRONT - The required front yard shall extend across the front of a lot between the said property lines. There shall be a required front yard on each street side of a corner lot. The required front yard with the smallest required front yard may be referred to as the secondary front yard.
YARD LINE - See (Building Line).
YARD, REQUIRED REAR - The required rear yard shall extend across the rear of a lot between the said property lines. On corner lots, the required rear yard may be to the rear of either street. On interior lots, the required rear yard shall, in all cases, be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
YARD, REQUIRED - Shall mean the required open space between a property line and a building line. The open space shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upwards except as otherwise provided in this title.
YARD, REQUIRED SIDE - The required side yard shall extend between the required front yard line and the required rear yard line. There shall only be one required side yard on a corner lot.
YARD, SIDE - A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard line to the rear yard line.
ZONE - A specifically delineated area or district of the City of Canton within which regulations and requirements uniformly govern the use, placement, spacing, and size of land and buildings.
ZONING MAP - Any map adopted as an ordinance by the municipality that delineates the extent of each district or zone established in the zoning ordinance.
ZONING ORDINANCE - Means a set of land use regulations enacted by the local governing body to create districts, which permit certain land uses and prohibits others. Land uses in each district are regulated according to type, density, height and the coverage of buildings.

CITY OF CANTON
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
(Adopted pursuant to SDCL Chapter 11-6)
ORDINANCE NO. 1008
EFFECTIVE DATE: AUGUST 22, 2012
Prepared by the South Eastern Council of Governments at the direction of the Planning Commission and City Commission of Canton, South Dakota
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS ........................................................................................1
Section 101. Title ................................................................................................................1
Section 102. Purpose ...........................................................................................................1
Section 103. Jurisdiction .....................................................................................................1
Section 104. Interpretation ..................................................................................................1
Section 105. Amendments ..................................................................................................1
Section 106. Enforcement, Violations and Penalties ..........................................................2
ARTICLE 2: SUBDIVISION PLANS APPROVAL PROCESS ...................................................3
Section 201. Applicability...................................................................................................3
Section 202. Overview of Approval Process ......................................................................3
Section 203. Filing Fee .......................................................................................................4
Section 204. Subdivision Plan Exemptions - Minor Plats ..................................................4
Section 205. Plat Exemptions .............................................................................................5
ARTICLE 3: CONCEPT PLAN .....................................................................................................6
Section 301. Submission .....................................................................................................6
ARTICLE 4: PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAN ..................................................................7
Section 401. Submission .....................................................................................................7
Section 402. Effective Period of Preliminary Subdivision Plan Approval .......................10
Section 403. Revisions to Preliminary Plan ......................................................................10
ARTICLE 5: DEVELOPMENT ENGINEERING PLANS AND THE PLAT ...........................11
Section 501. Development Engineering Plans ..................................................................11
Section 502. The Plat ........................................................................................................12
Section 503. Approval of the Plat .....................................................................................13
ARTICLE 6: PRELIMINARY PLAN CRITERIA .......................................................................14
Section 601. Intent ............................................................................................................14
Section 602. Blocks ..........................................................................................................14
Section 603. Lots ..............................................................................................................14
Section 604. Street System................................................................................................14
ARTICLE 7: DEVELOPMENT ENGINEERING PLAN CRITERIA .........................................16
Section 701. General Requirements ..................................................................................16
Section 702. Blocks ..........................................................................................................16
Section 703. Lots .............................................................................................................16
Section 704. Streets System ..............................................................................................17
Section 705. Walkways .....................................................................................................20
Section 706. Minimum Subdivision Improvements .........................................................20
Section 707. Maintenance Agreements .............................................................................20
Section 708. Easements ....................................................................................................20
ARTICLE 8: UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SPACE ........................................................................22
Section 801. Water Facilities ............................................................................................22
Section 802. Sanitary Sewers ............................................................................................22
Section 803. Public Open Space .......................................................................................23
ARTICLE 9: GRADING AND DRAINAGE ...............................................................................24
Section 901. Grading Plan ................................................................................................24
Section 902. Drainage Plan ...............................................................................................24
Section 903. Design Standards .........................................................................................24
ARTICLE 10: EROSION CONTROL PLAN ..............................................................................25
Section 1001. Specifications .............................................................................................25
Section 1002. Subdivisions and Individual Lots ...............................................................25
ARTICLE 11: PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES AND AMENITIES .................26
Section 1101. Existing Features ........................................................................................26
Section 1102. Sensitive Natural Areas ..............................................................................26
ARTICLE 12: RURAL SUBDIVISIONS .....................................................................................27
Section 1201. In General ...................................................................................................27
Section 1202. Roads..........................................................................................................27
Section 1203. Lots and Blocks ..........................................................................................27
Section 1204. Grading and Drainage ................................................................................27
Section 1205. Water Supply..............................................................................................27
Section 1206. Sanitary Sewers ..........................................................................................28
ARTICLE 13: ASSURANCES FOR THE COMPLETION OF MINIMUM IMP ......................29
Section 1301. Assurances Required ..................................................................................29
ARTICLE 14: CERTIFICATES REQUIRED ..............................................................................30
Section 1401. Certificates for Preliminary Plans ..............................................................30
Section 1402. Certificates for Plats and Replats ...............................................................31
Section 1403. Assurance Agreement For ..........................................................................34
ARTICLE 15: DEFINITIONS ......................................................................................................37
1
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 101. Title
These regulations shall be referred to as the 2012 Revised Subdivision Ordinance for the City of Canton.
Section 102. Purpose
It is the purpose of these regulations to govern the subdivision of land to provide for coordination of streets in other subdivisions and transportation plans; to set aside adequate areas for public uses, water and sewer facilities, drainage and flood control; to foster efficient and orderly growth compatible with the natural environment; to protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare; and to conform with other plans and regulations.
Section 103. Jurisdiction
These subdivision regulations shall apply to all subdivisions of land located within the City and within the unincorporated area identified by the Major Street Plan in accordance with platting jurisdiction statute of SDCL 11-6-26.
Section 104. Interpretation
These regulations are the minimum requirements for the promotion of public safety, health, and general welfare. It is not the intent of these regulations to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easement, covenant, or deed restriction, where these provisions conflict or overlap. Whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
Section 105. Amendments
Any provisions of these regulations may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, modified or repealed by the City Commission according to law; however, such amendments, supplements, changes or modifications shall not become effective until after study and recommendation by the Planning Commission and final approval by the City Commission as follows:
__ Proposed change(s) in Subdivision Regulations drafted and sent to City Attorney for review;
__ Letter received from City Attorney confirming legality of proposed change(s);
__ Planning Commission holds a public hearing on the proposed change(s) with notice to be published in the City’s official newspaper at least ten days prior to the scheduled date of the public hearing;
__ Planning Commission recommends adoption of the proposed change(s) to the City Commission;
__ City Commission holds a public hearing on the proposed change(s) with notice to be published in the City’s official newspaper at least ten days prior to the scheduled date of the public hearing;
2
__ First reading of ordinance changing the regulations held;
__ Second reading and adoption of the ordinance changing the regulations held;
__ Notice of adoption published; and
__ Revised Subdivision Regulations become effective twenty days after publishing the notice of adoption, unless the referendum is invoked.
Section 106. Enforcement, Violations and Penalties
A. The Authorized Official and City Engineer are hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of these regulations and establish rules for its administration. For such purposes, the Authorized Official shall have the powers of a law enforcement officer.
B. No owner, or developer of any parcel of land located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any part of the parcel before a final plat of the subdivision has been approved in accordance with the provisions of the regulations and filed with the Lincoln County Register of Deeds unless provisions of plat exemptions apply as within (Section 204) Subdivision Plan Exemptions - Minor Plat and (Section 205) Plat Exemptions.
C. Any person violating any provisions of these regulations shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed the fine established by SDCL 22-6-2(2). Each day in which a violation of these regulations continues shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Whenever any work is done contrary to the provisions of these regulations, the Authorized Official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done; and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the Authorized Official to proceed with work.
E. The Authorized Official and City Engineer shall together have the authority to make interpretations of these regulations and enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to clarify the application of its provisions.
F. No permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot or parcel subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of these regulations.
3
ARTICLE 2: SUBDIVISION PLANS APPROVAL PROCESS
Section 201. Applicability
Subdivision of land shall be required before the division of land (for any purpose) into two or more parcels.
Section 202. Overview of Approval Process
Proposed subdivision development plans must be approved by the City in accordance with the following procedures which include four principal steps.
Step 1:
Concept Plan (with an annexation petition or in preparation for preliminary subdivision plan)
Review by
Authorized Official, City Engineer
Approval by
None
Step 2:
Preliminary Plan (in coordination with rezoning)
Review by
Authorized Official, Utilities Superintendents, City Engineer, Planning Commission
Approval by
City Commission
Step 3:
Development’s Engineering Plans (in preparation for engineering construction plans)
Review by
City Engineer
Approval by
City Engineer
4
Step 4:
Plat (before a building permit is approved)
Review by
Authorized Official, City Engineer
Approval by
Authorized Official
Section 203. Filing Fee
A filing fee shall be deposited with the City for all preliminary subdivision plans, development engineering plans, and plats. The amount of fees charged shall be set forth by resolution of the City Commission. Fees established in accordance with this section shall be paid upon submission of a signed application.
Section 204. Subdivision Plan Exemptions - Minor Plats
The purpose of this section is to provide for the timely review of minor plats and replats (including plats for transfer of ownership) that do not discernibly impact surrounding properties, environmental resources, or public facilities. No concept plan, preliminary plan, or development engineering plans are required. Minor plats and replats are administratively approved by the Authorized Official and City Engineer and must comply with all requirements of a plat in Section 502 (The Plat). Any request for new or additional public infrastructure or facility services after the land has platted may be required to comply with Article 5 Development Engineering Plans at the request of the City Engineer.
A. Minor Plats.
1. A minor plat is a plat containing not more than three lots fronting on an existing street and meets ALL OF the following requirements:
a. Does not require the dedication of right-of-way or construction of new streets;
b. Does not require the creation of easements or has existing services that do not require additional easement size;
c. Does not create a lot or tract eligible for any public or private improvements other than sidewalks;
d. Does not landlock or otherwise impair convenient ingress or egress to or from the rear side of the subject tract or any adjacent property;
e. Does not change the grades from the grading plan which was submitted and approved with the original plat or, if the grades are going to be changed, then a grading plan shall be submitted and approved for the minor plat or replat;
f. Does not significantly change any plans that have been prepared for the placement of any other utilities in the subdivision;
5
g. Does not adversely affect the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property; and
h. Does not conflict with any provision or portion of the comprehensive plan, official map, zoning ordinance, or these regulations.
2. Replat. A replat includes all the requirements of a minor plat and shall also include the minor vacation of existing platted lines to achieve either a reconfiguration of the existing recorded plat or change the number of recorded lots in the subdivision and the perimeter of the tract being replatted is not altered by the replat. Also, a replat shall certify that the platting vacates the existing plat.
Section 205. Plat Exemptions
The following situations are exempt from the City subdivision regulations rules:
A. Cemetery gravesite plats.
1. Cemetery gravesite plats or plots do not have to meet any requirements of this subdivision ordinance as long as land is surveyed, mapped, or diagramed, and subdivided into sections, blocks, lots, individual grave spaces, avenues, walks, and streets, thereby platting or making a map which shall be filed and maintained as a permanent cemetery record.
B. Government use parcels. In order to facilitate the transfer of ownership from one owner to a government entity for the use of a public land or facility (e.g., school, park, drainageway, H lots), plats may be exempted by the Authorized Official and City Engineer.
However, the exemption of the City of Canton platting rules and regulations does not exempt the platting requirements of the county register of deeds, title company and state law.
6
ARTICLE 3: CONCEPT PLAN
Section 301. Submission
A concept plan is a process designed to help a developer save time and expense in preparing a preliminary plan and a plat. A concept plan does not have a requirement for engineering information; however, the more engineering design work that is done, the developer will be more likely to avoid rezonings or major amendments because of lot and block reconfigurations due to drainage and other utility requirements. The advantage of a concept plan is that City staff will provide important information upfront that may significantly affect lot and block layout and utility plans. It is recommended that at least some preliminary drainage engineering be completed during the concept plan stage. All concept plans for review shall be submitted to the Authorized Official.
A. Prior to the submission of the preliminary subdivision plan and, if needed, rezoning to the planning commission, the developer shall submit a concept plan to the Authorized Official, which will also be routed to the City Engineer. City staff comments on the concept plan shall be sent to the developer within 15 working days. The requirement for a concept plan may be waived by the Authorized Official and City Engineer if access permits have been approved and it is a residential subdivision with less than ten acres or a nonresidential subdivision with less than five acres. A developer may choose to submit a concept plan for comments that has all elements of a preliminary subdivision plan.
B. The concept plan shall contain the following information:
1.
The general layout of streets and access points to adjacent street systems; location of major drainageways, approximate flow paths and detention ponds; water line locations; nearest existing sanitary sewer line locations; natural features and amenities and preservation public land, proposed zoning districts; pedestrian connectivity; and agreement with the City’s comprehensive plan goals and policies.
2.
The owner and developer addresses and telephone numbers.
3.
Vicinity map to scale, showing locations of the concept plan and other property for at least 660 feet in every direction.
C. Comments from City staff in regard to the concept plan should include future land use amendments, zoning transitions, street right-of-way width and type of street (minor or major collector), pedestrian circulation, lot and block layout, street access points, water and sanitary sewer locations, assessments cost per acre including sanitary sewer, water main, regional detention cost, and storm sewer. Staff shall track consistency of comments between concept plan and preliminary subdivision plan.
7
ARTICLE 4: PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAN
Section 401. Submission
A preliminary subdivision plan is a process designed to assist the developer and the City with the efficient and timely development of utilities to and throughout a development. Plans will be evaluated for compliance with the City’s comprehensive plan goals and policy framework, adopted master plans, and the capital improvement program.
Based on the comments from the concept plan, the developer shall submit the preliminary subdivision plan to the Authorized Official. The application may be submitted five working days before the planning commission submittal deadline.
1. Within five working days of receipt of a subdivision application and fee, the Authorized Official will review the application to determine whether it contains all elements required by Section 401(A).
2. If the Authorized Official determines that the application does not contain all elements as required by Section 401(A), then the applicant shall be notified in writing of the specific deficiencies; and that the application shall not be scheduled for a public hearing until all elements of the application are submitted. The applicant has until the submittal deadline to submit all elements.
3. When the Authorized Official determines that the application does contain all elements as required by Section 401(A), the application shall be scheduled for a planning commission public hearing by the Authorized Official on a day when the planning commission is regularly scheduled to meet as determined by the rules, policies, and regulations as adopted or which may hereafter be adopted by the planning commission for holding public hearings on such requests.
4. The Authorized Official will review within ten days to determine compliance with all approval criteria of Section 401(A).
5. If the Authorized Official determines that the preliminary subdivision plans do not meet the criteria, a one-month deferral of the plan may occur and the Authorized Official shall identify specific required information in its notification to the applicant at the end of the ten-day review period. After receipt of the resubmitted preliminary subdivision plan, the Authorized Official may schedule the preliminary plan for a planning commission public hearing.
6. If the Authorized Official determines that the preliminary subdivision application is in sufficient compliance with Section 401(A), but there are specific design, improvement, or other compliance deficiencies, the Authorized Official may list conditions to the approval of the subdivision application to the planning commission.
The City Commission, in taking action on a preliminary plan, shall consider the recommendations of the planning commission and shall hold a public hearing. It shall then approve, disapprove, or approve with conditions based upon the criteria within Section 401(A). Approval of the preliminary plan shall indicate City Commission's approval of the general location of the lots, blocks, and streets including the interrelationship to
8
proposed zoning districts or land uses; all which shall be so noted on the preliminary subdivision plan's certificate of approval. The approved plan shall be kept on file in the office of the Authorized Official and City Engineer. Any conditions included by the City Commission shall be resolved on a revised preliminary plan which would be submitted to the Authorized Official for administrative approval before any development engineering plans and plats are submitted.
A. Element and Approval Criteria for Preliminary Subdivision Plans:
Elements
Approval Criteria
Submitted by licensed engineer.
The earmark that distinguishes a licensed/ registered professional engineer is the authority to sign and seal or "stamp" engineering documents for a design or analysis, thus taking legal responsibility for it.
Concept plan comments.
Consistency with concept plan comments.
Proposed name of subdivision.
The name shall not duplicate, be the same in spelling, or alike in pronunciation with the name of any other recorded subdivision, unless it is an extension of or adjoining to an existing subdivision.
The names of all adjoining subdivisions with adjoining unplatted property shall be labeled as such.
Showing connectivity with lot and block lines, easements, and rights-of-way.
Lot and block layout.
Consistent with Article 6 (Preliminary Plan Criteria).
Vicinity map to scale showing location of preliminary subdivision plan.
Includes other property between 660-1,320 feet in every direction.
The owner, developer, and engineer's names, addresses, and telephone numbers.
Use as contact for the project for comments and notifications.
Proposed zoning districts.
Sufficient to allow for staff review of residential densities and nonresidential structure size.
Area, legal description, and notations stating acreage, scale, and north arrow.
Determine if plan boundaries meet stated ownership; adjacent property notification, if required; measurement and review of plans.
9
Elements
Approval Criteria
The location and size of all public facilities, schools, libraries, fire stations, parks, tree masses, and other significant natural features.
Consistent with the parks/open space needs identified within the Canton Comprehensive Plan and Article 11 of the Subdivision Ordinance (Preservation of Natural Features and Amenities).
Existing contours referenced to North American Vertical Datum (NAVD 88) with intervals sufficient to determine the character and topography of the land to be subdivided.
Utility coordination and consistency with water, sewer, grading/drainage plans.
Phasing and timelines.
Per annexation resolution and for purposes of identifying final utility plan parcels (based on watershed boundaries); construction planning for private and public entities.
Proposed City reimbursements.
Coordination with CIP and City disbursements.
Other data consistent with or required within the developers/pre-annexation agreement.
Only data as required within an annexation, preannexation.
Certificates of approval for endorsement by the Planning Commission, Authorized Official, City Engineer, Finance Officer, and the City Commission.
Signed and executed.
Preliminary street plan.
Consistent with Engineering Design Standards.
Preliminary sanitary sewer plan.
Consistent with Engineering Design Standards.
Preliminary water plan.
Consistent with Engineering Design Standards.
Preliminary drainage plan.
Consistent with Engineering Design Standards.
Preliminary street lighting plan.
Consistent with Engineering Design Standards.
10
Section 402. Effective Period of Preliminary Subdivision Plan Approval
Any preliminary subdivision plan which has not received Development Engineering Plan approval for all or a portion of the Preliminary Subdivision Plan area within a period of three years would require resubmittal of a new plan for approval subject to any new subdivision regulations unless a waiver from the Authorized Official is approved.
Upon written request to the Authorized Official and prior to the Preliminary Plan expiration date, a one-year time extension for the Preliminary Plan may be granted by the Authorized Official, subject to the following condition:
The land uses for land within the preliminary subdivision plan area have not significantly been altered since the original approval date for the preliminary subdivision plan.
Section 403. Revisions to Preliminary Plan
Amendments to an approved preliminary subdivision plan may be requested by the developer. The Authorized Official may request an updated preliminary subdivision plan for review and approval when changes to the plan are proposed.
A. Amendments to a preliminary plan shall consist of external impacts, including changes in major (collectors) street pattern, change of zones, drainage facility location, other public open space location, or perimeter boundaries.
1. Amendments to an approved preliminary subdivision plan shall follow the procedures for approval of a preliminary subdivision plan as required in this section.
2. The approved plan [and any amendments] shall be kept on file with the Authorized Official.
11
ARTICLE 5: DEVELOPMENT ENGINEERING PLANS AND THE PLAT
Section 501. Development Engineering Plans
The development engineering plan is a process designed to assist the developer and the City with the efficient and timely development of utilities and final lot and block layout to and throughout a development. Plans will be evaluated for compliance with the Engineering Design Standards and the capital improvement program. The Development Engineering Plan approval will be based upon the engineering feasibility of the development including the determination of more precise locations of all lots, blocks, and streets.
Following the approval of the preliminary subdivision plan, if the developer wishes to proceed, development engineering plans shall be submitted at the City Office for review and acceptance by the City Engineer. The development engineering plans shall encompass all land included in a phase as shown on the preliminary subdivision plan, be in compliance with conditions and approval requirements of the preliminary subdivision plan, and existing and proposed easements shown and dimensioned from property lines and utilities.
The development engineering plans shall comply with the respective chapters within the adopted Engineering Design Standards. The final grading and drainage plan, the final utility plan, and the groundwater control plan shall be approved or disapproved within fifteen working days after submittal to the City. In addition, a final lot and block layout shall be approved by the City Engineer and Authorized Official as required by Table 1.
Table 1
Development Engineering Plan Lot and Block Layout
Elements
Criteria
Lots and blocks including a systematic lot and block numbering pattern, lot lines.
Ability to reference areas and review plans; consistent with Article 6 (Preliminary Plan Criteria) and Article 7 (Development Engineering Plan Criteria) and applicable Zoning Districts.
Location and widths of all existing and proposed easements.
Utility coordination; consistent with Article 6 (Preliminary Plan Criteria) and Article 7 (Development Engineering Plan Criteria)
Location of all street right-of-way including width and street names.
Consistency with Major Street Plan and Article 6 (Preliminary Plan Criteria) and Article 7 (Development Engineering Plan Criteria)
12
The location and size of all public facilities, schools, libraries, fire stations, parks, tree masses, and other significant natural features.
Consistent with the needs identified within the Comprehensive Plan and Article 11 of the Subdivision Ordinance (Preservation of Natural Features and Amenities)
Boundary lines of floodways and 100-year flood zones delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM).
To ensure buildable lots
Amendments to Development Engineering Plan Lot and Block Layout:
The City Engineer and Authorized Official may request an updated development engineering plan for review and approval when changes to the plan are proposed or when a proposed plat is not consistent with the development engineering plan. The proposed amendment may include the submission of an updated preliminary subdivision plan to the Authorized Official.
Amendments shall be done administratively with signed approval by Authorized Official and City Engineer and coincide with the development engineering plans.
Section 502. The Plat
Platting is a process designed to assist the developer and the City to approve the appropriate features of a proposed subdivision and place them on file with the county register of deeds. Platting is required when land is divided into tracts for purpose of sale, transfer of ownership or in creating a new building site prior to issuance of a building permit, or connecting to City utilities.
One signed mylar plat, two paper copies, one reduced 8.5 x 11 copy, and an electronic PDF and DWG shall be submitted to the City Office for review and approval. All copies shall be signed, sealed, and notarized.
The plat should be drawn at a scale of 100 feet to the inch from an accurate survey and on one or more sheets whose dimensions are as required by state law. If more than two sheets are required, an index sheet of the same dimension shall be attached and filed. The plat shall show the following information:
A.
The proposed name of the subdivision. The name shall not duplicate, be the same in spelling, or alike in pronunciation with the name of any other recorded subdivision, unless it is an extension of or adjacent to said subdivision.
B.
Scale and north arrow. All lot and block lines, type of easements, and rights-of-way such as drainage facilities, pedestrian, and utilities should be consistent with the development engineer plan. Adjoining unplatted property shall be labeled as such.
C.
A systematic lot and block numbering pattern, lot lines and street names, and the square footage of all lots.
D.
The location and width of all proposed and existing rights-of-way, alleys, and easements.
13
E.
The boundary lines of the area being subdivided with accurate angles or bearings and distances tying the perimeter boundaries to the nearest established street line, section corner, other previously described subdivision or other recognized permanent monuments which shall be accurately described on the plat as required by SDCL 43-18, 43-20 and 43-21.
F.
Location of all monuments and permanent control points, and all survey pins, either set or located as required by SDCL 43-18, 43-20 and 43-21.
G.
The identification and delineations of any portions of the property intended to be dedicated or granted for public use such as drainage facilities, schools or park land.
H.
All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating the boundaries of the subdivision lots, streets/roads, alleys, easements, and other areas for public or private use. Linear dimensions are to be given to the nearest 1/100 of a foot.
I.
The radii, chords, length of curve, point of tangency, and central angles for all curvilinear streets/roads and radii for rounded corners.
J.
The boundary lines of the floodway and 100-year flood zones, along with the base flood elevation on each lot as delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM).
K.
Acknowledgment of the owner or owners of the plat of any restrictions, including dedication to public use of all streets/roads, alleys, parks or other open spaces shown thereon and the granting of easements required; as well as the use of any required common areas
L.
All formal irrevocable offers of dedication for all streets/roads, alleys, parks, drainage facilities, pedestrian paths and other uses as required.
M.
Approved assurance agreement(s) under Section 1301.
N.
The certificate of the surveyor attesting to the accuracy of the survey and the correct location of all pins and monuments shown as required by SDCL 43-18, 43-20 and 43-21.
O.
Certificates of approval for endorsement by the Authorized Official.
P.
Existing building outlines to verify setbacks and lot area requirements and ensure current and proposed easements are clear of obstructions.
Section 503. Approval of the Plat
If these plans are approved, the developer may then submit the plat(s) for approval. The plat shall provide the information indicated in Section 502 [The Plat] and shall require the review and approval of the Authorized Official. The plat shall be in conformance with an approved final lot and block layout of the development engineering plan. Either all or a portion of the final lot and block layout of the development engineering plan may be platted.
The plat shall be considered for approval only after the City Engineer has approved assurances as required by Article 13 from the developer fixing responsibility for the required improvements, or any revision thereof. If the plat is not approved by the Authorized Official within ten days of submittal, the plat shall be presented to the City Commission for action. A plat shall be considered submitted when it has been filed with the Authorized Official. Approval of any plat shall be contingent upon the plat being recorded within 120 days after the certificate of approval is signed by the Finance Officer.
14
ARTICLE 6: PRELIMINARY PLAN CRITERIA
Section 601. Intent
When applications are submitted for a preliminary plan, developers shall comply with the following criteria:
Section 602. Blocks
The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with regard to provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; the need for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of traffic and utilities; and limitations and opportunities of topography .
Blocks shall normally be wide enough to allow two tiers of residential lots of an appropriate depth.
Section 603. Lots
A. Lots should generally be in compliance with the zoning ordinance.
B. Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit appropriate building setbacks.
C. Each lot shall abut a dedicated right-of-way or shall include an appropriate private street.
Section 604. Street System
A. Arrangement and extension. The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall conform to the major street plan and shall make provisions for the continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas or their proper projection where adjoining land is not subdivided.
1. The arrangement of all streets and alleys shall be such as not to cause a hardship to owners of adjoining property when they plat their own land and seek to provide for convenient access to it.
B. Circulation plan. In general, streets within subdivisions shall be designed to incorporate and tie into existing or proposed pedestrian pathways and roadways, and to take into account design restrictions on abutting parcels caused by the surrounding topography, parcel lines or other features. Other criteria in the street circulation plan shall include the following:
1. Provisions should be made for a collector street every half mile, and there should be a street connecting adjacent subdivisions at intervals not less than a quarter mile where environmental constraints and land use considerations permit.
2. Streets should be designed to convey residents conveniently throughout the neighborhood, and to the parks, schools, and shopping areas of the neighborhood and to adjacent neighborhoods. When a subdivision is designed or constructed in conjunction with another use (such as retail, office, apartments, park or school) of a neighborhood scale, the local and/or collector road system should be designed to provide roadway connections between the various uses.
15
C. Arterial streets. In order to maintain the traffic carrying capacity of the arterial streets by limiting access to it from individual lots, and in order to protect the residents of property adjacent to arterial streets from the high traffic volumes associated with the street, property along such arterials shall be subdivided in the manner set forth below:
1. Double frontage lots. Where double frontage lots are used for residential development, additional lot depth or width consistent with the zoning ordinance for rear yard setback shall be required to provide for an extra setback to offset the impact of high traffic volume. When double frontage lots are proposed, the developer shall be required to sign an assurance agreement prior to plat approval.
2. Tracts onto arterial streets. In order to avoid private access from individual lots onto arterial streets, lots should be arranged on blocks so that their side or rear yards are adjacent to the arterial street. Lots adjacent to an arterial street shall have an additional width to provide for an extra setback to offset the impact of high traffic volume. This design will be accepted only for a limited distance due to the number of streets which would intersect with the arterial.
3. Access roads. Access roads may be used as the City grows into the areas in the county where they have been required. Under some circumstances they would also be appropriate for commercial and industrial development. Access roads shall be constructed to City standards with a right-of-way width of 50 feet.
4. Rear access roads. Rear access roads are recommended for commercial developments. In this way the access can serve two tiers of lots and alleviate the dangerous turning movements onto and off of arterial streets.
5. Non-residential land uses, and higher density residential land uses including multiple family units and townhouses are particularly suitable for the intersection of two arterial streets. Any development of this type should have limited access to the arterial street.
6. Lots adjacent to railroad right-of-way. Lots for residential development adjacent to functioning railroad rights-of-way shall provide extra lot depth or width consistent with the zoning ordinance for rear yard setback to provide for an extra setback to offset the impact of the railroad traffic.
D. Collector street development
1. Collectors shall be used to collect traffic from other local roads and collectors to arterial roadways.
2. Based upon increased speeds and volumes lot sizes and land uses may be increased along collectors to be consistent with the proposed zoning and transitions.
3. Collectors shall be developed along or between property lines, so that both land owners can share in the cost as well as having access to the collector.
4. In agricultural and transitional areas, collector streets shall be identified and located through the Engineering Design Standards.
16
ARTICLE 7: DEVELOPMENT ENGINEERING PLAN CRITERIA
Before a plat is submitted, developers shall have an approved Development Engineering Plan which shall comply with the following criteria and all Engineering Design Standards.
Consisting of a:
1. Lot and block layout - approved by Authorized Official and City Engineer.
2. Drainage, water and sanitary sewer developer’s engineering plans - approved by City Engineer.
Section 701. General Requirements
The plat shall conform to the criteria of the preliminary subdivision plan plus the additional
criteria for Development Engineering Plans.
Section 702. Blocks
A. Block lengths shall not exceed 1,320 feet.
Section 703. Lots
A. Lot dimensions shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and conform to the Canton Zoning Ordinance.
B. Each lot shall abut a dedicated right-of-way, mutual access, common area, or private street. Private streets or roads shall be indicated on the Development Engineering Plan as a private roadway easement and shall not be included as part of any required lot area or setback.
C. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide off-street parking and loading for the use contemplated.
D. All interior lot lines shall be a straight line or a series of straight lines. Curved interior lot lines shall be prohibited.
E. Side lot lines shall be at right angles to streets except on curves where they shall be radial except when otherwise approved.
F. Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit appropriate building setbacks from both sides.
G. In undeveloped or vacant areas, streets shall be identified and classified through the transportation planning process. The location of major streets shall conform to the official Major Street Plan.
17
Section 704. Streets System
A. Street design standards. All public street improvements, including pavement width, street grades, alignment and visibility, and intersections shall be designed in accordance with standard accepted engineering practice and are subject to the approval of the City Engineer. All public street facilities shall be designed in compliance with the Engineering Design Standards.
1. Half streets. Whenever an existing half street is adjacent to a tract being subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within said subdivision. A preliminary plan of a subdivision may show half a street along adjoining property which has not been subdivided, but no lot abutting on such half street shall have a building permit issued for it until such time as the other half street is dedicated.
B. Traffic calming. Improving traffic flow into and through subdivisions also needs to take into consideration traffic volumes and speeds. Traffic calming is the process by which vehicular speeds and volumes on local streets are reduced to acceptable levels. This is achieved through the installation of approved devices such as traffic circles, flares, and center islands. Traffic calming serves the purpose of reducing cut-through traffic, truck traffic, excessive speeding, noise, vibration, air pollution, and accidents in an attempt to provide a safer environment for motorists and pedestrians.
1. Approved devices shall be spaced within the right-of-way along major collectors through residential subdivisions, based upon Engineering Design Standards.
2. Traffic calming devices may be required by the City Engineer, based upon the review of a traffic impact study.
C. Arterial Street System Development - Whenever an arterial street has been constructed for which the cost has not been apportioned against the property located outside the City which abuts an arterial street constructed by special assessment and which benefits the property located outside the City limits, the property shall pay its proportionate share of the cost of such construction, without interest, according to the benefits to accrue to such property before such property may be served by the street. Access to an arterial shall be as described in the Engineering Design Standards. The costs shall be established by resolution by the Canton City Commission. Recovered costs required by this subsection shall be paid prior to platting or replatting for development. The recovered cost shall be deposited in the assessment revolving fund and shall be used only for new street construction.
D. Right-of-way widths. The developer shall be required to dedicate street right-of-way widths according to the major street plan and not less than as follows:
STREET TYPE RIGHT-OF-WAY IN FEET
Expressway/principals 100-200
Arterials 100-120
Collectors 66-80
Locals 66
Access roads 60-66
Cul-de-sacs (55 radius for turnarounds and eyebrows) 60-66
18
Alleys 20
Rural Subdivisions 66
E. Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sacs will be allowed where they are necessary for the reasonable development of a subdivision.
1. The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be 500 feet measured along the centerline, between the radius point of the turnaround and the right-of-way line of the abutting street. The maximum length of a cul-de-sac may be extended where no other practical alternative is available for the reasonable development of a subdivision.
2. Temporary turnarounds may also be required by the City Engineer on dead-end streets that will eventually be continued.
3. Emergency access may be required by the fire chief on cul-de-sac streets to allow for emergency service response.
F. Private streets or roads; places. Private roads may be allowed when serving a limited number of parcels, if right-of-way constraints exist, and when all maintenance responsibilities are detailed within the easement.
G. Access easements. When the traffic impact of one or more proposed property developments indicates that the public safety can be better served by the use of access easements, the following requirements shall be observed:
1. Any access easement accepted by the City must provide for perpetual unobstructed access to the area it serves, and prohibit the erection of any structure within or adjacent to the access area which would interfere with the use of the access easement by the public or any governmental agency.
2. Access easements shall be indicated on the plat.
3. Any plat presented for City approval which shows an access easement as a means of access shall provide language in the owner’s certificate [see Article 14] reserving the access easement as a perpetual unobstructed access easement.
4. Access easement areas shall be paved by the developer and maintained in passable condition. Designs for access easements must be approved by the City Engineer.
5. An easement area maintenance agreement among property owners who will depend on the access easement for access shall be filed with the plat. It shall describe the legal responsibilities for the repair and maintenance of the easement area and the required signs (see 6. below).
6. The developer may be required to place traffic control signs on access easements or to pay the City to place traffic control signs for access easements at the locations the City Engineer deems necessary for the safety and convenience of the public. Traffic control signs shall be approved by the City Engineer.
19
H. Alleys.
1. Alleys are permitted in commercial and industrial districts, except where provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading, and parking consistent with the requirement set forth in the Canton Zoning Ordinance.
2. Alleys are permitted in residential districts when design standards and conditions warrant an alternative means of access.
I. Continuation of street names. Streets obviously in alignment with existing streets shall bear the names of those streets. When, due to topography, offsets caused by rectangular surveys or other physical features, streets become interrupted, quarter line and section line streets shall retain the same name on either side of the irregularities.
J. Street naming criteria. No street names shall be used which will duplicate, be the same in spelling, or alike in pronunciation with any other existing streets. All street names should be kept as short as possible to permit signs to be no longer than 36 inches. All street names shall indicate directions either north, south, east, or west. Street name suffixes shall be applied as follows:
Street: A road generally running east and west.
Avenue: A road generally running north and south.
Road: A road running both east and west or north and south for significant lengths; such names may only be assigned to major rights-of-way.
Lane: A road running northeast to southwest.
Drive: A road running northwest to southeast.
Trail: A road which wanders in different directions.
Circle: All cul-de-sacs.
Court: A road with two openings which enters and exits on the same street.
Place: All private roads.
Parkway: Limited access roads such as major streets which are divided by a median.
Boulevard: A minor street divided by a median.
K. Prohibition on certain street name suffixes. No Development Engineering Plan shall be approved which use the names of square, ridge, pass, way, or terrace as a suffix for a street name.
20
Section 705. Walkways
A. Concrete or asphalt pedestrian walks of an appropriate width (as determined by the City Engineer) shall be required through blocks where deemed necessary to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, bus stops and other community facilities. They may also be required to provide access through greenways and common areas. The walks shall be maintained by the adjacent property owners.
Section 706. Minimum Subdivision Improvements
Where development engineering plans are approved and plats within the development engineering plan are platted, utilities will be required to be extended to the edge of adjacent platted land.
Section 707. Maintenance Agreements
Where the subdivision contains sewers, sewage treatment plants, water supply systems, park areas, storm drainage systems, road systems, or other facilities or services which are necessary to or desirable for the area, and which are of common use or benefit and which are not accepted for maintenance by an existing public agency, provisions shall be made by maintenance agreement for the proper and continuous maintenance and supervision of such facilities. A final and signed copy of the agreement shall be attached to each and every plat having a facility or service covered by such an agreement.
Section 708. Easements
Easements shall be provided and dedicated where necessary for wires, cables conduits, fixtures, and equipment for distribution of electric power, wastewater collectors, storm drains, overland storm water flow routes, sidewalks, pedestrian ways, bikeways, private roadways, and water mains at such locations and widths as determined by the City. The width of easements required for public wastewater collectors, storm drains, and/or water mains shall be as specified in the Engineering Design Standards for the particular improvement adopted by the City. All necessary utilities must be located in the right-of-way or in easements abutting rear or side lot lines, except on double frontage lots. Deviations from this policy may be made when it is demonstrated that the utility is necessary and no practical alternative locations exist. In any dedication of an easement, the City may prohibit or restrict building, fences, driveways, and other improvements; may enter for construction, reconstruction, replacement, repair, operation, and maintenance purposes; and will be held harmless for the cost of replacement or damage to any improvement or vegetation within the easement and may make any other appropriate or necessary requirements.
A. All easements for municipal utilities shall be shown on the plat.
B. There shall be a ten foot utility easement for municipal utilities along all right-of-way frontages; except when the setback is equal to or less than twenty feet, then the utility easement shall be equal to half the distance of the required setback per the zoning district.
C. Easements centered on rear lot lines shall be provided for utilities and drainage where necessary and shall be a minimum of twenty feet in total width unless otherwise required by the City Engineer.
D. Where topographical or other conditions warrant side yard easements and easements across lots,
21
easements at least ten feet in total width shall be provided.
E. Lots and easements shall be arranged in such a manner as to eliminate unnecessary jogs or offsets and to facilitate the use of easements for power distribution, telephone service, drainage, water, and sewer services.
F. The property owner whose property is subject to such easements shall be responsible for its maintenance. The property owners shall keep the easement clear of any structure, debris, trees, shrubs, or landscaping whatsoever except that lawn grass, which shall be regularly mowed, and vegetation may be grown thereon.
22
ARTICLE 8: UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SPACE
Section 801. Water Facilities
A. General Requirements
1. Necessary action shall be taken by the applicant to extend or create water lines to hook onto a public water supply for the purpose of providing a water-supply system capable of providing domestic water use and fire protection.
2. Where a public water main is accessible, the subdivider shall install adequate water facilities (including fire hydrants) subject to the specifications of the City utilities department as shown on the final utility plan required in Section 501.
3. Water main extensions shall be approved by the Water Superintendent. If the water main is extended adjacent to property that will not participate in the initial construction cost of the water main, the developer shall submit to the Water Superintendent a cost recovery study based upon the actual construction costs showing the amount due from each property when a connection is made to the extended water main.
4. To facilitate the above, the location of all fire hydrants, all water supply improvements, and the boundary lines of proposed districts shall be shown on the preliminary water and sewer plan.
B. Public Water Supply
Land which is located over or adjacent to a water bearing stratum or water supply reservoir and which is designated as an area providing or supplementing a municipal water supply shall not be developed or subdivided for residential, recreational, commercial or industrial purposes except when public water and sewer systems are provided.
C. Design Standards
All water facilities including water mains, valves, fire hydrants, storage facilities and pumping stations shall be designed in accordance with the Engineering Design Standards and are subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
Section 802. Sanitary Sewers
A. Provided for each lot.
Each lot within a subdivision area shall be provided with a connection to an approved public sanitary sewer.
B. Exceptions.
In areas where a public sanitary sewer is not reasonably accessible, but where plans, including
23
the comprehensive plan, a facilities plan or any other approved plan for the installation of sanitary sewers in the vicinity of the subdivision has been prepared, the subdivider shall install sewers in conformity to plans approved by the City Engineer. In cases where a connection to an existing public sanitary sewer may not be immediately practical, a connection may be made to the gravity sewer system by the use of a lift station, constructed in accordance with the regulations and requirement set forth by the City Engineer.
C. Design Standards.
All sanitary sewer facilities including gravity sewers, manholes, lift stations and force mains shall be designed in accordance with the Engineering Design Standards and are subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
Section 803. Public Open Space
In all new subdivisions to be developed for residential or as a planned development, the City may require a minimum reservation of 5% of the land within the proposed subdivision for public use as parks, playgrounds, public open space or trails. The area to be dedicated shall be delineated on the preliminary plan and final plat. Such portion to be dedicated may be adjusted by resolution of the City Commission from time to time.
In lieu of the minimum reservation of land in this Section, the City may require the subdivider to contribute an equivalent amount in cash for part or all of the portion required to be dedicated to such public uses or purposes based on the fair market value of the land. Cash contributions shall be paid by the subdivider prior to the approval of the final plat. Cash contributions shall be placed by the City in a special fund and used only for the acquisition of land for parks, playgrounds, public open space, development of existing park and playground sites, public open space and debt retirement in connection with land previously acquired for public purposes.
Where a proposed park, playground, public open space, school site or other public site which is shown on the Comprehensive Plan is located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision to be developed for residential, commercial, industrial or as a planned development, and such public sites are not dedicated, such public ground shall be reserved and no action taken towards approval of a preliminary plan or final plat for a period not to exceed ninety days to allow the opportunity to consider and take action towards acquisition of such public ground or park by purchase or other causes.
24
ARTICLE 9: GRADING AND DRAINAGE
Section 901. Grading Plan
The final grading plan for the subdivision shall be submitted to and approved by the City Engineer. The grading plan shall, as much as possible, be laid out to conform to the natural contour of the land in compliance with the Engineering Design Standards.
Section 902. Drainage Plan
The final drainage plan for the subdivision shall conform to the city-approved master drainage plan. If a master drainage plan is not available for a proposed subdivision location and if the City deems it necessary, one will be conducted by the City on the drainage basin of which the proposed subdivision is part. No subdivision plans will be approved prior to completion and acceptance of the master drainage plan.
Section 903. Design Standards
All drainage facilities including storm sewers, on-site detention, drainageways, detention ponds, and drainage channels shall be designed in compliance with the currently approved Engineering Design Standards and are subject to approval of the City Engineer.
25
ARTICLE 10: EROSION CONTROL PLAN
Section 1001. Specifications
Measures used to control erosion on a development site shall meet the requirements of the Engineering Design Standards. Stripping of vegetation, regrading and cut and fill operations should be kept to a minimum, as should the amount of land and the duration of exposure. Whenever feasible, development plans should be made in conformance with topography in order to create the least erosion potential. Similarly, as much as possible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented. The City Engineer shall require any further measures as necessary to prevent erosion on building sites and developments from depositing wastes or sediments on public streets or other property. Every effort shall be made to retain the natural vegetation on all ditches and drainageways. Ditches and drainageways will not be disturbed without the approval of the City Engineer.
Section 1002. Subdivisions and Individual Lots
A. General
1. Land disturbing activities of one acre or more shall comply with the Erosion and Sediment Control Guidelines of the City’s Engineering Design Standards and all SD Department of Environment and Natural Resources guidelines.
2. Throughout build-out, a subdivision owner and developer is responsible for and shall implement and maintain Best Management Practices (BMP) and conditions of the approved erosion and sediment control plan to control erosion and sediment problems on all property within the subdivision until the notice of termination is granted. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivision owner and developer to inform owners and contractors of lots within the development about the erosion control standards. The responsibility may be transferred to new owners of lots within the subdivision by completing the transfer of permit coverage form as stated in the general permit.
26
ARTICLE 11: PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES AND AMENITIES
Section 1101. Existing Features
Existing natural features which would add value to residential development or to the community as a whole, such as trees, water courses, and similar irreplaceable assets, should be preserved in the design of the subdivision.
Section 1102. Sensitive Natural Areas
Sensitive natural areas as shown on the comprehensive plan shall be reviewed with regard to the special character of the area taking into consideration harmonious design, environmental protection, and topographical restraints.
27
ARTICLE 12: RURAL SUBDIVISIONS
Section 1201. In General
A. Premature subdivision of land is to be discouraged, due to unavailability of urban services, higher energy consumption, premature and excessive loss of agricultural land, and inefficient delivery of basic government services.
B. Where rural subdivisions are allowed in the Major Street Plan area, their design standard and minimum improvements are the same as those required within the City limits except for the following exceptions listed below.
Section 1202. Roads
A. Specifications for roads shall be in accordance with the Engineering Design Standards approved by the City Engineer.
B. Roads shall be designated on the plat as dedicated right-of-way or as private roadways. The responsibility for maintenance of all subdivision roads shall be certified on the plat or spelled out in a maintenance agreement to be filed with the plat.
C. All roads shall comply with other right-of-way and street naming requirements outlined in this ordinance.
Section 1203. Lots and Blocks
A. Whenever a plat or preliminary plat is proposed having lots which are one acre or larger in size, the planning commission may require that said plat or plan shall show how such lots can be re-subdivided into urban sized lots in the event the area is ever annexed into the City.
B. Lots fronting along an arterial road or a federal, state or county highway shall be discouraged. Where they are allowed, shared drives may be required, or dedication of a frontage road between the arterial or highway and the lot shall be provided. Said road shall provide direct access to the adjoining property while limiting curb cuts along the major road. Approval shall be certified by the appropriate public entity for access onto all dedicated roads.
Section 1204. Grading and Drainage
Driveways and drainage culverts shall be installed by the lot owner in accordance with the Engineering Design Standards and approved by an applicable township, county or state agency. Storm water collection and disposal systems may be required by the City Engineer.
Section 1205. Water Supply
If a City public water system is not available, a central water system shall be provided in such a manner that an adequate supply of potable water will be available to every lot in the subdivision. All subdivisions shall
28
require proof of an adequate water supply prior to issuance of any building permits.
Section 1206. Sanitary Sewers
In areas where public sanitary sewers are not accessible and no plans for public sewers have been prepared, or where the connection to public sanitary sewer is impractical, individual sewer systems will be permitted provided they comply with the regulations set forth for septic systems by the appropriate state agency and any additional county requirements. Connection to the City sewer system shall be required when the public sewer system is within two hundred feet of an individual property line.
29
ARTICLE 13: ASSURANCES FOR THE COMPLETION OF MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS
Section 1301. Assurances Required
A. Assurances for Subdivisions Within the City Limits. No plats of any subdivision shall be approved unless the improvements required by this ordinance have been installed prior to such approval, or unless the developer shall have signed an assurance agreement to establish the responsibility for the construction of such improvements in a satisfactory manner and within a period specified by the City Engineer; such period not to exceed three years. An extension to that three-year period may be granted at the discretion of the City Engineer. This assurance agreement shall be recorded with the register of deeds at the time of filing the plat.
B. Assurances for Rural Subdivisions. No plat of any rural subdivision shall be approved unless the improvements required by this ordinance have been installed prior to such approval, or unless the developer shall have posted a surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit or acceptable cash deposit assuring completion of all required improvements.
No building permits shall be issued until assurances have been filed or all required road improvements have been completed.
30
ARTICLE 14: CERTIFICATES REQUIRED
Section 1401. Certificates for Preliminary Plans
CITY COMMISSION APPROVAL
Be it resolved by the City Commission of the City of Canton, that the preliminary plan of (Subdivision Name) to the City of Canton is hereby approved and that the Finance Officer of the City of Canton is hereby directed to endorse on such plan a copy of this resolution and certify the same thereon.
Adopted this ________ day of ________, 20____.
_____________________________
Mayor, City of Canton
ATTEST: __________________
City Finance Officer
STATE OF SOUTH DAKOTA )
: SS
COUNTY OF LINCOLN )
I, (Name), the duly appointed, qualified and acting City Finance Officer of the City of Canton, South Dakota, hereby certify that the above resolution is a true and correct copy of the resolution adopted by the City Commission of the City of Canton, at a meeting held on the ________ day of ________, 20_____.
Witness my hand as City Finance Officer and the official seal of the City of Canton, South Dakota.
_________________________
City Finance Officer
City of Canton, South Dakota
CITY ENGINEER APPROVAL
We, (Name), City Engineer of the City of Canton, do hereby certify that we did duly review and recommend approval of this preliminary plan on this ________ day of ________, 20_____.
______________________________
City Engineer
City of Canton, South Dakota
AUTHORIZED OFFICIAL APPROVAL
I, (Name), Authorized Official of the City of Canton, do hereby certify that I did duly review and recommend approval of this preliminary plan on this ________day of ________, 20______.
31
_______________________________________
Authorized Official
City of Canton, South Dakota
CITY PLANNING COMMISSION APPROVAL
The City Planning Commission of the City of Canton approves the preliminary plan of (Subdivision Name) to the City of Canton and the same is recommended to the City Commission of the City of Canton for approval.
____________________________
City Planning Commission
(Chair)
Section 1402. Certificates for Plats and Replats
SURVEYOR’S CERTIFICATE
I, (Name) , a Registered Land Surveyor of the State of South Dakota, do hereby certify that I did on or before (Date) , survey that parcel of land described as (Legal description) containing (Size) [and it is in all respects correct].
______________________________
Registered Land Surveyor
OWNER’S CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
I, (Name) , do hereby certify that I am the owner of all land included in the above plat and that said plat has been made at my request and in accordance with my instructions for the purposes (Indicated herein), and that the development of this land shall conform to all existing applicable zoning, subdivision and erosion and sediment control regulations.
DEDICATION OF LAND FOR PUBLIC USE
I hereby dedicate to the public for public use forever the streets, roads and alleys, parks and public grounds, if any, as shown on said plat, including all sewers, culverts, bridges, water distribution lines, sidewalks and other improvements on or under the streets, alleys, parks and public grounds whether such improvements are shown or not. I also hereby grant easements to run with the land for water, drainage, sewer, gas, electric, telephone or other public utility lines or services under, on or over those strips of land designated hereon as easements.
I hereby waive any rights of protest to any special assessment program which may be initiated for the purpose of installation of improvements required by the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Canton.
32
OWNER’S CERTIFICATE FOR PRIVATE MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES
I, (Name) , also certify that ownership and maintenance of streets, roads and alleys, parks and other open space, private drainage easements, drainageways and detention areas, if any, as shown on said plat, and any improvements thereto, shall be provided by the ________ Homeowner’s Association except those areas, improvements or facilities with respect to which an offer of dedication to the public has been accepted by the appropriate public authority. I also hereby grant easements to run with the land for water, drainage, sewer, gas, electric, telephone or other public utility lines or services under, on or over those strips of land designated hereon as easements.
If private streets are shown, include:
I further grant and certify that the roadway shown as (Name of private road) is a private roadway easement which is hereby reserved as a permanent unobstructed access. Said street or road is for vehicular and pedestrian travel for the purpose of access to the abutting property. It is understood that the owner, their lessees and assignees have the responsibility with respect to maintaining said private street or road. Said grant is to run with the land and shall remain in effect until such street or road is accepted for public declaration. The owners, their lessees and assignees, of the property platted as (Name of subdivision) , shall at their own cost and expense keep and preserve said private street or road at all times in a good condition of repair and maintenance, and clear of snow and other obstructions and neither erect nor permit erection of any improvements of any kind within said private street or road which might interfere in any way with the property maintenance, use, repair, reconstruction and patrolling of said private street or road.
If access easements are shown, include:
I further grant and certify that the roadway is an access easement which is hereby created as a perpetual common unobstructed access in favor of the lots abutting on it. The easement is for vehicular and pedestrian travel over the roadway for the purpose of access to the abutting property. The owner, their lessees and assignees shall maintain the easement area. They shall, at their own expense, keep the easement area in good repair and maintenance and clear of snow and other obstructions. No improvements of any kind may be erected within the easement area which might interfere in any way with the proper maintenance, use, repair, reconstruction and patrolling of the access easement. This covenant shall run with the land.
If the plat is a condominium or includes common ownership include:
We hereby set aside Tract x as a common area for the purpose of access to a public way and for parking and loading for Tracts a through z. We further certify that the common areas shall be owned by the owners of Tracts a through z inclusive as tenants in common; and that Tracts a through z shall not be sold, transferred, or otherwise conveyed unless the instrument of conveyance for the Tract being transferred and conveyed also transfers and conveys all of that Tract owner’s interest in Tract x.
If the plat is a replat include:
I, (Name) , do hereby certify that this replat will not place any existing lot or building in violation of any applicable ordinance, code, regulation, law including but not limited to zoning, building, subdivision, and flood prevention.
I further certify that this platting of said described (New Subdivision Name) does hereby vacate the following platting:
33
(Legal description of old plat) on file at the Register of Deeds office in Book ________, page__, said plat, hereby vacated, being situated within described (New Subdivision Name) as surveyed.
Dated this ________ day of ________, 20_____.
______________________________
Name
STATE OF SOUTH DAKOTA )
: SS
COUNTY OF LINCOLN )
On this ________ day of ________, 20_____, before me, the undersigned officer, appeared (Name), known to be the person whose name is subscribed to the within instrument and acknowledged to me that he/she executed the same for the purposes therein contained.
In witness thereof, I have hereunto set my hand and official seal this ________ day of ________,
20_____.
My commission expires: ________
__________________
Notary Public, ________ County, South Dakota
AUTHORIZED OFFICIAL CERTIFICATE
I, (Name), Authorized Official of the City of Canton, do hereby certify that this plat has been approved by me or my authorized agent and that the City Finance Officer is hereby directed to certify the same thereon.
Approved this ____________ day of ______________, 20____.
_______________________________________
Authorized Official
City of Canton, South Dakota
FINANCE OFFICER’S CERTIFICATE
I, (Name), the duly appointed, qualified and acting Finance Officer of the City of Canton, South Dakota, hereby certify that the certificate of approval is true and correct including the signature thereon, and that any special assessments which are liens upon the land shown in the above plat, as shown by the records in my office, on this ________ day of ________, 20_____, have been paid in full.
_________________________
City Finance Officer
Canton, South Dakota
34
COUNTY TREASURER’S CERTIFICATE
I, Treasurer of Lincoln County, South Dakota, do hereby certify that all taxes which are liens upon any land included in the above (and the foregoing) plats, as shown by the records of my office, have been fully paid.
Dated this ________ day of ________, 20______.
_____________________________
Treasurer
Lincoln County, South Dakota
DIRECTOR OF EQUALIZATION
I, Director of Equalization of Lincoln County, South Dakota, do hereby certify that a copy of the above plat has been filed at my office.
_____________________________ Director of Equalization
Lincoln County, South Dakota
REGISTER OF DEEDS
Filed for record this ________ day of ________, 20______, at ________ o’clock ________.m., and recorded in Book ________ of Plats on page ________.
_____________________________
Register of Deeds
Lincoln County, South Dakota
Section 1403. Assurance Agreement For
________
(Legal Description)
THIS IS AN AGREEMENT made as of ________ (DATE), between the City of Canton, South Dakota (CITY), ________ (OWNER), and ________ (DEVELOPER). OWNER and DEVELOPER intend to make public and private improvements in order to develop ________ (DEVELOPMENT NAME).
OWNER, DEVELOPER, AND CITY, in consideration of their mutual covenants herein, agree in respect to the construction and acceptance of the improvements for the DEVELOPMENT as set forth below.
OWNER and DEVELOPER shall:
1. Construct and/or pay for the improvements required for the DEVELOPMENT in the Subdivision Ordinance, the Engineering Design Standards Manual for Public Improvements, and the Design Standard Plates of the City of Canton in accordance with the plans and specifications as filed with the
35
City Engineer.
2. Complete all required improvements no later than two years after acquiring a construction permit, but no later than three years after filing of the plat. Time extensions may be granted by the City Engineer.
3. Pay all costs attributed to this land when and if the City makes a final determination as to the appropriate costs for any detention ponds benefiting this land.
4. File this Assurance Agreement with the plat in the office of the County Register of Deeds.
Improvements Required and Method of Payment (Owner/Developer—D, Special Assessment— SA, Not Required—NR):
Improvements Required Method of Payment Comments
STREETS
Grading and Graveling ________ ________
Curb and Gutter ________ ________
Paving ________ ________
Other ________ ________
UTILITIES
Street Lighting ________ ________
Water System ________ ________
Sanitary Sewer System ________ ________
DRAINAGE
Storm Sewer ________ ________
Drainageways ________ ________
OTHER
Lot Grading ________ ________
CITY shall, upon satisfactory completion of DEVELOPMENT, including any and all warranty periods, accept and maintain all public improvements. Final acceptance of all improvements will be made upon final inspection and acceptance by the CITY.
Upon written notice, the City Engineer and the Authorized Official may suspend or revoke any active City permits and/or deny issuance of further City permits or City inspections within any phase of subdivision development if utility infrastructure improvements within that phase of subdivision development have not been extended to the adjacent property, and development of that adjacent property is restricted.
Should the OWNER and/or DEVELOPER fail to fully complete the required improvements within the time or extensions there of, of this Assurance Agreement, the CITY may complete any unfinished required improvements. All costs to the CITY related to the completion of any unfinished required improvements will be billed to the OWNER and/or DEVELOPER. Should the OWNER and/or DEVELOPER fail to pay for these improvements, the responsibility for payment shall fall to the abutting property which will be assessed for such improvements.
This Assurance Agreement is given for the benefit of the CITY and the purchasers of lots in the DEVELOPMENT.
36
_________________________ _________________________
Mayor Owner
ATTEST:
_________________
City Finance Officer
STATE OF SOUTH DAKOTA )
: SS
COUNTY OF ________ )
On this ________ day of ________ 20_____, before me, the undersigned officer, personally appeared ________, known to me or satisfactorily proven to be the person whose name is subscribed to the within instrument, and acknowledged that he/she executed the same for the purposes therein contained.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I hereunto set my hand and official seal.
______________________
Notary Public/South Dakota
My Commission expires: ___________
_____________________
Developer
STATE OF SOUTH DAKOTA )
: SS
COUNTY OF ________ )
On this ________ day of ________ 20_____, before me, the undersigned officer, personally appeared ________, known to me or satisfactorily proven to be the person whose name is subscribed to the within instrument, and acknowledged that he/she executed the same for the purposes therein contained.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I hereunto set my hand and official seal.
______________________
Notary Public/South Dakota
My Commission expires: ___________
37
ARTICLE 15: DEFINITIONS
Access Easement. An easement granting the perpetual right of abutting property owners to use a designated portion of property for common ingress and/or egress purposes. The easement area shall be maintained by the abutting property owners. The easement is not to be considered required frontage.
Alley. A public or private right-of-way which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property.
Arterial. A main traffic artery, more or less continuous across the City, which acts as a principal connecting street with state and federal highways and includes each street designated as an arterial street on the Major Street Plan.
Assurance Agreement. A contract entered into by the developer and the City by which the developer promises to complete the required public improvements within the subdivision within a specified time period following final subdivision plat approval.
Authorized Official. The person, officer, or official and his authorized representative, whom the City Commission has designated as its agent for the administration of these regulations.
Basement. Any story located below the main floor.
Block. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways, or boundary lines of municipalities.
Building. Any structure having a roof, supported by columns or walls, for shelter or enclosure of persons or property.
City. The City of Canton, South Dakota.
Collector. A street which carries traffic from local streets/roads to arterial streets or highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation in such development.
Common Areas. Common areas, as used in this ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires and unless otherwise provided in the master deed or lease, includes:
a. The land whether fee simple or leased on which the building or buildings stand;
b. The land which is used to access the building or buildings;
c. The foundations, main walls, roofs, halls, lobbies, stairways, and entrances and exits and communication ways;
d. The basements, flat roofs, yards, gardens, recreation facilities, and parking areas, unless otherwise provided or stipulated;
e. The premises for the lodging of janitors or persons in charge of the building or buildings, except as otherwise provided or stipulated;
38
f. The compartments or installations of central services such as power, light, gas, cold and hot water, refrigeration, reservoirs, water tanks, pumps, and the like;
g. The elevators, garbage incinerators, and in general all devices or installations existing for common use; and
h. All other elements of the property rationally of common use or necessary to its existence, upkeep, and safety. [SDCL 43-15A-5]
Comprehensive Development Plan. Any legally adopted part or element of the comprehensive plan of the City of Canton.
Concept Plan. A concept plan is a basic plan that is preparatory to the preliminary plan.
Condominium. A condominium includes separate interest in common areas and other portions of real property.
Contractor. The person who contracts with an individual or the developer to construct a building or structure on a parcel of land.
Cul-de-Sac. A local street with only one outlet having an appropriate terminal for safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
Dedicated. A grant of land to the public for their perpetual use.
Developer. The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or its authorized agent who shall have express written authority to act on behalf of the owner. Consent shall be required from the legal owner of the premises.
Double Frontage. A lot which abuts a road on two opposite sides (not a corner lot).
Easement. Authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of the property. An easement is also a means to acquire a legal right for a specific use of land owned by others.
Engineering Design Standards. The Engineering Design Standards for public improvements of the City of Canton.
Expressway. A principal traffic artery, serving the major centers of activity, the highest traffic volume corridors and the longest trip desired, with partially or fully controlled access.
Development Engineering Plan. The development engineering plan shall address the engineering aspects of topography and infrastructure.
Frontage Road. A street used only for access to abutting property where there will be constructed an expressway or arterial street.
Homeowners Association. An association or organization, whether or not incorporated, which operates under and pursuant to recorded covenants or deed restrictions through which each owner or a portion of a subdivision—be it a lot, parcel site, unit plot, condominium, or any other interest—is automatically a member
39
or assessment for a prorated share of expense of the association which may become a lien against the lot, parcel, unit, condominium, or other interest or member.
Local Street. A street intended to provide access to other streets from individual properties and to provide right-of-way beneath it for various utilities but not intended to be used for through traffic.
Lot. A tract, plot, or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building development.
Lot of Record. A plat that has been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement), but not including an unfinished crawl space used for access.
Main Floor. The lowest story in which more than six feet lies above grade for more than 50 percent of the perimeter or in which any point is more than 12 feet above grade.
Major Drainageway. The main corridor for storm water flow through developments. Major drainageways are identified as intermittent streams on USGS quadrangle maps, or as otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
Major Street Plan. The street plan adopted as part of the Comprehensive Plan.
Minor Plat. Any plat containing not more than three (3) lots fronting on an existing street that meets all standards of Section 204.
Owner. The record owners of real property in fee simple including any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any other legal entity having legal title to the land sought to be subdivided.
Parcel. Any contiguous quantity of land in the possession of, owned by, or recorded as the property of the same claimant, person, or company.
Plat. A map, or representation on paper or transferable to paper (e.g., electronic) of a piece of land subdivided into lots, parcels, tracts or blocks, including streets/roads, commons, and public grounds, if any, all drawn to scale and complete with all irrevocable offers of dedication.
Preliminary Subdivision Plan. The preliminary subdivision plan shall address the preliminary subdivision plan’s internal street network and associated lot and block layout and the relationship of proposed zoning and land use.
Private Street/Road. A roadway that has not been dedicated for public use, but rather reserved by platting of a lot or by a private easement. The private street or road shall be owned and maintained by the property owners which it serves. The plat shall have the owner’s certificate regarding the lot’s “Private Maintenance of Facilities.”
Replats. The adjustment and/or vacation of property lines which reallocates or consolidates land area of contiguous lots or parcels, provided that the adjustment or vacation of property lines, sites, or other divisions of land under stated conditions of this subdivision ordinance.
40
Right-of-Way. A strip of land occupied by a street, railroad, pedestrian walkways or other special use. The use of the term right-of-way for platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or area of such lots or parcels.
Setback. That line that is the required minimum distance from any lot line that establishes the area within which the principal structure must be created or placed.
Structures. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, walls, fences and signs.
Subdivider. A person who prepares or causes to be prepared a subdivision plat.
Subdivision. The division or redivision of land into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, sites, condominiums, or divisions for the purpose of sale, lease, or transfer of ownership, except as provided in Section 204-Subdivision Plan Exemptions – Minor Plat and Section 205-Plat Exemptions
Substantial Build-Out. A subdivision in which at least ninety percent of the individual lots or ninety percent of the real property within the approved subdivision has been developed by the completion of planned vertical and horizontal construction and the remaining property has been permanently stabilized.
