LEAD, SOUTH DAKOTA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2019 S-7 Supplement is current with
legislation passed through December 31, 2018
Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CITY OFFICIALS
OF
THE CITY OF LEAD, SOUTH DAKOTA
 
ELECTED OFFICIALS
Mayor                                Ron Everett
Commissioner                         Colin Greenfield
Commissioner                         Don Mack
Commissioner                         Joel Edgar
Commissioner                         David Vardiman
CITY STAFF
City Administrator                   Mike Stahl
Public Works Administrator           John Bunch
Public Safety Administrator          John Wainman, Jr.
City Utilities Superintendent        Roger Thomas
Buildings and Public Health Official Dennis Schumacher
City Attorney                        Tim Johns
Finance Officer                      Billie Jo Ryan
Head Librarian                       Cyndie Harlan
City Engineer                        Interstate Engineering
Fire Chief                           Tim Eggers
 
Adopting Ordinance
ORDINANCE #1001-10
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF LEAD, SOUTH DAKOTA;
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF
ORDINANCES.
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the City of Lead are
inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in form and substance
for the complete preservation of the public peace, health, safety and general
welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of its affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of South Dakota empower and
authorize the City of Lead to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any
existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published
and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, the City Commission of the City of Lead has authorized a general
compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the City of Lead of
a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinance in book form;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF LEAD:
Section 1.   The general ordinances of the City of Lead as revised, amended,
restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and shall
constitute the “Code of Ordinances of the City of Lead.”
Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following Titles:
TITLE I   GENERAL PROVISIONS
TITLE III   ADMINISTRATION
TITLE V   PUBLIC WORKS
TITLE VII   TRAFFIC CODE
TITLE IX   GENERAL REGULATIONS
TITLE XI   BUSINESS REGULATIONS
TITLE XIII   GENERAL OFFENSES
TITLE XV   LAND USAGE
Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code of Ordinances.
Section 4.   Such Code of Ordinances shall be deemed published as of the day of
its adoption and approval by the City Commission of the City of Lead.
Section 5.   Such Code of Ordinances shall be presumptive evidence in all
courts and places of the ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and
regulations therein contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is
properly signed, attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings
and notices thereof as required by law have been given.
Those voting aye:
Those voting nay: 
Motion carried.
Dated this 18th Day of October, 2010
________________________________________
Tom Nelson
City of Lead, Mayor
ATTEST:
________________________________________
Mike Stahl
City of Lead, Administrator
(Seal)
First Reading:      October 18, 2010
Second Reading:   November 1, 2010
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      Chapter
         
10.   GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Rules of interpretation
   
10.03   Captions
   
10.04   Definitions
   
10.05   Severability
   
10.06   Reference to other sections
   
10.07   Reference to offices
   
10.08   Errors and omissions
   
10.09   Powers to enact, amend or repeal ordinances and resolutions; generally
   
10.10   Ordinances repealed
   
10.11   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.12   Repeal or modification of an ordinance
   
10.13   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.14   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.15   Corporate limits
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.
   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature, as revised, codified,
rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component codes, titles, chapters
and sections, shall be known and designated as the "Lead city code", for which
designation "code of ordinances" or "codified ordinances" may be substituted.
Code title, chapter and section headings do not constitute any part of the law
as contained in the code.
§ 10.02  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication
required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of
state law.
   (B)   Specific rules of interpretation. The construction of all ordinances
shall be by the following rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant
to the intent of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:
      (1)   Acts by assistants. When a statute, code provisions or ordinance
requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as
the principal, that requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the
act by an authorized agent or deputy.
      (2)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
      (3)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
General terms descriptive of an officer, act, proceeding or thing shall have
reference to a municipality concerned or affected.
Statutory reference:
   General terms descriptive of an officer, act, proceeding and the like, see
SDCL § 9-1-1
§ 10.03  CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.04  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code of ordinances, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY.  The City of Lead, County of Lawrence, State of South Dakota.
   CODE.  The Code of Ordinances of the City of Lead, including each and every
section thereof.
   COMMISSION.  Lead City Commission, constituting the governing body of the
city.
   COMPUTATION OF TIME.  The time in which any act provided by this code or
other ordinance is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and
including the last, unless the last is a holiday and then it also is excluded.
Fractions of a day are to be disregarded in computations which include more
than one day, and involve no questions of priority.
   COUNTY.  Lawrence County, South Dakota.
(SDCL § 9-1-1)
   DUTIES PERFORMED BY AGENTS.  Wherever in this code any act is required to be
done by an officer in the line of his or her general duties, or by a department
head or inspector, the same shall be construed to permit that person; provided
that the agent or subordinate is duly authorized and duly qualified to perform
that act. The rule shall apply also to license holders, where that act is not
otherwise required to be performed personally by that person, either by
specific law or by the nature of that act.
   ELECTOR(S) or QUALIFIED ELECTOR(S).  Voter(s).
(SDCL § 9-1-1)
   GOVERNING BODY.  The City Commission of the City of Lead, South Dakota.
(SDCL § 9-1-1)
   JOINT AUTHORITY.  Giving authority to a majority of officers or other
persons, unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the
authority.
   LOT.  Includes PARCEL or TRACT OF LAND.
(SDCL § 9-1-1)
   MONTH.  A calendar month.
   MUNICIPALITY or MUNICIPAL CORPORATION.  All cities and towns organized under
the laws of this state but shall not include any other political subdivisions.
(SDCL § 9-1-1)
   OATH.  Includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed".
   OFFICERS and EMPLOYEES.  Whenever reference is made in this code by title
only, shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of Lead"
and shall be taken to mean the officer or employee of this city having the
title mentioned or performing the duties indicated.
   OR and AND.  "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or" if the sense
requires it.
   ORDINANCE.  A permanent legislative act within the limits of its powers of
the governing body of a municipality.
(SDCL § 9-19-1)
   OWNER.  As used in this code relating to local improvements, the grantee in
the last deed of conveyance of any lot or parcel of land recorded in the office
of the Register of Deeds of the county or counties in which the municipality is
located, or his or her heirs or successors.
(SDCL § 9-1-1)
   PERSON.  Extends and is applied to associations, corporations, firms,
partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.
   PUBLICATION.
      (1)   Any requirement for publication shall mean publication in the
official newspaper of the municipality concerned or affected, if any; but if
none, then, in a legal newspaper published in the municipality, if any; but if
none, then, in any legal newspaper which serves the municipality, except as
provided by SDCL § 9-13-13.
      (2)   Personal service, either within or without the state upon the
person affected thereby by delivery of a copy of a notice required to be
published shall be equivalent to the required PUBLICATION.
(SDCL § 9-1-1)
   RESOLUTION.  Any determination that, decision or direction of the governing
body of a municipality of a temporary or special character for the purpose of
initiating effecting, or carrying out its administrative duties and functions.
(SDCL § 9-19-1)
   SDCL.  South Dakota Codified Laws.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when a person cannot write.
   STATE.  The State of South Dakota.
   STREET.  Includes AVENUE.
(SDCL § 9-1-1)
   VARIATIONS IN PUNCTUATION, TYPOGRAPHICAL ERRORS AND THE LIKE.  No variation
in punctuation, either formal or informal, consistent or not, shall affect the
validity of this code, nor shall obvious or apparent defects in spelling or
typography be construed as to invalidate any portions hereof, so long as the
purpose and intent of the section is clear.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING.  Includes any representation of words, letters or
figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
   YEAR.  A calendar year.
(Prior Code, § 1-200)
§ 10.05  SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.06  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.07  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this local government exercising the powers,
duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer
of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.08  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.09  POWERS TO ENACT, AMEND OR REPEAL ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS;
GENERALLY.
   Every municipality may enact, make, amend, revise or repeal all the
ordinances, resolutions and regulations as may be proper and necessary to carry
into effect the powers granted thereto.
§ 10.10  ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.11  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.12  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF AN ORDINANCE.
   (A)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.13  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section. In addition to this
indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a caption or
title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.14  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.15  CORPORATE LIMITS.
   The corporate limits of the city are hereby declared to be such as have
heretofore and hereafter and legally established and amended by law and
ordinances of the city as shown on the official map thereof on file in the
office of the City Finance Officer, which map is incorporated into this code by
reference, and adopted as the official map showing the boundaries and limits of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 1-300)
§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.
   Municipalities are authorized to provide for the punishment of each
violation of an ordinance, resolution or regulation with a charge of a Class II
misdemeanor (SDCL § 22-6-2(2)).
(Ord. 1038-15, passed 8-3-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Maximum penalty, see SDCL § 9-19-3
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      Chapter
         
30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
31.   MAYOR; LEAD CITY COMMISSION
         
32.   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
         
33.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
         
34.   FINANCE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 30:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
30.01   Ward boundaries; voting precinct
   
30.02   City seal
   
30.03   Municipal retirement system
   
30.04   Deadlines for submittals of documents to commission
   
30.05   Fireman Pension Fund and Board
§ 30.01  WARD BOUNDARIES; VOTING PRECINCT.
   The city hereby designates the municipal boundaries of the city as the one
voting precinct.
(Prior Code, § 2-100)  (Ord. 957-04, passed 6-14-2004)
§ 30.02  CITY SEAL.
   (A)   Description. The seal of the city shall have thereon "City of Lead,
South Dakota, Seal, Incorporated".
(Prior Code, § 2-400)
   (B)   Custody. The city seal shall be and remain in the custody of the City
Finance Officer.
(Prior Code, § 2-401)
   (C)   Use. The seal of the city shall be affixed by the City Finance Officer
to all ordinances passed by the Commission, bonds and any and all instruments
to which the seal shall be attached as required by statute.
(Prior Code, § 2-402)
§ 30.03  MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
   (A)   The city shall be a participating municipality in the state retirement
system, as provided by law, for the purpose of including police officers and/or
general employees in its employ under the state municipal retirement system,
hereinafter called the retirement system.
   (B)   The effective date of the city's participation in the retirement
system is January 1, 1966, as provided by the state retirement system.
   (C)   All police officers in the employ of the city as of the above date
shall be included in the membership of the retirement system; and all persons
who thereafter become police officers in the employ of the city shall be
included in the membership of the retirement system.
   (D)   All general employees of the city as of the above date shall be
included in the membership of the retirement system; and all persons who
thereafter become general employees of the city shall be included in the
membership of the retirement system.
   (E)   The City Finance Officer is hereby authorized and directed to pay to
the State Treasurer, the appropriate city contributions and salaries paid
police officers and all general employees of the city out of the General Fund
of the city for the state municipal retirement system; the city contributions
to be paid to the retirement system concurrent with the contributions paid to
the retirement system by the city employee members in the retirement system;
and same to be remitted to the retirement system in a manner and form as the
Board of Trustees of the state municipal retirement system from time to time
prescribes.
(Prior Code, § 2-801)
§ 30.04  DEADLINES FOR SUBMITTALS OF DOCUMENTS TO COMMISSION.
   All documents that require review by any city commission must be received by
the city no less than ten calendar days prior to the scheduled meeting of the
respective commission.
(Ord. 981-07, passed 12-3-2007)
§ 30.05  FIREMAN PENSION FUND AND BOARD.
   (A)   The City of Lead Fireman Pension Fund as previously established in
Ordinance 475 and Ordinance 484 is hereby continued for the purpose of
providing pensions and death benefits for firemen of the city and their
eligible beneficiaries.  All of the provisions of Ordinances 475 and 484, and
amendments thereto, are hereby incorporated in this section by reference
thereto and are otherwise not affected by the revision of these ordinances.
   (B)   The Firemen's Pension Board shall consist of three Trustees as
follows:
      (1)   One member of the Lead City Commission to be selected by the
Commission to serve at the pleasure of the Commission;
      (2)   One member of the Pension Fund to be elected by the members of the
Pension Fund according to the rules and regulations, as the Lead City
Commission from time to time may adopt. The term of office shall be three
years; and
      (3)   A citizen who is a resident and tax payer of the city and who is
not an officer or employee of the city, to be appointed by the Trustees
provided in divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section. The term of office of
the citizen shall be three years.
(Prior Code, § 2-800)  (Ord. 964-04, passed 10-25-2004)
CHAPTER 31:  MAYOR; LEAD CITY COMMISSION
Section
   
31.01   Election and duties
   
31.02   Regular meetings
   
31.03   Special meetings
   
31.04   Adjourned meetings
   
31.05   Meetings open to public
   
31.06   Agenda
   
31.07   Presiding officer and organization
   
31.08   Executive sessions
   
31.09   Presiding officer
   
31.10   Roll call
   
31.11   Quorum
   
31.12   Compel attendance
   
31.13   Order of business
   
31.14   Reading of minutes
   
31.15   Mayor's vote; duties generally
   
31.16   Silence as affirmative vote
   
31.17   Committees
   
31.18   Adjournment
   
31.19   Rules of order
§ 31.01  ELECTION AND DUTIES.
   The elective officers of the city shall consist of the Mayor and the four
Commissioners elected at large for a three-year term, and shall perform the
duties as prescribed within the laws of the state and the specific duties as
prescribed by the ordinance of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-200)  (Ord. 776-86, passed 8-11-1986)
§ 31.02  REGULAR MEETINGS.
   Regular meetings of the Lead City Commission shall be held on the first and
third Mondays of each month at the City Hall at the time set by the Lead City
Commission; provided, however, that when the fixed time for any regular meeting
of the Lead City Commission falls upon a day designated by law as a legal
holiday or national holiday, the meeting shall be held later that same week or
moved to the next regularly scheduled meeting.
(Prior Code, § 2-201)  (Ord. 956-04, passed 3-29-2004; Ord. 997-09, passed 12-
7-2009; Ord. 1048-16, passed 9-19-2016)
§ 31.03  SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   The Mayor shall call special meetings of the Lead City Commission whenever
in his or her opinion the public business shall require it, or at the express
written request of any two Commissioners. Written notice of the special meeting
shall be given either personally or by notice left at his or her place of
residence, to each Commissioner at least 24 hours before the special meeting is
held, unless a waiver of the notice is obtained either before or at the special
meeting. The notice required under this section shall state the date and the
hour of the meeting and the purpose for which the meeting is called, and no
business shall be transacted thereat, except as is stated in the notice.
(Prior Code, § 2-202)
§ 31.04  ADJOURNED MEETINGS.
   The Lead City Commission may adjourn a meeting to a later day, in which
event the adjourned meeting shall be considered as a part of the first meeting.
(Prior Code, § 2-203)
§ 31.05  MEETINGS OPEN TO PUBLIC.
   (A)   The meetings of the Commissioners shall be open to the public.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for anyone not a member of the Lead City
Commission to make any disturbance or interfere in any way with the
deliberations of the Commissioners at the meetings and no person, not a member
of the Commissioners, shall address or deliver any remarks to the Commissioners
at the meetings without first asking for the privilege of doing so.
(Prior Code, § 2-204)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 31.06  AGENDA.
   All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract documents or
other matters to be submitted to the City Commission, shall be delivered to the
City Finance Office by the Friday preceding the City Commission meeting. The
City Finance Office shall immediately arrange a list of the matters according,
to the order of business and furnish each member of the Lead City Commission
and the Mayor with a copy of the same prior to the Commissioners’ meeting and
as far in advance of the meeting as time for preparation will permit.
(Prior Code, § 2-205)  (Ord. 1048-16, passed 9-19-2016)
§ 31.07  PRESIDING OFFICER AND ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The presiding officer of the Commission shall be the Mayor.
   (B)   In case the Mayor is unable to perform the duties of his or her office
by reason of absence or sickness, the Board shall appoint by a majority vote of
all members thereof one of its members to act in his or her stead, whose
official designation shall be "acting President of the Lead City Commission".
The Commissioner so appointed shall be invested with all the powers and shall
perform all the duties of the Mayor during that absence or sickness. In case of
a vacancy in the Office of Mayor, the Lead City Commission  shall appoint by a
majority vote of all the members thereof one of its number as acting Mayor, who
shall be invested with all the powers and shall perform all the duties of the
Mayor, until the election of a Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 2-206)
§ 31.08  EXECUTIVE SESSIONS.
   From time to time, the Lead City Commission may, by motion, close for
executive sessions for purposes permitted by law. Thereafter, the Lead City
Commission shall reconvene in open meeting to take actions as may be
appropriate.
(Prior Code, § 2-207)
§ 31.09  PRESIDING OFFICER.
   The Mayor, or in his or her absence, the presiding Commissioner, shall take
the chair at precisely the hour appointed for the meeting, and shall
immediately call the Lead City Commission to order.
(Prior Code, § 2-208)
§ 31.10  ROLL CALL.
   Before proceeding with the business of the Lead City Commission, the City
Finance Officer shall call the roll of the members, and the names of those
present shall be entered in the minutes.
(Prior Code, § 2-209)
§ 31.11  QUORUM.
   A majority of all the members elected to the Lead City Commission shall
constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting of the Lead City
Commission. In the absence of a quorum, presiding officer shall, at the request
of any two members present, compel the attendance of absent members.
(Prior Code, § 2-210)
§ 31.12  COMPEL ATTENDANCE.
   (A)   The Lead City Commission may compel the presence of absent members by
sending the Chief of Police or any police officer to require their attendance.
   (B)   If any member refuses to attend after being notified, he or she shall
state his or her reasons therefor to the Lead City Commission at its next
meeting and if the Lead City Commission (excluding the member whose refusal to
attend is under consideration) unanimously deems the reasons insufficient in
light of all circumstances, the Lead City Commission may impose the penalty
which in its discretion the case warrants.
   (C)   Any member of the Lead City Commission shall be considered in
malfeasance of office when he or she fails to attend and participate in
meetings of the Board without being excused. Non-excused absences shall be
punishable by withholding of payment.
(Prior Code, § 2-211)  (Ord. 883-96, passed 3-11-1996)
§ 31.13  ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   All meetings of the Lead City Commission shall be open to the public.
   (B)   Promptly at the hour set by law on the day of each regular meeting,
the members of the Lead City Commission, City Administrator, City Finance
Officer and the Mayor shall take their regular station in the Commission
chambers, and the business of the Lead City Commission shall be taken up for
consideration.
(Prior Code, § 2-212)  (Ord. 1048-16, passed 9-19-2016)
§ 31.14  READING OF MINUTES.
   Unless the reading of minutes of the Lead City Commission meeting is
requested by a member of the Lead City Commission, the minutes may be approved
without reading if a synopsis thereof has previously been furnished to each
member.
(Prior Code, § 2-213)
§ 31.15  MAYOR'S VOTE; DUTIES GENERALLY.
   (A)   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Lead City Commission
and shall be entitled to vote on any questions appearing before the Lead City
Commission upon which a vote is required.
   (B)   He or she shall preserve order, decide all questions of order, subject
to an appeal from the Lead City Commission.
(Prior Code, § 2-214)
§ 31.16  SILENCE AS AFFIRMATIVE VOTE.
   Unless a member of the Lead City Commission states that he or she is not
voting, his or her silence shall be recorded as an affirmative vote.
(Prior Code, § 2-215)
§ 31.17  COMMITTEES.
   The Mayor shall appoint from time to time committees of the Lead City
Commission as may be necessary for the transaction of business and the
administration of the affairs of the city.
(Prior Code, § 2-216)
§ 31.18  ADJOURNMENT.
   A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and without debate.
(Prior Code, § 2-217)
§ 31.19  RULES OF ORDER.
   Robert's Rule of Order, Newly Revised, Copyright 1970, published by Scott,
Foresman and Company, shall govern the Lead City Commission in its deliberation
in cases not otherwise provided for by ordinance, rule or regulation.
(Prior Code, § 2-218)
CHAPTER 32:  OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
   
32.01   Mayor's duties generally
   
32.02   Appointive officers
   
32.03   Oath of officer
   
32.04   Bonds
   
32.05   (Reserved)
   
32.06   Approval of Lead City Commission
   
32.07   Administrative policy and procedures
   
32.08   Personnel policy and procedures
   
32.09   City Finance Officer's report
   
32.10   Extraterritorial assistance
   
32.11   City Administrator
   
32.12   Public Works Administrator
   
32.13   Public Safety Administrator/Chief of Police
§ 32.01  MAYOR'S DUTIES GENERALLY.
   The Mayor shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the
city government, shall enforce the laws of the city and require the faithful
performance of all administrative duties.
   (A)   Duties:
      (1)   Appoint, dismiss and the like. Appoint competent, qualified
officers and employees to the administrative service and shall have the power
to dismiss, suspend and discipline, in accordance with the personnel system
under his or her control. He or she shall also have the power to authorize a
department head or officer responsible to him or her to appoint and remove
subordinates serving under that department head or officer;
      (2)   Appoint to acting capacity. Designate himself or herself or some
other officer or employee to perform the service under his or her control which
is vacant or which lacks administration due to the absence or disability of the
incumbent;
      (3)   Annual report. Prepare and present to the Lead City Commission an
annual report of the city's affairs, including a summary of reports of
department heads, and other reports as the Lead City Commission shall require;
and
      (4)   Budget report. Assemble estimates of the financial needs and
resources of the city for each ensuing year, and shall prepare a program of
activities within the financial power of the city, embodying in it a budget
document with proper supporting schedules and analyses.
   (B)   Powers:
      (1)   Assign according to classification. Have the power to assign any
employee or the city to any department or branch thereof requiring services
appropriate to the personnel system classification of the employee so assigned;
      (2)   Approval. All appointments and dismissals should be subject to Lead
City Commission approval;
      (3)   Overrule officials. Have the power to set aside any action taken by
a department head and may supersede him or her in the functions of his or her
office;
      (4)   Delegate duties. Have the power to direct any department, division
or bureau to perform the work for any other department, division or bureau;
      (5)   Appoint administrative committees. Have the power to designate from
the administrative service the committees and the officers thereof as he or she
shall find necessary for the proper consideration of administrative problems.
The committees shall meet at the request of the Chief Administrator and shall
make recommendation on matters referred to them as they shall find necessary
for the best interests of the city; and
      (6)   Appear before Lead City Commission. Have the power to appear before
and address the Lead City Commission at any meeting.
(Prior Code, § 2-300)
§ 32.02  APPOINTIVE OFFICERS.
   The appointive officers of the city shall be a City Administrator, Public
Works Administrator, Public Safety Administrator/Chief of Police, Building
Official, City Finance Officer, City Librarian, City Attorney, City Engineer,
City Newspaper, City Depositories and other officers as may be necessary for
the administration of city business and affairs. All the appointments shall be
made as provided for by state law and this code of ordinances and unless
otherwise provided for by ordinance shall be made at the first meeting in May
of each year and shall be for a term of one year, or until their successors are
duly appointed and qualified.
(Prior Code, § 2-301)  (Ord. 1009-12, passed 7-2-2012; Ord. 1033-15, passed 4-
6-2015)
§ 32.03  OATH OF OFFICER.
   (A)   Persons required to take oath of office. Each of the following
officers and department heads and other officers as may be appointed shall be
required to take an oath of office before entering upon the discharge of his or
her duties, which oath shall be subscribed by the person taking it and shall be
filed in the City Finance office:
      (1)   Officers. The Mayor, Commissioners, officers and department heads;
      (2)   Police officers. Every member of the Department of Police
(including any private, special, temporary or substitute police officers which
a city might find it necessary to appoint); and
   (B)   Form of oath for the chief administrator and officers.
STATE OF SOUTH DAKOTA   )
COUNTY OF LAWRENCE      ) ss
CITY OF LEAD            )
   I, _______________________, do solemnly swear that I will support the
Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State of South
Dakota, and the Charter and Ordinances of the City of Lead; that I will
faithfully, honestly and impartially discharge my duties as _______________,
during my continuance therein; that I am not directly or indirectly pecuniarily
interested in any public service corporation engaged in business in the City of
Lead, or in any person or corporation having contracts with said city, so help
me God.
Subscribed and sworn to before me this ________ day of _____________________,
20_____.
________________________________
City Finance Officer
   (C)   Form of oath for members of Police Department.
STATE OF SOUTH DAKOTA   )
COUNTY OF LAWRENCE      ) ss
CITY OF LEAD            )
   I,______, do solemnly swear that: I will support the Constitution of the
United States, the Constitution of the State of South Dakota, and the Charter
and Ordinances of the City of Lead; and that I will to the best of my ability,
faithfully perform the duties of the office of ___________________ during my
continuance therein, so help me God.
__________________________________
(Prior Code, § 2-302) (Ord. 1009-12, passed 7-2-2012)
§ 32.04  BONDS.
   Bonds of city officials, unless otherwise provided for by state law, shall
be as fixed annually at the May meeting by the Lead City Commission.
(Prior Code, § 2-303)
§ 32.05  (RESERVED).
§ 32.06  APPROVAL OF LEAD CITY COMMISSION.
   All employees must be approved by the Lead City Commission. The approval
shall include the wage and starting date of each employee.
(Prior Code, § 2-305)  (Ord. 1009-12, passed 7-2-2012)
§ 32.07  ADMINISTRATIVE POLICY AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Officers. Each officer shall perform all duties required of his or her
office by state law, the Charter, this code and ordinances of the city, and
other duties not in conflict therewith as may be required by the Lead City
Commission.
   (B)   Department heads.
      (1)   Department head, defined. Any elected or appointed person other
than the Mayor or Commissioners who has direct supervision and responsibility
for personnel records, funds, maintenance and service to be performed by a
municipal department.
      (2)   Responsibility to Lead City Commission. The department heads shall
be immediately responsible to the Lead City Commission for the effective
administration of their respective departments and all activities assigned
thereto.
      (3)   Inaugurate sound practices. The department heads shall keep
informed as to the latest practices in their particular field.
      (4)   Report to administrator. The department heads shall submit reports
of the activities of their departments to the Lead City Commission as may be
required by these ordinances or at the special request of the Lead City
Commission.
      (5)   Maintain records. The department heads shall establish and maintain
a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to
furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities
and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the Lead City Commission.
      (6)   Authority over employees. The department heads shall have power,
when authorized by the Lead City Commission, to appoint and remove, subject to
the personnel policy regulations, all subordinates under them.
      (7)   Maintain equipment. The department heads shall be responsible for
the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in their
departments.
   (C)   Departments. Each department shall furnish, upon the direction of the
Lead City Commission, any other department service, labor and materials as may
be requisitioned by the head of that department, and as its own facilities
permit, through the same procedure and subject to the same audit and control as
other expenditures are incurred.
(Prior Code, § 2-310)
§ 32.08  PERSONNEL POLICY AND PROCEDURES.
   All personnel policies and procedures governing conditions of employment by
the city, except as otherwise provided in the code of ordinances, shall be
contained in a manual entitled "Personnel, Policies and Procedures" adopted by
the Lead City Commission.
(Prior Code, § 2-320)
§ 32.09  CITY FINANCE OFFICER'S REPORT.
   (A)   It is hereby made the duty of the City Finance Officer's to make a
report to the Lead City Commission monthly showing the financial condition of
the several funds, and to give other information relating thereto as may be in
his or her possession.
   (B)   The monthly report shall be made to the Lead City Commission at a
regularly scheduled meeting.
(Prior Code, § 2-340)
§ 32.10  EXTRATERRITORIAL ASSISTANCE.
   (A)   The Police Department is directed to give assistance to law enforcing
agencies in neighboring jurisdictions.
   (B)   In times of emergencies, whenever they are requested by the County
Sheriff to do so, for purposes of giving emergency assistance, the police
officers on duty shall be authorized to drive the city police vehicle to the
scene of the emergency, and he or she shall take whatever action is necessary
in giving assistance.
(Prior Code, § 2-350)
§ 32.11  CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Creation of Office. The Office of City Administrator is hereby
created. The City Administrator shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of
the city and shall be responsible to the Lead City Commission for the proper
administration of all affairs of the city.
   (B)   Appointment of City Administrator. The City Administrator shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the consent of a majority of the Lead City
Commission for a term of one year or until his or her successor is duly
appointed and qualified.
   (C)   Powers and duties of City Administrator. The City Administrator shall
perform all duties listed herein and have all powers as provided by law and by
resolution or motion of the Lead City Commission.
      (1)   The duties of the City Administrator are as follows:
         (a)   Recommend to the Mayor and governing body the appointment, and
if necessary, for the good of the city, the removal of department heads. Upon
the recommendation of the department head, and if necessary, for the good of
the city, remove any other employee;
         (b)   Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the governing body
together with a message describing the important features and be responsible
for its administration after adoption;
         (c)   Prepare and submit to the governing body as of the end of the
fiscal year, a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of
the city for the preceding year;
         (d)   Keep the governing body advised of the financial condition and
future needs of the city and make recommendations as may be deemed advisable;
         (e)   Recommend to the governing body a standard schedule of pay for
each appointed office and position in the service of the city;
         (f)   Recommend to the governing body (from time to time), adoption of
measures as may be deemed necessary or expedient for the health and improvement
of administrative services;
         (g)   Consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units
under his or her jurisdiction, with approval of the governing body. The City
Administrator may be the head of one or more departments with approval of the
governing body;
         (h)   Attend all meetings of the governing body unless excused
therefrom and take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the
governing body. The City Administrator shall be entitled to notice of all
regular and special meetings of the governing body;
         (i)   Supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies and equipment
for which funds are provided in the budget. No purchase shall be made, contract
let or obligation of service incurred for any item which exceeds the current
budget appropriation by the governing body. No contract in excess of the amount
established by state law shall be let except by the governing body. The
Administrator may issue rules governing purchasing procedures within the
administrative organization, as the governing body shall approve;
         (j)   See that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced;
         (k)   Investigate the affairs of the city or any department or
division thereof. Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning
the administration of the government of the city, and in regard to service
maintained by the public utilities in the city, and see that all franchises,
permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed;
         (l)   May simultaneously hold any other appointed offices of the city
to include, but not be  limited to, the position of Municipal Finance Officer;
and
         (m)   Perform other duties as may be required by the governing body,
not inconsistent with the laws or ordinances of the municipality or state.
      (2)   Examples of work City Administrator will be required to perform:
         (a)   Attend meetings of the Lead City Commission and meetings between
the Lead City Commission and other governmental officials, business and private
citizens, act as an official representative of the city at public and
organization meetings;
         (b)   Draft correspondence including letters, proclamations, prepare
reports and research on special projects as directed;
         (c)   Maintain liaison relationships and coordinate with executive,
legislative and administrative officials at the federal, state and local
government levels and assist with review of departmental applications for
federal and state aid;
         (d)   Direct and advise department heads concerning activities and
plans for various departments. Transmit requests and recommendations from the
Lead City Commission and the Mayor to the various department heads; and
         (e)   Other duties and functions as are necessary or incidental to the
proper performance of the position of City Administrator.
   (D)   Compensation. The City Administrator shall receive compensation as the
Lead City Commission shall fix.
(Ord. 961-04, passed 10-25-2004; Ord. 1033-15, passed 4-6-2015)
§ 32.12  PUBLIC WORKS ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Creation of Office. The Office of Public Works Administrator is hereby
created. The Public Works Administrator shall be responsible for the
administration and direction of all aspects of public works to include,
streets, parks, cemeteries and public utilities.
   (B)   Appointment of Public Works Administrator. The Public Works
Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the majority
of the Lead City Commission for a one-year term or until his or her successor
is duly appointed and qualified.
   (C)   Powers and duties of Public Works Administrator. The Public Works
Administrator shall perform all duties and have all powers as provided by law
and by resolution or motion of the Lead City Commission.
(Ord. 962-04, passed 10-25-2004)
§ 32.13  PUBLIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATOR/CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   Creation of Office. The Office of Public Safety Administrator/Chief of
Police shall be responsible for the administration of all aspects of public
safety to include, the Police Department, Fire Department, ordinance and code
enforcement.
   (B)   Appointment of Public Safety Administrator/Chief of Police. The Public
Safety Administrator/Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
consent of the majority of the Lead City Commission for a one-year term or
until his or her successor is duly appointed and qualified.
   (C)   Powers and duties of Public Safety Administrator/Chief of Police. The
Public Safety Administrator/Chief of Police shall perform all duties and have
all powers as provided by law and by resolution or motion of the Lead City
Commission.
(Ord. 963-04, passed 10-25-2004)
CHAPTER 33:  CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
33.01   Parks and Recreation Board
   
33.02   Planning Commission
   
33.03   Library Board
   
33.04   Historic Commission
   
33.05   Residency requirements
§ 33.01  PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD.
   (A)   Under authority of SDCL § 9-38-90.1 and the special levy therefore
having been approved at a municipal election on June 13, 1972, there is
established a Park and Recreation Board, consisting of up to 11 members to be
appointed by the Lead City Commission each to serve five-year terms.
   (B)   As to the new members of the Board, one shall be appointed for five
years, one for four years, one for three years and thereafter each for five
years.
   (C)   The members of the Board shall be appointed on January 1, and their
term on the Board shall be determined from the appointment date. The Board
members shall receive no compensation for their services.
   (D)   The Board shall hold regular meetings at least once a month and as
many special meetings as it may deem proper. Five members shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business, but an affirmative vote of at least
four members shall be necessary to authorize any action of the Board.
   (E)   The organization, powers and duties of the Park and Recreation Board
shall be regulated by SDCL Chapter 9-38 and acts amendatory thereto.
(Prior Code, § 2-900)  (Ord. 819-90, passed 7-9-1990)
§ 33.02  PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   The official name of the Planning Commission shall be "Lead City
Planning Commission", hereafter referred to as "Commission".
   (B)   The composition of the City Planning Commission shall consist of up to
seven members appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Lead City Commission,
and to hold office as set forth by state law.
   (C)   The City Planning Commission created under and by virtue of SDCL
Chapter 11-6 shall be created, established and carry on its functions in
accordance with SDCL Chapter 11-6 and any acts amendatory thereto, and shall
have all the powers, duties and responsibilities as set forth in the statutes.
(Prior Code, § 2-901)  (Ord. 947-03, passed 3-17-2003)
§ 33.03  LIBRARY BOARD.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Library Board of Trustees, consisting of
five members to be appointed by the Mayor, one for one year, two for two years,
and two for three years, and thereafter each for three years, or until his or
her successor is appointed and confirmed. They shall receive no compensation
for their services.
   (B)   The organization, powers and duties of the Library Board of Trustees
shall be regulated by SDCL Chapter 14-1 and acts amendatory thereto and SDCL §
9-12-15.
(Prior Code, § 2-903)
§ 33.04  HISTORIC COMMISSION.
   Membership will be comprised of up to seven members to be appointed by the
Mayor and confirmed by the Lead City Commission from a list of applicants.
Every effort will be made to receive application from persons who are qualified
to serve because of professional activities, or because of academic or
experiential qualifications. However, non-professional members, who represent a
demonstrated interest, experience or knowledge in historic preservation will
also be encouraged to apply and will have equal right to serve. The Board
members shall receive no compensation for their services.
(Ord. 934-01, passed 7-16-2001; Ord. 1034-15, passed 6-15-2015; Ord. 1040-15,
passed 9-8-2015)
§ 33.05  RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS.
   To be an appointed member on any of the city organizations, as defined in
Chapter 33, the appointee must meet one of the following requirements:
   (A)   Be a resident within the city;
   (B)   Own and/or operate a business within the city; and
   (C)   Own property in the city.
(Ord. 1040-15, passed 9-8-2015)
CHAPTER 34:  FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Purpose
   
34.02   Sales tax
   
34.03   Collection
   
34.04   Exemptions from taxation
   
34.05   Use tax
   
34.06   Interpretation
   
34.07   Uses of tax
Municipal Excise Tax
   
34.20   Purpose
   
34.21   Effective date
   
34.22   Collection
   
34.23   Interpretation
Special Additional Municipal Tax
   
34.35   Purpose
   
34.36   Effective date; enactment of tax
   
34.37   Use of revenue
   
34.38   Collection
   
34.39   Interpretation
Economic Development Incentive for Housing
   
34.50   Definitions
   
34.51   Municipal real property tax rebate
   
34.52   Property tax rebate schedule and criteria
   
34.53   Property tax rebate calculation
   
34.54   Property tax rebate; two year review
 
   
34.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Mayor; Lead City Commission, see
Chapter 31
   Officers and Employees, see
Chapter 32
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide additional needed revenue for
the city by imposing a municipal retail sales and use tax pursuant to the
powers granted to the municipality by the state by SDCL § 10-52 entitled
Uniform Municipal Non-Ad Valorem Tax Law, and acts amendatory thereto.
(Prior Code, § 20-100)
§ 34.02  SALES TAX.
   There is hereby imposed a tax upon the privilege of engaging in business as
a retailer, a tax of 2% upon the gross receipts of all sales of tangible
personal property consisting of goods, wears or merchandise, sold at retail in
the city to consumers or users and upon the gross receipts of any person from
engaging or continuing in any of the following businesses or services in the
city; abstractors; accountants; architects; barbers; beauty shops; bill
collection services; blacksmith shops; car washing; dry cleaning; dyeing;
exterminators; garage and service stations; garment alterations; cleaning and
pressing; janitorial services and supplies; specialty cleaners; laundry, linen
and towel supply; membership or entrance fee for the use of a facility or for
the right to purchase tangible personal property or services; photography;
photo developing and enlarging; tire recapping; welding and all repair
services; cable television; rentals of tangible personal property except of
leases of tangible personal property between one telephone company and another
telephone company; motor vehicles leased or any other business not enumerated
in which a Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, as prepared by the
Statistical Policy Division of the Office of Management and Budget, Office of
the President together with a tax upon the sale, furnishing or service of gas,
electricity and water and upon the gross receipts from all sales of tickets or
admissions to places of amusement and athletic events and any others subject to
the Retail Sales and Service Tax, SDCL § 10-45, and acts amendatory thereto and
not enumerated herein.
(Prior Code, § 20-101)
§ 34.03  COLLECTION.
   The tax is levied pursuant to authorization granted by SDCL § 10-52 and acts
amendatory thereto and shall be collected by the State Department of Revenue in
accordance with the same rules and regulations applicable to the state sales
tax and under additional rules and regulations as the Commissioner of Revenue
of the state shall lawfully prescribe.
(Prior Code, § 20-102)
§ 34.04  EXEMPTIONS FROM TAXATION.
   In addition to gross receipts exempted by state law and therefore from tax
imposed hereunder, there are specifically exempted from the provisions of this
subchapter and from computation of the amount of tax imposed by it the
following:
   (A)   Farm machinery and irrigation equipment used exclusively for
agricultural purposes;
   (B)   Gross receipts from vending machines, including but not limited to
pinball machines, phonographs and all other mechanical devices for amusement;
   (C)   Sales of tangible personal property and taxable services to purchasers
residing or doing business outside the city provided that delivery is made to
the purchaser outside the city by common carrier or by the conveyance of the
seller or by the United States mail, and provided that the articles so
purchased and delivered are used outside the city. Receipts from sales to a
construction company of materials and supplies which are incorporated into and
become part of projects outside the city limits are exempt from Municipal Sales
and Use Tax, even if delivery is made to a truck of the construction company
within the city, and mining companies using materials in their own operations
outside the municipality shall be exempt from Municipal Sales and Use Tax on
those materials; and
   (D)   One percent of the tax shall not be applicable to parts or repairs on
machinery or equipment, which are clearly identifiable as used primarily for
agricultural purposes as tax pursuant to SDCL § 10-46E if the part replaces a
farm machinery part assigned a specific or generic part number by the
manufacturer of the farm machinery, farm machinery or equipment tax pursuant to
SDCL § 10-46E, and agricultural animal health products and medicines and gross
receipts from selling food, as defined by the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (Pub. L.
No. 95-113), codified at 7 U.S.C. § 2012(g), as amended through January 1,
1983, and rules promulgated pursuant thereto.
(Prior Code, § 20-103)
§ 34.05  USE TAX.
   In addition there is hereby imposed an excise tax on the privilege of the
use, storage and consumption within the jurisdiction of the city of tangible
personal property at the same rate as the municipal sales and service tax upon
all transactions or use, storage and consumption which are subject to the State
Use Tax Act, SDCL § 10-46, and acts amendatory thereto.
(Prior Code, § 20-104)
§ 34.06  INTERPRETATION.
   It is declared to be the intention of this subchapter and the taxes levied
hereunder that the same shall be interpreted and construed in the same manner
as all sections of the State Retail Occupational Sales and Service Act, SDCL §
10-45 and acts amendatory thereto, and the State Use Tax, SDCL § 10-46 and acts
amendatory thereto, and that this shall be considered a similar tax except for
the rate thereof to that tax.
(Prior Code, § 20-105)
§ 34.07  USES OF TAX.
   All revenues generated from 1% of the 2% tax rate shall only be used for
capital improvement, land acquisition and debt retirement.
(Prior Code, § 20-107)
MUNICIPAL EXCISE TAX
§ 34.20  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide additional needed revenue for
the city by imposing a municipal gross receipts tax on realty improvement
contracts pursuant to the powers granted to the municipality by the state by
SDCL § 10-52, Uniform Municipal Non-Ad Valorem Tax Law, acts amendatory
thereto, and SDCL § 10-46A-11.
(Prior Code, § 20-200)
§ 34.21  EFFECTIVE DATE.
   Commencing with the first calendar quarter following the effective date of
this subchapter, there is hereby imposed as a municipal gross receipts tax a
tax of 0.5% on the gross receipts of all prime contractors and other persons
engaged in realty improvement contracts within the jurisdiction of the city,
who are subject to the State Realty Improvement Contract Gross Receipts Tax,
SDCL § 10-46A, and acts amendatory thereto.
(Prior Code, § 20-201)
§ 34.22  COLLECTION.
   The tax is levied pursuant to authorization granted by SDCL § 10-52, acts
amendatory thereto, and SDCL § 10-46A and shall be collected by the State
Department of Revenue in accordance with the same rules and regulations
applicable to the Realty Improvement Contract Gross Receipts Tax and under
additional rules and regulations as the Secretary of Revenue of the state shall
lawfully prescribe.
(Prior Code, § 20-202)
§ 34.23  INTERPRETATION.
   It is declared to be the intention of this subchapter and the taxes levied
hereunder that the same shall be interpreted and construed in the same manner
as all sections of the State Realty Improvement Contract Gross Receipts Tax,
SDCL § 10-46A, and acts amendatory thereto, and that this tax shall be
considered a similar tax except for the rate thereof to that tax.
(Prior Code, § 20-204)
SPECIAL ADDITIONAL MUNICIPAL TAX
§ 34.35  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide additional needed revenue for
the city by imposing a special additional non-ad valorem tax on the gross
receipts of rentals on lodging or camping accommodations for less than 28 days,
alcoholic beverages, eating establishments, amusement ticket sales pursuant to
the powers and limitations set forth by SDCL § 10-52A-2 and acts amendatory
thereto.
(Ord. 824-90, passed 8-27-1990)
§ 34.36  EFFECTIVE DATE; ENACTMENT OF TAX.
   From and after November 1, 1990, there is hereby imposed a 1% special
additional municipal non-ad valorem tax, pursuant to SDCL § 10-52A-2, upon the
gross receipts of all leases or rentals of hotel, motel, campsites or other
lodging accommodations within the municipality for periods of less than 28
days; sales of alcoholic beverages as defined in SDLC § 35-1-1; establishments
where the public is invited to eat, dine or purchase and carry out prepared
food for immediate consumption; and ticket sale or admissions to places of
amusement, athletic and cultural events. This tax is measured by 1% of the
gross receipts of all persons engaged in the above described business activity
within the jurisdiction of the city, who are subject to the State Retail
Occupational Sales and Service Tax, SDCL § 10-45 and acts amendatory thereto.
This tax is in addition to any other tax or taxes in effect on the above
described business activity immediately prior to the enactment of this tax.
(Ord. 824-90, passed 8-27-1990)
§ 34.37  USE OF REVENUE.
   Any revenue received under this subchapter may be used only for the purpose
of land acquisition, architectural fees, construction costs, payment for civic
center, auditoriums or athletic facility buildings, including the maintenance,
staffing and operations of the facilities and the promotion and advertising of
the city, its facilities, attractions and activities pursuant to the
authorization granted in this regard in SDCL § 10-52-8.
(Ord. 824-90, passed 8-27-1990)
§ 34.38  COLLECTION.
   The tax is levied pursuant to authorization granted by SDCL § 10-52 and acts
amendatory thereto, and shall be collected by the State Department of Revenue
in accordance with the same rules and regulations applicable to the state sales
tax and under additional rules and regulations as the Secretary of Revenue of
the state shall lawfully prescribe.
(Ord. 824-90, passed 8-27-1990)
§ 34.39  INTERPRETATION.
   It is declared to be the intention of this subchapter and the taxes levied
hereunder that the same shall be interpreted and construed in the same manner
as all sections of the State Retail Occupational Sales and Service Act, SDCL §
10-45 and acts amendatory thereto, and that this shall be considered a similar
tax except for the rate thereof to that tax.
(Ord. 824-90, passed 8-27-1990)
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVE FOR HOUSING
§ 34.50  DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever used or referred to in this subchapter, unless a different meaning
is clearly indicated by the context, the following definitions apply:
   DWELLING or HOUSING.  A building or structure, or portion thereof, designed
or used for residential occupancy. The terms DWELLING or HOUSING shall not be
construed to mean motels, hotels or mobile homes.
(Ord. 1057-17, passed 1-2-2018)
§ 34.51  MUNICIPAL REAL PROPERTY TAX REBATE.
   To encourage new housing construction, or to encourage rehabilitation/
improvements of existing housing in the city, a rebate of the city municipal
real property tax, attributable to the increase in assessed value of the
property due to any new construction or improvements made to the structure, is
hereby established.  The program for the property tax rebate is subject to the
following provisions:
   (A)   The property tax rebate will be available for all properties
throughout the city.
   (B)   The property tax rebate will apply to:
      (1)   Any newly constructed single-family, two-family and multi-family
dwellings that are constructed to the standards of city ordinances; or
      (2)   Any improvements to existing housing that increase the taxable
assessment of the property by $5,000, per county assessment.
   (C)   A city building permit will be required prior to any work commencing
on any qualifying property per this subchapter.
   (D)   The rebate shall be for five years, commencing the year of issuance of
building permit.
   (E)   This rebate is transferable to any subsequent property owner, but the
five year term of the rebate will not change.
(Ord. 1057-17, passed 1-2-2018)
§ 34.52  PROPERTY TAX REBATE SCHEDULE AND CRITERIA.
   The rebate shall only apply to the city municipal real property taxes. The
rebate of city municipal real property taxes shall be paid to the owner of the
real property by December 15 of each year.  This rebate shall be equal to the
property taxes received by the city, without interest, and shall not act as a
credit toward any state or federal taxes. The city shall have the right to
withhold any or the entire rebate to offset any past due property taxes or
unpaid assessments on the real property, or any fines, judgments or other debts
owed to the city by the property owner.
(Ord. 1057-17, passed 1-2-2018)
§ 34.53  PROPERTY TAX REBATE CALCULATION.
   (A)   For the purposes of calculation; the property tax of the dwelling,
before reconstruction and/or improvements, will remain in effect and be called
the base. This base will be established at the time a building permit is
acquired for property improvements. Only the increased property tax, due to
reconstruction and/or improvements, above the base, shall be rebated.  This
base shall remain in effect for the five years of the tax rebate.
   (B)   For illustration purposes only, the city will calculate the rebate as
follows:
      Current property value:            $20,000
      City of Lead mill levy:            8.75 (for illustration purposes only)
      Current property tax (base):         = $20,000/1000 x 8.75 = $175
      Improved property value:            $120,000
      Improved property tax:            = $120,000/1000 x 8.75 = $1,050
      Rebate:                  = $1,050 - $175 = $875.00
(Ord. 1057-17, passed 1-2-2018)
§ 34.54  PROPERTY TAX REBATE; TWO YEAR REVIEW.
   This tax rebate subchapter expires two years from its effective date unless,
upon review, the City Commission determines by a resolution that it should be
continued. All future continuances will be increments of no more than two
years.  If continued, the rebate will then expire automatically unless further
action is taken.
(Ord. 1057-17, passed 1-2-2018)
§ 34.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person failing or refusing to make reports on payments prescribed
by §§
34.01 through
34.06 and the rules and regulations relating to the ascertainment and
collection of the tax herein levied shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be fined not more than $100. In addition, all the collection
remedies authorized by SDCL § 10-45 and acts amendatory thereto, and SDCL § 10-
46 and acts amendatory thereto, are hereby authorized for the collection of
these excise taxes by the Department of Revenue.
(Prior Code, § 20-106)
   (C)   Any person failing or refusing to make reports of payments prescribed
by §§
34.20 through
34.23 and the rules and regulations relating to the ascertainment and
collection of the tax herein levied shall be fined not more than $500. In
addition, all the collection remedies authorized by SDCL § 10-46A and acts
amendatory thereto are hereby authorized for the collection of these excise
taxes by the Department of Revenue.
(Prior Code, § 20-205)
   (D)   Any person failing or refusing to make reports or payments prescribed
by this subchapter and the rules and regulations relating to the ascertainment
and collection of the tax herein levied shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, shall be fined not more than $100. In addition, all the
collection remedies authorized by SDCL § 10-45, and acts amendatory thereto are
hereby authorized for the collection of these excise taxes by the State
Department of Revenue.
(Ord. 824-90, passed 8-27-1990)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
      Chapter
         
50.   GARBAGE AND RUBBISH
         
51.   GENERAL WATER PROVISIONS
         
52.   SEWERS AND SEWER CONNECTIONS
CHAPTER 50:  GARBAGE AND RUBBISH
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Municipal garbage disposal systems
   
50.02   Garbage collection may be by contract
   
50.03   Definitions
Collection Regulations
   
50.15   Supervision
   
50.16   Frequency of collection
   
50.17   Garbage containers required
   
50.18   Maintenance and replacement of garbage containers
   
50.19   Location of garbage containers
   
50.20   General garbage collection vehicle requirements
Collection Rates
   
50.35   Rates generally
   
50.36   Rates for commercial and business units
   
50.37   Disposition of heavy accumulations
   
50.38   Certain wastes; disposition
Violations; Prohibited Activities
   
50.50   Unlawful to accumulate garbage or trash
   
50.51   Littering prohibited; generally
   
50.52   Burning
   
50.53   Caustic waste in sewer prohibited
   
50.54   Disposition of flammable materials
 
   
50.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01  MUNICIPAL GARBAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS.
   The municipality shall have the power to collect and dispose of and regulate
the manner of handling of garbage and other waste material, and for the purpose
to acquire, establish, maintain, operate and regulate equipment and a sanitary
landfill, and to fix and collect charges for the services, and to contract with
one or more persons for the collection and hauling of garbage and other waste
material from the municipality.
(Prior Code, § 16-100)
§ 50.02  GARBAGE COLLECTION MAY BE BY CONTRACT.
   In addition to licensing persons, firms or corporations to collect and haul
garbage, upon the adoption by the Lead City Commission of the city of a
resolution in proper form, the Lead City Commission may enter a contract for
the purpose of the collecting and hauling of garbage.
(Prior Code, § 16-101)
§ 50.03  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FAMILY DOMESTIC UNIT.  Any single independent family unit, irrespective of
the number of persons constituting the family, but shall not include a
situation where more than one family lives together in any single residence or
abode, but in the situation each of the independent families shall be deemed
and regarded as a separate and distinct family domestic unit. Each independent
family unit living in multiple dwelling residences, apartment houses or any
types of residences, including trailer houses or mobile homes, shall each be
deemed a FAMILY DOMESTIC UNIT for the purposes of this chapter.
   GARBAGE.  Kitchen refuse, cans, bottles, paper, ashes, clipped grass, tree
leaves and other waste materials ordinarily originating on household or
commercial premises, and items which can be and are placed in regulation
garbage containers as provided for in this chapter. The word GARBAGE shall not
include highly flammable or explosive materials.
   RESIDENTIAL UNIT.  Housekeeping units living under one roof, apartment
dwelling or mobile home housing, whether occupied or not.
   RUBBISH.  Large cardboard cartons, accumulations of tree leaves, tree limbs
and branches, and other ordinary household or commercial rubbish or vegetation
not customarily placed in regulation garbage containers. The word RUBBISH shall
not include highly flammable or explosive materials.
(Prior Code, § 16-102)
COLLECTION REGULATIONS
§ 50.15  SUPERVISION.
   All garbage and rubbish accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed
and disposed of under the supervision of the Lead City Commission.
(Prior Code, § 16-200)
§ 50.16  FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.
   (A)   The collection of garbage shall be made from all residential premises
one or more times each week except when legal holidays prevent, or in case of
an emergency. The collection of garbage from all commercial establishments
shall be made as needed.
   (B)   These collections of garbage from residential and commercial
establishments shall be made provided that the garbage material is properly
stored for collection in containers complying with the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 16-201)
§ 50.17  GARBAGE CONTAINERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   All family domestic units where kitchen garbage accumulates shall
provide one or more watertight metal or plastic garbage cans, with tightly
fitted covers, not to exceed 30 gallons in size. Family domestic units shall
provide sufficient cans to hold at least one week's accumulation of garbage.
The garbage cans shall be provided with suitable handles. Military G.I. cans,
oil drums and cyanide cans shall not be used as garbage cans.
   (B)   All garbage which is an accumulation of animal and vegetable matter
shall be placed in a garbage can or other suitable container. Other types of
materials defined in §
50.03 above as garbage may be placed in either the garbage cans or in suitable
and sufficiently strong containers to adequately hold and confine the waste
materials. No person shall place anything in a garbage can other than garbage,
as defined in §
50.03 above, and then only after draining off moisture from moist substances
and wrapping them in paper to avoid freezing of the substances to the garbage
can or container. No hot ashes shall be placed in any garbage container.
   (C)   Garbage cans shall be kept tightly closed except during the collection
or deposit of garbage. The contents of all receptacles shall be so protected
that the wind cannot blow out and scatter same over the streets, alleys and
premises of the city.
(Prior Code, § 16-202)  Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.18  MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT OF GARBAGE CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Every garbage can or container required by this subchapter shall be
maintained by the owner or user in as sanitary condition as possible and shall
be thoroughly cleansed as needed by washing, scalding or otherwise.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of every family domestic unit or commercial
establishment where garbage accumulates, to replace, within ten days after
receipt of condemnation notice issued by the city, any garbage cans or
containers that have deteriorated or that have jagged edges capable of causing
injuries to those whose duty it is to handle the containers.
(Prior Code, § 16-203)  Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.19  LOCATION OF GARBAGE CONTAINERS.
   (A)   On the days of the garbage collection, the garbage shall be put in a
place as shall be convenient for the garbage collectors or haulers. Garbage
cans and waste materials containers shall be placed on the premises adjacent to
an alley bordering on the premises. Where no alley is available, garbage cans
and waste materials containers shall be so placed that the collectors of
garbage do not have to carry the cans or containers for a distance of more than
ten feet to reach the collection vehicle.
   (B)   No garbage collection vehicle shall be required to use any private
driveway in collecting garbage under the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 16-204)  Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.20  GENERAL GARBAGE COLLECTION VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS.
   Vehicles for collection of garbage shall prevent the escape of the contents
thereof. Wet garbage or material subject to rot, decay or putrefaction or
materials or liquids emitting strong or noxious odors shall be collected and
hauled in an all metal, packer type vehicle which has been approved by the City
Health Officer or Lead City Commission.
(Prior Code, § 16-205)  Penalty, see §
50.99
COLLECTION RATES
§ 50.35  RATES GENERALLY.
   Each residential, family domestic or multiple family dwelling unit shall be
charged a monthly fee as set forth by resolution. The city may enter into
cooperative agreements with other providers of utility services for the
enforcement of the collection of the fees. The City Finance Officer shall
collect all delinquent garbage, collection fees.
(Prior Code, § 16-300)
§ 50.36  RATES FOR COMMERCIAL AND BUSINESS UNITS.
   Rates for services at all places of business and commercial units shall be
such as are agreed upon by the owners or occupants and a duly licensed garbage
collector.
(Prior Code, § 16-301)
§ 50.37  DISPOSITION OF HEAVY ACCUMULATIONS.
   Heavy accumulations such as earth or dirt, brick, broken concrete, lumber
ashes, plaster, sand or gravel, large dead trees, Christmas trees which exceed
seven feet in length, tree branches that are not in bundles of three feet in
length or less and two feet or less in diameter, automobile frames or parts,
appliances, furniture and other bulky, heavy materials, shall be disposed of at
the expense of the owner or person controlling the same.
(Prior Code, § 16-302)  Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.38  CERTAIN WASTES; DISPOSITION.
   Wastes from lumber yards, building material suppliers, building contractors,
offal from meat and other packing plants, waste oil and used tires shall be
disposed of at the expense of the party responsible for the same.
(Prior Code, § 16-303)  Penalty, see §
50.99
VIOLATIONS; PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES
§ 50.50  UNLAWFUL TO ACCUMULATE GARBAGE OR TRASH.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or occupant of any lot, yard,
place, store, residence or premises of any kind, to suffer, allow or permit
slop, decaying animal or vegetable matter, garbage, ashes, tin cans, discarded
crockery, discarded metal or other substances to accumulate in any yard, place,
store, residence or premises or in or upon any sidewalk, alley, place, store,
residence or premises.
(Prior Code, § 16-400)  Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.51  LITTERING PROHIBITED; GENERALLY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, cast or deposit upon any
street, alley, sidewalk or any yard or premises, public or private, any filth
of any kind, or cans, paper, trash, paper containers, bottles, refuse or any
other form of litter or waste matter.
(Prior Code, § 16-401)  Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.52  BURNING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any garbage, rubbish,
leaves, grass or other organic refuse, outside of any building at any time in
the city, except by permit.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to burn paper, excelsior or any other material
which may produce sparks and be blown about by the wind, anywhere in the city,
unless the same is burned in a stove, fireplace or furnace sufficiently
fireproof to prevent the escape of ignited particles, except by permit.
(Prior Code, § 16-402)  Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.53  CAUSTIC WASTE IN SEWER PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, cast or pour into the
city sewer system or into any city storm sewer any waste oil or other oil,
caustic substance or any other like substance which would degrade the waters or
which would interfere with the functions or operation of the sewage treatment
lagoons or sewage treatment plant.
(Prior Code, § 16-403)  Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.54  DISPOSITION OF FLAMMABLE MATERIALS.
   Highly flammable or explosive materials shall not be placed in containers
for regular collection or disposal, but shall be disposed of as directed by the
city at the expense of the owner or possessor thereof.
(Prior Code, § 16-404)  Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.99  PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
CHAPTER 51:  GENERAL WATER PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Policy
   
51.002   Definitions
   
51.003   Sale of water to private parties or other governmental entities who
are not members of the system
   
51.004   Fire protection; additional fire hydrants
   
51.005   Water restriction
Water Service
   
51.015   Water service; generally
   
51.016   Permits for water service
   
51.017   Connections
   
51.018   Service lines
   
51.019   Curb stop boxes
   
51.020   Service size
   
51.021   Tap size
   
51.022   Corporate stops
   
51.023   Location of taps when more than one required
   
51.024   Depth
   
51.025   To run parallel or at right angles to street
   
51.026   Inspection
   
51.027   Repair and replacement
   
51.028   Disconnecting old lines
   
51.029   Turning on, off and interfering with valves, stopcocks and the like
   
51.030   Turn on/off procedures
   
51.031   Right of Water Department to shut off service
   
51.032   Abnormal demand
   
51.033   Restrictions of use of water
   
51.034   Discontinuance of service
   
51.035   Taking of water from fire hydrants
   
51.036   Cross-connections
   
51.037   Use of electrical devices to thaw frozen lines
   
51.038   Responsibilities of persons doing street work relative to valve boxes,
curb boxes and the like
   
51.039   Access to premises
   
51.040   Denial of city liability
   
51.041   Easements
Meters
   
51.055   All new water services metered
   
51.056   One meter to each service; auxiliary meters
   
51.057   Determination of size
   
51.058   Water meter location
   
51.059   Accessibility
   
51.060   Bypasses
   
51.061   Check valve between meter and boiler
   
51.062   Installation and removal
   
51.063   Remote reading device
   
51.064   Testing
   
51.065   Notice of breakage or stoppage
   
51.066   Notice of removal
   
51.067   Breaking seal, bypassing and the like
Water Service Charges
   
51.080   Water use charges
   
51.081   Billing generally
   
51.082   Billing when meter not read
   
51.083   Adjustments of bill in case of leaks
   
51.084   Failure to pay
   
51.085   Shut-off policy for new accounts
   
51.086   Rates
   
51.087   Tap fees
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001  POLICY.
   These rules and regulations are adopted by the city and are declared to be
necessary for the efficient, economic and safe operation of the municipal water
distribution system in the Lead/Central City and adjoining area. These are
intended to provide an adequate amount of potable water to the service area
through the regulation and control of connections to and the use of the system
and may be amended by the city pursuant to state and/or federal statutes or
drinking water standards.
(Prior Code, § 21-100)
§ 51.002  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY.  The municipality of Lead.
   COMMERCIAL.  Classification of water use for all uses other than
residential.
   EASEMENT.  An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   MAY.  Permissive. See SHALL.
   OCCUPANT.  The person using the lot, parcel of land, building or premises
connected to the water distribution system. The OCCUPANT may also be the owner.
   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, company, association, governmental agency,
society, corporation, group or political subdivision.
   PLUMBING CODE.  The current South Dakota Plumbing Code.
   RESIDENTIAL.  The classification of domestic water use that applies to
residences and apartments and similar installations.
   SHALL.  Mandatory. See MAY.
   TREATED WATER (VERSUS UNTREATED WATER).  Water that has been treated by the
Lead/Deadwood Sanitary District water treatment plant.
   UTILITY DEPARTMENT.  The portion of the city that is responsible for the
over site of all city utilities.
   UTILITY DEPARTMENT POLICY.  The guidelines that serve to guide the running
of the Utility Department. Deviations from the POLICY shall be under the
directions of the Utility Superintendent. In case of emergency, appropriate
action shall be taken. The Utility Superintendent shall refer policy changes to
the Lead City Commission.
   UTILITY SECRETARY.  The individual directed by the Lead City Commission to
provide the administration, customer service, fee collection and water service
applications for the Utility Department.
   UTILITY SUPERINTENDENT.  The person appointed by the Lead City Commission to
over see the Utility Department.
   WATER MAIN.  The general water supply distribution system for public use,
controlled by the city. Generally, this shall mean water lines that are on the
public right-of-way, HMC property or private property with an easement. This
shall include fire hydrants. The WATER MAINS shall include that portion of the
service line on public right-of-way up to the curb stop.
   WATER SERVICE.  The pipe from the water main to the water distribution
system of the building served.
   WATER SYSTEM.  The physical facilities, property and water rights under city
control.
(Prior Code, § 21-120)
§ 51.003  SALE OF WATER TO PRIVATE PARTIES OR OTHER GOVERNMENTAL ENTITIES WHO
ARE NOT MEMBERS OF THE SYSTEM.
   The city may enter into long term contracts, on a case by case basis, to
sell drinking water to developers of subdivisions, existing subdivisions
governed by a homeowners association, and future water districts to be formed
subject to the following:
   (A)   The city will ensure that it will always have sufficient quantities of
water to meet the needs of its citizens and those of Central City;
   (B)   The purchaser waives any future claims it may otherwise make against
the city for any issues concerning the failure or insufficiency of any
infrastructure of the city or the purchaser, and purchaser must agree to accept
financial responsibility for the replacement of or addition of lines, pumps,
meters, storage tanks and any other equipment and thing necessary to meet the
delivery needs for the amount of water contracted for;
   (C)   The water will be sold for a profit by the city based on a monthly
service fee and a price per 1,000 gallons with the proceeds to go to the water
enterprise fund for future improvements to the system;
   (D)   Any agreement for sale and its rate structure shall make provisions
for the effects of inflation and other market forces that may affect the value
of drinking water, and that the agreement will be reviewed periodically for any
other adjustments deemed necessary by the parties;
   (E)   Any city water restrictions will be also enforced against the
purchaser and if unforeseen circumstances shall arise, such as supply problems,
the city will reserve the right to serve the needs of its own customers before
attempting to meet the needs of the purchaser;
   (F)   The city reserves the right to inspect purchaser's system and to place
certain requirements thereon but it will not be making any representations or
warranties as to the adequacy of the design or the quality of materials or
construction or that the system is fit to meet a particular purpose;
   (G)   The city shall have no responsibility to a private contractor,
homeowner's association, water district or any person served by their water
systems if capacity flows (or the total lack thereof) should prove to be
insufficient in the case of fires; and
   (H)   Contract for sale of drinking water to a private contractor shall
carry a provision that a water district be formed within a reasonable period of
time so that the city will be dealing in the long term with another
governmental entity with taxing power having a perpetual life term.
(Ord. 972-06, passed 5-22-2006)
§ 51.004  FIRE PROTECTION; ADDITIONAL FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   Owners may, with written approval, tie into water mains for additional
fire hydrants for private property at their own expense. The installation shall
comply with the city's engineering standards.
   (B)   The fire hydrant shall be accessible for anyone's use for
firefighting.
   (C)   The supply line and fire hydrant shall revert with proper easements to
the city as part of the water main.
(Prior Code, § 21-400)
§ 51.005  WATER RESTRICTION.
   It may from time to time be necessary to require water restriction. Water
users shall use water only in the manner directed under those restrictions.
Violation of the restriction shall be just cause for disconnection and/or fine.
(Prior Code, § 21-600)
WATER SERVICE
§ 51.015  WATER SERVICE; GENERALLY.
   The city is responsible to provide for the needs of the authorized domestic
water consumers in its service area.
(Prior Code, § 21-200)
§ 51.016  PERMITS FOR WATER SERVICE.
   (A)   The Utility Department shall permit applications and process fees.
      (1)   Permits meeting the requirements of the Water Policy are to be
approved by the Utility Superintendent.
      (2)   All permit fees shall be paid before a permit is granted.
   (B)   The permit shall be approved based on it being in compliance with the
water policy. A permit shall not be issued or water provided until the
necessary easements are granted. After the application is approved and the fees
paid, a permit shall be issued, with copies to owner, Utility Secretary and
Utility Superintendent.
   (C)   No connection shall be made into the water system, nor shall any
changes be made to an existing tap, nor in water use, without first obtaining a
permit.
   (D)   The application for a permit shall include the name of the owner, the
owner's address, telephone number, description of premises, size of tap
(minimum of one inch), the purpose for which it is to be used, and other data
required. Engineering plans may be required.
(Prior Code, § 21-201)
§ 51.017  CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   After a permit has been issued, a licensed plumber or the Utility
Department will tap the line, provide the service to the property line and
install a curb stop.
   (B)   The Utility Department shall inspect water service for compliance with
policy before the water is turned on.
   (C)   Water services shall be turned on and off only by the Utility
Department, unless prior approval is obtained for construction and repair
purposes.
   (D)   Backflow devices if needed shall be provided on water services by the
owner.
   (E)   Owner shall install a shut-off valve inside the building for his or
her control of the water service.
   (F)   All work shall comply with the State Plumbing Code and this policy.
   (G)   Every building shall have its own separate water service. Application
for exception may be made to the Utility Superintendent.
   (H)   Any building requiring internal fire protection (sprinkler, hoses and
the like) shall have water service for fire protection separate from the water
service for the domestic water. There in no charge for water use for fire
protection and a meter is not required.
(Prior Code, § 21-202)
§ 51.018  SERVICE LINES.
   (A)   The city shall be responsible for the service lines up to and
including the curb stop. The curb stop shall be placed at the property line
(just inside the public right-of-way) where possible. If the curb stop is
placed on private property, an easement shall be secured and registered. The
service line after the curb stop shall be the responsibility of the owner
   (B)   All service lines from the water main to the curb stop shall be
installed by the Utility Department as part of the tap fee.
   (C)   The service line from the curb stop to the building shall be the
responsibility of the owner. The owner shall at all times be in compliance with
the Plumbing Code.
(Prior Code, § 21-203)
§ 51.019  CURB STOP BOXES.
   (A)   All curb stops shall be provided with a box or tube of approved
pattern, and the top of each box or tube shall be placed on the level with the
grade of the sidewalk, and no premises shall be supplied unless the box is in
good order.
   (B)   Stops and boxes are the responsibility of the Utility Department or
its contractor.
(Prior Code, § 21-204)
§ 51.020  SERVICE SIZE.
   (A)   The service size shall be determined by the owner, with a minimum size
of one inch. Refer to the State Plumbing Code.
   (B)   The city reserves the right to limit service size.
(Prior Code, § 21-205)
§ 51.021  TAP SIZE.
   (A)   All drilled and threaded service taps shall be one inch on four-inch
or larger pipe.
   (B)   Service larger than this shall be with a series of taps, or service
clamps, up to and including two inches, or with regular fittings.
   (C)   If a service larger than one and one-fourth inches is desired, it must
be a series of taps or a double strap service clamp up to and including two
inches, or a tapping sleeve and valve larger than two inches.
(Prior Code, § 21-206)
§ 51.022  CORPORATE STOPS.
   (A)   Every tap two inches or less shall be provided with a corporate stop
or valve at the main.
   (B)   Services larger than that shall be provided with a shut-off valve in a
valve box.
(Prior Code, § 21-207)
§ 51.023  LOCATION OF TAPS WHEN MORE THAN ONE REQUIRED.
   Where more than one tap is required, the taps shall be placed at least 18
inches apart in the main, and in no case shall a tap be made closer than 24
inches from the face of the bell.
(Prior Code, § 21-208)
§ 51.024  DEPTH.
   Water service pipes shall in no case be laid at a depth less than six feet
below ground.
(Prior Code, § 21-209)
§ 51.025  TO RUN PARALLEL OR AT RIGHT ANGLES TO STREET.
   All water service lines, including private lines, must run parallel or at
right angles to the street.
(Prior Code, § 21-210)
§ 51.026  INSPECTION.
   No water service ditch and installation shall be filled or service pipe
covered until the same has been inspected and approved in writing by the
Utility Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 21-211)
§ 51.027  REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT.
   (A)   Underground water service lines requiring repairs, which are
galvanized iron, pipe or lead pipe connected in the water system shall be
replaced completely with material specified in the Plumbing Code.
   (B)   The replacement shall be at the expense of the owner and the Utility
Department on their respective portions of the service line.
(Prior Code, § 21-212)
§ 51.028  DISCONNECTING OLD LINES.
   When property owner abandons a service line for any reason, it shall be
disconnected at the main by the Utility Department.
(Prior Code, § 21-213)
§ 51.029  TURNING ON, OFF AND INTERFERING WITH VALVES, STOPCOCKS AND THE LIKE.
   No person, other than a duly authorized agent of the city, shall turn on or
off, or in any manner interfere with any valve, stopcock or other appliance in
the water system without prior approval.
(Prior Code, § 21-214)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.030  TURN ON/OFF PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Requests for water turn on or turn off (service call) shall be made to
the Utility Secretary, who in turn notifies the Utilities Superintendent.
   (B)   The owner or an owner's representative must be present and sign as
witness of water turn on or turn off unless other arrangements have been made.
(Prior Code, § 21-215)
§ 51.031  RIGHT OF WATER DEPARTMENT TO SHUT OFF SERVICE.
   (A)   The city reserves the right at any time to shut off the water on any
main for any reason or no reason. It is expressly provided that no claim shall
be made against the city by reason of the shut off of service.
   (B)   The Utility Department, before shutting off water, shall give
reasonable notice to water users affected. In case of emergency, the water may
be shut off without notice.
   (C)   Should a privately owned water line break, the Utility Department may
shut off all water supply to all water users on that line, and water service
may be terminated by the Department until the break is repaired.
(Prior Code, § 21-216)
§ 51.032  ABNORMAL DEMAND.
   An abnormal quantity of water requires prior written permission from the
Utility Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 21-217)
§ 51.033  RESTRICTIONS OF USE OF WATER.
   Some or all water use may be restricted at any time. Water shall not be
wasted. Violators of this section are subject to shut off and fine.
(Prior Code, § 21-218)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.034  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   Service to a specific customer may be discontinued for any reason or no
reason, or for any of the following:
   (A)   Nonpayment of bills. If a bill is not paid within 60 days after
presentation, service may be discontinued;
   (B)   Unsafe apparatus. If the appliances or apparatus of a customer could
cause or result in the contamination of the water supplied by the Utility
Department, or result in annoyance to other customers, or are otherwise unsafe,
service may be discontinued;
   (C)   Service detrimental to others. If the service to a customer is of a
magnitude, or of a character that service to other customers is adversely
affected, service may be discontinued;
   (D)   Fraud and abuse. Service may be refused or discontinued by the city in
order to protect itself against fraud or abuse;
   (E)   Noncompliance with this policy or administrative authority. If a
customer fails to comply with these regulations, service may be discontinued;
or
   (F)   Charge for restoration of service. If a customer's service is
discontinued, the Utility Department has the right to make a charge for
disconnecting or restoring service and to require additional credit security.
(Prior Code, § 21-219)
§ 51.035  TAKING OF WATER FROM FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, no person other than
authorized employees of the city and authorized personnel from the Fire
Department shall open any fire hydrant or take any water therefrom.
   (B)   The Utility Superintendent may permit the taking of water from fire
hydrants subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   A water service application is required;
      (2)   All water shall be metered through the valve assemblies provided by
the city or by other means of measurement approved by the Utility Department
and shall be paid for at the rates prescribed herein. The owner may provide a
meter, subject to approval by the Utility Department;
      (3)   Before the meter is installed and any water taken, the owner shall
pay a deposit for a fire hydrant meter to secure the payment of all amounts
chargeable to the account;
      (4)   Meters shall be installed sealed, removed and relocated only by
authorized city personnel. Fees shall be collected by the Utility Secretary;
      (5)   A service charge shall be paid for each relocation of the meter
made by the customer;
      (6)   The account and all water use shall be subject to the same terms,
conditions and regulations as water accounts and use by customers in general;
      (7)   The Utility Superintendent shall select the fire hydrant; and
      (8)   To protect the water main from the water hammer, no fast-acting
valves will be allowed. Only gate valves (slow closing) will be allowed.
(Prior Code, § 21-220)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.036  CROSS-CONNECTIONS.
   No person shall make any cross-connection to the water system with any other
water system, or from a well, cistern or any other source.
(Prior Code, § 21-221)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.037  USE OF ELECTRICAL DEVICES TO THAW FROZEN LINES.
   No person shall connect any electric welder, generator or other electrical
device to any water service line for the purpose of thawing the frozen water in
the line unless the water meter in the line has been removed and all electrical
grounding connections and other electrical connections have been disconnected
from the portion of the service line to which the device is connected.
(Prior Code, § 21-222)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.038  RESPONSIBILITIES OF PERSONS DOING STREET WORK RELATIVE TO VALVE
BOXES, CURB BOXES AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Any person doing any kind of work in the streets or sidewalks shall be
held responsible for breaking of valve boxes, curb boxes or any apparatus
connected with the water system.
   (B)   Any person placing any kind of paving or sidewalk is required to bring
curb boxes or valve boxes to the top of the paving or sidewalk surface and to
see that the boxes are free from dirt, stones or any other obstruction before
paving material is placed.
   (C)   The city will inspect and approve any surfacing before it is placed.
   (D)   Curb boxes shall not be covered up. Any repair cost incurred by the
city after the inspection shall be charged to the owner or the responsible
party.
(Prior Code, § 21-223)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.039  ACCESS TO PREMISES.
   The Utility Department reserves the right to access a customer's premises at
all reasonable times to inspect any of the city property located thereon, or
for any other purpose properly associated with the service of water to the
customer.
(Prior Code, § 21-224)
§ 51.040  DENIAL OF CITY LIABILITY.
   The city is not responsible for damages caused by the breaking of water
meters or for any accidents resulting from variation in the water pressure or
the hydraulic ram of the water in the mains.
(Prior Code, § 21-225)
§ 51.041  EASEMENTS.
   Easements shall be obtained, processed and recorded wherever any portion of
the water system is on private property.
(Prior Code, § 21-226)
METERS
§ 51.055  ALL NEW WATER SERVICES METERED.
   (A)   All new commercial water services and new houses shall be metered.
   (B)   The meter will be supplied by the city and installed by the owner.
(Prior Code, § 21-300)
§ 51.056  ONE METER TO EACH SERVICE; AUXILIARY METERS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, the supply of water through each
separate service will be recorded by one meter only.
   (B)   If additional or auxiliary meters are desired for recording the
subdivision of each supply, they must be furnished and set by the owner at his
or her own expense and he or she must assume all responsibility of maintaining
and reading the same.
(Prior Code, § 21-301)
§ 51.057  DETERMINATION OF SIZE.
   The size of a water meter to be used on any service shall be determined by
the Utility Department.
(Prior Code, § 21-302)
§ 51.058  WATER METER LOCATION.
   (A)   Wherever possible, water meters shall be placed in the cellar,
mechanical room, basement, meter pit or other suitable location in the building
to be supplied with water. All meters shall be provided with a remote reading
device. All meter installations must be approved by the Utility Department.
   (B)   Each owner must provide, at his or her own expense, a suitable place
for the water meter, safe from damage due to frost, hot water, steam or other
causes. Where the meter is injured by frost or use of a torch, or otherwise
damaged by the act or neglect of the occupant or owner of the premises or of
his or her agents or servants, the cost of repair or replacing the same shall
be the responsibility of the owner. In case of neglect or refusal to pay the
same on demand, the water supply may be turned off, the meter removed, or both,
in which case the water shall not be turned on until the cost and penalty for
turning off and on is paid in full.
   (C)   All water meters located outside of buildings must be placed in pits.
All the meter pits shall be constructed by the property owner or water user
according to plans and specifications furnished by the Utility Department and
placed in the location elected by the Utility Department. There also must be a
shut-off valve in each meter pit. Pits shall be secured.
(Prior Code, § 21-303)
§ 51.059  ACCESSIBILITY.
   (A)   The owner of a premises where a water meter or remote meter reading
device is located shall see that the meter or device is kept free from
obstruction on or around the same, and conveniently accessible during all
reasonable hours of the day for the purpose of reading, inspection or repairing
the meter or device.
   (B)   If the owner refuses to grant access to any water meter or remote
reading device, or refuses to keep free access to the water meter or remote
device for the purpose of reading or checking by the Utility Department, the
water may be shut off and not turned on again until those conditions have been
corrected.
(Prior Code, § 21-304)
§ 51.060  BYPASSES.
   (A)   There shall be no water meter bypasses unless approved by the Utility
Department.
   (B)   All bypass valves shall be sealed.
(Prior Code, § 21-305)
§ 51.061  CHECK VALVE BETWEEN METER AND BOILER.
   Where a water meter has been placed on a pipe connection to a boiler or
other hot water apparatus, a check valve must be placed and maintained between
the meter and the broiler or hot water apparatus, which valve shall protect the
meter from back pressure of steam, the owner of the premises shall be
responsible to pay for the damage.
(Prior Code, § 21-306)
§ 51.062  INSTALLATION AND REMOVAL.
   (A)   The installation of the water meter shall be by the owners at their
expense.
   (B)   Installation must meet the State Plumbing Code.
   (C)   All water meter installations shall be sealed by the Utility
Department.
(Prior Code, § 21-307)
§ 51.063  REMOTE READING DEVICE.
   (A)   Remote reading devices must be installed on all existing water meters.
The device shall be considered part of the water meter servicing the property
and shall not be removed or altered except by the Utility Department.
   (B)   If the consumer or property owner refuses to grant access to the
Utility Department to install a remote reading device, the water to the
property may be shut off.
(Prior Code, § 21-308)
§ 51.064  TESTING.
   (A)   Upon the written request of any owner or customer, the Utility
Department will test the water meter supplying the premises. A fee as
established by the city will be required before the meter is disconnected,
which will be returned if the meter is found to be registering in excess of 2%
fast, otherwise the deposit will be retained to cover the cost of making the
test.
   (B)   If the test of the meter shows that it fails to register correctly
within 2%, the Utility Department shall make a charge or allow a credit in
proportion to the error, for all water registered in excess of the minimum
amounts allowed by the established rates, the same to be retroactive for three
billing periods only.
(Prior Code, § 21-309)
§ 51.065  NOTICE OF BREAKAGE OR STOPPAGE.
   In case of breakage or stoppage or any other irregularity in the water
meter, the owner shall immediately notify the Utility Department.
(Prior Code, § 21-310)
§ 51.066  NOTICE OF REMOVAL.
   Before a person removes a water meter for any reason, the Utility Department
shall be notified.
(Prior Code, § 21-311)
§ 51.067  BREAKING SEAL, BYPASSING AND THE LIKE.
   Every person who shall break or deface the seal of any water meter or who
shall obstruct or injure the action of any water meter, or who shall make any
connection by means of a pipe, or otherwise, with any main or pipe knowingly
without its passing through the meter, or who shall use any water so obtained,
shall have their water service discontinued and charged a fine.
(Prior Code, § 21-312)
WATER SERVICE CHARGES
§ 51.080  WATER USE CHARGES.
   (A)   All water taken from the water system shall be paid for monthly by the
owner of the premises served, based upon monthly meter readings, estimates or
specific contracts.
   (B)   Monthly discounts are available for customers who have their water
charge taken directly from their bank account.
   (C)   A service call charge shall be paid for water turn-on and turn-off
service.
      (1)   This charge will appear on the regular monthly bill.
      (2)   An after hours service call charge shall be paid if the service is
requested to be performed during hours other than the regular scheduled hours
of the Utility Department.
      (3)   The charge shall be paid even if the employees of the Utility
Department are unable to turn on the water because of inability to obtain
access or if no one representing the owner is present at the site at the time
agreed upon for the service.
      (4)   In case of turning water off and back on in the same day for
repairs, only one service charge shall be charged. There will be no service
call charge for detecting leaks or frozen lines.
(Prior Code, § 21-500)
§ 51.081  BILLING GENERALLY.
   (A)   Billing for water service shall be made on a monthly basis.
   (B)   The bills shall be payable at Norwest Bank in Lead or Deadwood,
automatic bank deduction or at City Hall.
   (C)   Any bills unpaid at the time the bill is due for the following month
shall be considered delinquent. A late fee shall be charged to any account 30
days past due.
(Prior Code, § 21-501)
§ 51.082  BILLING WHEN METER NOT READ.
   (A)   If the Utility Department is unable to obtain access to a premise or
dwelling for the purpose of reading a water meter or remote meter, for any
reason whatsoever, or if a meter or remote meter fails to register the amount
of water passing through it, for any reason, a monthly bill will be issued
based upon the last actual meter reading obtained from the premises or
dwelling.
   (B)   The proper adjustment will be made when the meter reading is obtained.
In no case will any bill be issued for more than three consecutive months.
   (C)   If any meter reading is not obtained at the end of any three-month
period, the water will be turned off, after notice until the meter reading is
obtained and service charge is paid in full.
(Prior Code, § 21-502)
§ 51.083  ADJUSTMENTS OF BILL IN CASE OF LEAKS.
   (A)   There will be no adjustments of the bill because of leaks from the
owner's plumbing.
   (B)   If any adjustment is requested on any water bill based upon proof of a
faulty metering device, and if the device has not been tampered with, an
adjustment may be made (maximum of three months) based upon prior normal usage
for that account prior to the time the metering device became faulty.
(Prior Code, § 21-503)
§ 51.084  FAILURE TO PAY.
   (A)   The owner is responsible for all charges.
   (B)   If charges prescribed by this policy are not paid within 60 days from
the billing date, the water may be shut off. The water shall not be turned on
again until all current and delinquent charges are paid in full, together with
two service call charges for turning the water off and turning it back on.
   (C)   The owner of the property may request that the water be turned off if
his or her tenant's water bill is 30 days delinquent. However, the owner will
still be responsible for any and all charges.
   (D)   No person shall turn on the water to any premises from which the water
has been turned off as provided for in this section.
   (E)   If any abnormal costs are incurred to shut off water from non-payment
of the water bill, the cost of work shall be added to the water bill in
addition to all other charges. All customers have the right to appeal the
accuracy of a water bill by contacting the Utility Department.
(Prior Code, § 21-504)  (Ord. 936-01, passed 9-4-2001)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.085  SHUT-OFF POLICY FOR NEW ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   On an account transferred to a new owner, the new owner takes over any
existing balances.
   (B)   A new account becomes delinquent if not paid within 60 days of receipt
of first billing, and the water may be shut off.
(Prior Code, § 21-505)
§ 51.086  RATES.
   (A)   Deposit for fire hydrant meter: $50; to secure return of meter and
payment of charges.
   (B)   Rental for fire hydrant meter: $50; plus per 1,000 gallons water rate
for all water used.
   (C)   Service call charge: charge per trip for turning water off and on,
setting fire hydrant meters and the like, set by resolution.
   (D)   Meter test charges: residential meter test: $30; includes service
call.
   (E)   Water use rates:
      (1)   Metered rates: set by resolution; and
      (2)   Un-metered rates: set by resolution.
   (F)   Late fee: set by resolution.
   (G)   Monthly discount for bank deduction: $0.50
(Prior Code, § 21-506)
§ 51.087  TAP FEES.
   (A)   At the time of making application for a permit, the applicant shall
pay to the city an additional sum to cover the cost of making the tap upon the
water main, the service connection through the curb stop.
   (B)   Water meters will be the owners' responsibility.
 
Residential (Single-Family) Commercial and Multi-Family Sized Tap         Fee
                                                        One inch          $300
Any larger size taps must be performed by a licensed plumber, the cost of $300
which will be the owners' responsibility
 
(Prior Code, § 21-507)
CHAPTER 52:  SEWERS AND SEWER CONNECTIONS
Section
   
52.01   Sewer permit required
   
52.02   To whom issued
   
52.03   Application for permit
   
52.04   Permission to tap sewers
   
52.05   Specifications
   
52.06   Inspection
   
52.07   Filling
   
52.08   Responsibility of private property owners
   
52.09   Sewer connection required
   
52.10   Sewer repair
   
52.11   Refuse prohibited
   
52.12   Separate connections
   
52.13   Minimum grade
   
52.14   No construction over sewer lines
   
52.15   Interference with natural drainage
   
52.16   Fee
   
52.17   Clear water connections
§ 52.01  SEWER PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall make connections, attach to or tap any lateral sanitary
sewer or trunk sewer or make excavations in the streets, alleys or public
property or under the sidewalks, for the purpose of making those connections or
attachments to any sewer, without first having obtained a permit therefor from
the Building Inspector. The permit fee for the sewer connection will be $150
for each connection.
(Prior Code, § 14-100)  (Ord. 834-91, passed 3-11-1991)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.02  TO WHOM ISSUED.
   No permit shall be issued to any but a licensed plumbing contractor who has
paid the required license under the provisions of
Chapter 110 of this code of ordinances for licensing plumbing contractors, that
he or she will comply in all respects with the regulations and instructions of
the Community Development Officer pertaining to the work, and be responsible
for the faithful execution of all the work by his or her employer.
(Prior Code, § 14-101)
§ 52.03  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   An application for permit must be in writing and signed by the owner of the
property designated to be drained, or his or her authorized agent, and must be
accompanied with a plan showing in detail the course and size of the drain
through the building and property of the applicant. The plans shall be filed in
the office of the Community Development Officer for reference.
(Prior Code, § 14-102)
§ 52.04  PERMISSION TO TAP SEWERS.
   No person shall break or tap any lateral or trunk sewer at any other place
than where a "Y" has been placed for the connecting of the service sewers,
except upon written permission of the Community Development Officer. When an
opening is made in any lateral or trunk sewer at any place other than where a
"Y" is left for those purposes, it shall be made under the supervision of the
Community Development Officer by inserting a "Y" in the sewer main.
(Prior Code, § 14-103)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.05  SPECIFICATIONS.
   The Community Development Officer, at the time of granting a sewer permit,
shall furnish minimum specifications and regulations to be followed in laying
the sewer, based upon the plans furnished to him or her.
(Prior Code, § 14-104)
§ 52.06  INSPECTION.
   No service sewer trench shall be filled or sewer pipe covered until the
service sewer has been first inspected by the Community Development Officer or
his or her assistant. All persons making service sewer connections shall give
at least five hours' notice to the Community Development Officer of the time
when the service sewer will be ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of
the Community Development Officer, within a reasonable time after the notice,
to inspect the sewer. If in his or her judgment the service sewer is properly
connected and laid with the proper grade, he or she shall give permission for
the filling of the trench. If he or she finds the service sewer defectively or
improperly laid and connected, he or she shall order the same taken out and re-
laid in accordance with his or her directions. When the service sewer is
completed and approved by the Community Development Officer, he or she shall
give permission to the owner or person in charge of the property served by the
service sewer to turn water therein and use the same, but no service sewer
shall be used until the permission is first obtained.
(Prior Code, § 14-106)
§ 52.07  FILLING.
   (A)   The filling of earth around and on top of all connecting pipes with
lateral or main sewers shall be done in a manner to obtain the greatest
compactness and solidity possible.
   (B)   For that purpose the earth shall be laid and rammed in regular layers
not exceeding nine inches in depth up to the surface of the roadway or
thoroughly soaked with water as may be directed by the Community Development
Officer, and the street or alley shall be left in as good condition, whether
paved or unpaved, as it was previous to the laying of the pipe connection to
the satisfaction of the Community Development Officer.
(Prior Code, § 14-107)
§ 52.08  RESPONSIBILITY OF PRIVATE PROPERTY OWNERS.
   Every owner, agent or person having charge of any dwelling house or other
building, the sewer from which is connected to the common sewer line, shall be
responsible for all connections and lines that connect to the common sewer.
Whenever it is necessary for any repairs and for ditches to be dug on these
private lines and connections, it shall be done at the expense of the private
property owner. All installations and repairs from the house connection to the
property line of the owner shall be the responsibility of the private property
owner.
(Prior Code, § 14-200)
§ 52.09  SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED.
   Every owner, agent or person having charge of any dwelling house or other
building which is or shall be occupied by human beings, which dwelling house or
other building is situated on or near any street in which the common sewer is,
or may hereafter be laid on or near any common sewer not in a street, shall,
within 15 days after notice in writing to that effect is served on the owner,
agent or person having charge of the premises, connect his or her dwelling
house or other building with a common sewer to be named by the Community
Development Officer in a manner and by means as are set forth in this chapter
and in strict compliance herewith. The notice shall be signed by the Community
Development Officer and shall be served by any police officer of the city. Any
person disregarding the notice shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 14-201)
§ 52.10  SEWER REPAIR.
   Whenever a sewer running from any building and connecting with a common
sewer or with another drain becomes clogged, obstructed, broken or out of order
in any way, or unfit for drainage or sewer purposes, the owner, agent or person
having charge of the premises drained by the sewer shall, within five days
after notice to the effect from the Community Development Officer, reconstruct,
repair, alter or cleanse the sewer as the condition thereof may require and in
the case of neglect or refusal for the space of five days to do so, the
Community Development Officer shall report the same to the Sewer Commissioner,
who shall cause the sewer to be reconstructed, altered, repaired or cleansed,
as he or she may deem expedient, at the expense of the owner, agent or person
having charge of the premises, who shall be liable for that expense, charged in
the same manner as a special assessment.
(Prior Code, § 14-202)
§ 52.11  REFUSE PROHIBITED.
   No one shall throw or deposit or permit to be thrown or deposited in any
receptacle connected with a public sewer, garbage, hair, ashes, fruit or
vegetables, peelings or refuse, rags or cotton, distilled mash, grape skins,
grease or oil from automobiles, or any other matter or thing whatever; except
feces, urine, the necessary closet paper and liquid house waste, and domestic
garbage processed by a garbage disposal unit approved by the Plumbing
Inspector, any flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas, and any toxic or
poisonous liquid, solid or gas, in sufficient quantity to upset the sewage
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public
nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment
plant.
(Prior Code, § 14-203)  (Ord. 850-92, passed 11-16-1992)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.12  SEPARATE CONNECTIONS.
   The main drain of every house or building shall be separately and
independently connected to the sewer where the sewer is in front of the
building; and where it is necessary to construct a private sewer to connect
with a sewer in an adjacent street, the sewer plans shall be used as are
approved by the Community Development Officer.
(Prior Code, § 14-204)
§ 52.13  MINIMUM GRADE.
   All sewers outside of buildings must be laid in ground of sufficient
solidity for a proper foundation and in a trench with a uniform grade of not
less than one-eighth inch to the foot and one-fourth inch, if practicable.
(Prior Code, § 14-205)
§ 52.14  NO CONSTRUCTION OVER SEWER LINES.
   No person shall construct or erect any building or structure over or upon
any lateral or trunk city sewer line unless he or she shall have the written
permission of the Community Development Officer. The Community Development
Officer, upon granting that permission, shall specify what provision shall be
made in the construction thereof to protect the sewer line and to provide for
access to the sewer line for the purpose of maintenance and repairs.
(Prior Code, § 14-206)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.15  INTERFERENCE WITH NATURAL DRAINAGE.
   No person shall construct or alter any building or other construction over,
upon or immediately adjacent to any natural drainage so as to obstruct the
natural drainage except upon the written approval of the Community Development
Officer. As a condition of the approval, the Community Development Officer may
require that provision for the natural drainage as may appear to be necessary.
(Prior Code, § 14-207)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.16  FEE.
   The owner of any property served by a city sewer shall pay a service fee as
determined by resolution of the city.
(Prior Code, § 14-208)
§ 52.17  CLEAR WATER CONNECTIONS.
   No person(s) shall make connection of roof down spouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building
sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a
public sanitary sewer unless the connection is approved by the Street
Superintendent for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. The
connection may be made to the storm sewer system if approved by the Street
Superintendent.
(Ord. 850-92, passed 11-16-1992)  Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL REGULATIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS
      
72.   ACCIDENTS
      
73.   PARKING METER REGULATIONS
      
74.   TRAFFIC COURT REGULATIONS AND FINES
      
75.   MOTORCYCLES
      
76.   SNOWMOBILES
      
77.   REGULATION OF BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES AND COASTERS
      
78.   ABANDONED, DERELICT AND JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES
      
79.   PARKING AND STORAGE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section
Definitions
   
70.01   Definitions
Driver's License
   
70.10   Unlicensed driver
   
70.11   License not in possession
   
70.12   Driving with canceled, suspended or revoked license
   
70.13   Possession of revoked or altered license
   
70.14   Permitting unlawful use of license
   
70.15   Displaying another's license
   
70.16   Lending license to another
   
70.17   Allowing unauthorized person to drive
   
70.18   Permitting unauthorized minor to drive
   
70.19   Violation of restricted license
   
70.20   Possession of commercial driver license or commercial driver
instruction permit
Vehicle License
   
70.30   Possession of registration
   
70.31   Operation without license plates
   
70.32   Driving with suspended or revoked registration
   
70.33   Substitution of license plates
   
70.34   Renewal of registration during assigned month; expiration of staggered
license plates or validation stickers
Vehicle Equipment
   
70.50   Safety glass required
   
70.51   Replacement of opening with safety glass required
   
70.52   Glass impairing operator's vision prohibited
   
70.53   Windshield wipers required
   
70.54   Rear vision mirror required
   
70.55   Horn required
   
70.56   Sirens and whistles prohibited
   
70.57   Exhaust system and muffler
   
70.58   Headlights required
   
70.59   Taillights required
   
70.60   Stop lights required
   
70.61   Illumination of license plates
   
70.62   Auxiliary driving lights
   
70.63   Spot lamps; aiming and adjustment
   
70.64   Adjustment of other lamps
   
70.65   Motorcycles required to have headlamps
   
70.66   Headlamps on mopeds
   
70.67   Blue lights on fire vehicles
   
70.68   Seat belt use required
   
70.69   One-way glass, adhesive film or other glaze in rear window prohibited
DEFINITIONS
§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this Traffic Code the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE.  Vehicles of the Fire Department, police
vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments or
public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the Chief of
Police.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to a highway when 50% or more
of the frontage thereof for a distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by
buildings in use for business.
   CROSSWALK.  That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation of curb and property lines at intersections or any other portion
of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other
markings on the surface.
   CURB.  The extreme edge or lateral boundary of a roadway whether marked by
curbing or not so marked.
   DEAD STORAGE.  Any vehicle not legally licensed in the current year, not
operable upon demand, not moved within 72 hours from city streets or city-owned
parking lots.
   DEPARTMENT.  The Police Department of the City of Lead, South Dakota.
   DIAGONAL PARKING.  That a vehicle shall be drawn up to the curb, gutter or
sidewalk on the right hand side of the street at an angle of 45 degrees with
the curb line thereof, such vehicle to be parked within six inches of the curb,
gutter or sidewalk on and along said street upon which such vehicle is parked,
and no vehicle shall be parked nearer than one foot to any other vehicle.
   DOUBLE PARKING.  The parking of a vehicle alongside another vehicle which is
parked at the curb.
   DRIVER.  See OPERATOR or DRIVER.
   DRIVEWAY.  See PRIVATE ROAD or DRIVEWAY.
   DWELLING.  Any house, lodging, place, residence or tenement.
   HIGHWAY, ROADWAY or STREET.  Every way or place of whatever nature set apart
for the use of vehicles or motor vehicles and including alleys, roads, avenues
and public highways.
   INTERSECTION.  The area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral curb
lines or, if none, then of the lateral boundary lines of two or more streets or
highways which join one another at an angle whether or not one such street or
highway crosses the  other, but such area in the case of the point where an
alley and street meet shall not be deemed an intersection.
   LOADING ZONE.  The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use
of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
   MOPED.  A motor driven cycle equipped with two or three wheels, foot pedals
to permit muscular propulsion and an independent power source providing a
maximum of two brake horsepower.  If a combustion engine is used, the maximum
piston or rotor displacement shall be 50 cubic centimeters regardless of the
number of chambers in such power source.  The power source may not be capable
of propelling the vehicle, unassisted, at a speed in excess of 30 miles per
hour on a level road surface and is equipped with a power drive system that
functions directly or automatically only, not requiring clutching or shifting
by the operator after the drive system is engaged.
   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Motor vehicle, as defined herein, includes all vehicles or
machines, trailers, semi trailers, recreational vehicles, truck tractors, and
motorcycles, propelled by any power other than muscular and used upon the
public streets for the transportation of persons or property or both.
   MOTORCYCLES.  Every motor vehicle designed to travel on not more than three
wheels in contact with the ground, except any such vehicle may be included
within the term TRACTOR as herein defined.
   OCCUPIED RESIDENCE. The house or dwelling occupied by the owner or legal
tenant; not to include rental property owned and not occupied by the rental
property owner.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS.  All signals, not inconsistent with this Traffic
Code, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction for the purpose of directing, warning, or regulating traffic.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS.  All signs and markings, other than signals, not
inconsistent with this title, placed or erected by a public body or official
having jurisdiction for the purpose of guiding, directing, warning or
regulating traffic.
   OPERABLE UPON DEMAND.  Owner must at law enforcement request be able to get
into the vehicle and start it, drive it forward and backwards to prove that it
is road ready and can be driven at any time.
   OPERATOR or DRIVER.  Any person who is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   OWNER.  A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle or in the event a
vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease
thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in
the agreement and with an immediate right of possession, vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor shall be deemed the
owner for the purpose of this Traffic Code.
   PARALLEL PARKING.  That all motor vehicles or other vehicles shall be drawn
up parallel to the curb, gutter or sidewalk on the right hand side of the
street; the hub of both wheels on the right hand side of the vehicles are
parked, and no vehicles shall be parked nearer than three feet of the front or
rear of any other vehicle.
   PARKING.  The placement of any vehicle in the same vicinity for less than 72
hours.
   PEDESTRIAN.  Any person afoot.
   PERSON.  Every natural person, firm, co partnership, association, or
corporation.
   PRIVATE ROAD or DRIVEWAY.  Every road or driveway not open to the use of the
public for the purposes of vehicular travel.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle used primarily for sport, amusement or
leisure travel.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to a highway not comprising
a business district when the frontage on such highway for a distance of 300
feet or more is mainly occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in
use for residence.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The privilege of the immediate use of the street or highway.
   ROAD TRACTOR.  Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other
vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
   ROADWAY.  The privilege of the immediate use of the street or highway.  See
also HIGHWAY, ROADWAY or STREET.
   SIDEWALK.  That portion of a street between the curb lines and adjacent
property lines set aside for the use of pedestrians.
   SNOWMOBILE.  A mechanically driven vehicle in, upon or by which any persons
or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a roadway, the motive force
of which is applied through a revolving tract, guided by skis, or differential
tract operation.
   STREET.  See HIGHWAY, ROADWAY or STREET.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL.  Any device using colored lights, words, shapes or
any combinations thereof, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically
operated or not by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to
proceed.
   VEHICLE.  Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, excepting devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks; provided that
for the purposes of this Traffic Code a bicycle or a ridden animal shall be
deemed a vehicle.
   VEHICLE STORAGE.  The placement of any vehicle in the same vicinity for over
72 hours.
   VICINITY.  A residentially zoned area which is within 1,000 feet of the
closest boundary of the private property. Measurement of vicinity shall be by
the most direct route using public or private right- of-way and not crossing
private property.
(Prior Code, § 19-100)  (Ord. 1028-14, passed 8-18-2014)
DRIVER'S LICENSE
§ 70.10  UNLICENSED DRIVER.
   No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon a street or highway unless such
person has a valid license as an operator under the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 19-200)
§ 70.11  LICENSE NOT IN POSSESSION.
   Every licensee shall have his/her operator's license in his immediate
possession at all times when operating a motor vehicle and shall display the
same upon demand of a peace officer.
(Prior Code, § 19-201)
§ 70.12  DRIVING WITH CANCELED, SUSPENDED OR REVOKED LICENSE.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any street or highway at time when
his/her privilege so to do is canceled, suspended or revoked.
(Prior Code, § 19-202)
§ 70.13  POSSESSION OF REVOKED OR ALTERED LICENSE.
   No person shall display or cause or permit to be displayed or have in his/
her possession any canceled, revoked, suspended, fictitious or fraudulently
altered operator's license.
(Prior Code, § 19-203)
§ 70.14  PERMITTING UNLAWFUL USE OF LICENSE.
   No person shall permit any unlawful use of an operator's license issued to
him/her.
(Prior Code, § 19-204)
§ 70.15  DISPLAYING ANOTHER'S LICENSE.
   No person shall display or represent as one's own any operator's license not
issued to him/her.
(Prior Code, § 19-205)
§ 70.16  LENDING LICENSE TO ANOTHER.
   No person shall lend his/her operator's license to any other person or
knowingly permitted use thereof by another.
(Prior Code, § 19-206)
§ 70.17  ALLOWING UNAUTHORIZED PERSON TO DRIVE.
   No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by him/
her or under his/her control to be driven upon any street or highway by any
person who is not authorized under this Traffic Code or in violation of any of
the provisions of this Traffic Code.
(Prior Code, § 19-207)
§ 70.18  PERMITTING UNAUTHORIZED MINOR TO DRIVE.
   No person shall cause or knowingly permit his/her child or ward under the
age of 18 years to drive a motor vehicle upon any provisions of this Traffic
Code.
(Prior Code, § 19-208)
§ 70.19  VIOLATION OF RESTRICTED LICENSE.
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle in any manner in violation of the
restrictions imposed in a restricted license issued to him/her.
(Prior Code, § 19-209)
§ 70.20  POSSESSION OF COMMERCIAL DRIVER LICENSE OR COMMERCIAL DRIVER
INSTRUCTION PERMIT.
   No person may drive a commercial motor vehicle on city streets unless the
person holds and has in immediate possession a commercial driver license with
applicable endorsements valid for the vehicle the person is driving or is
driving under a commercial driver instruction permit.
(Prior Code, § 19-210)
VEHICLE LICENSE
§ 70.30  POSSESSION OF REGISTRATION.
   The receipt of registration shall be subject to inspection by any peace
office at any time.  Said receipt of registration shall at all time, while the
motor vehicle, trailer or semi trailer for which it was issued is being
operated be in the possession of the operator thereof.
(Prior Code, § 19-300)
§ 70.31  OPERATION WITHOUT LICENSE PLATES.
   No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle on any street or highway
unless such vehicle shall have a distinctive number assigned to it by the
department of commerce and regulation, and two number plates, bearing such
number conspicuously displayed, horizontally and in an upright position, one on
the front and one on the rear of such vehicle, each securely fastened.
(Prior Code, § 19-301)
§ 70.32  DRIVING WITH SUSPENDED OR REVOKED REGISTRATION.
   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon any streets or highways while
the registration thereof is suspended or revoked.
(Prior Code, § 19-302)
§ 70.33  SUBSTITUTION OF LICENSE PLATES.
   No person, other than a public official designated by state law shall buy,
sell or deal in the license plates provided by this Traffic Code during the
time such license plates are valid, or deal with license plates issued by a
foreign state, or counterfeit any such number plate or substitute any marker.
(Prior Code, § 19-303)
§ 70.34  RENEWAL OF REGISTRATION DURING ASSIGNED MONTH; EXPIRATION OF STAGGERED
LICENSE PLATES OR VALIDATION STICKERS.
   After the conversion period, all owners shall continue to renew the
registration of their vehicles during the month assigned to the first initial
of their last name. All license plates or validation stickers issued on a
staggered basis shall expire on the last day of the month assigned for the
renewal of registration.
(Prior Code, § 19-304)
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT
§ 70.50  SAFETY GLASS REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to register a motor vehicle, except motorcycles,
manufactured on or after July 1, 1953, unless it is equipped with safety glass
or safety glazing material in all partitions, doors, windows, windshields, or
wind deflectors.
(Prior Code, § 19-800)
§ 70.51  REPLACEMENT OF OPENING WITH SAFETY GLASS REQUIRED.
   It shall be a petty offense for any person to replace any glass or glazing
material used in partitions, doors, windows, windshields, or wind deflectors in
any motor vehicle with any material other than safety glass.
(Prior Code, § 19-801)
§ 70.52  GLASS IMPAIRING OPERATOR'S VISION PROHIBITED.
   No glass or glazing material may be cracked, broken, shattered or distorted
to the extent that it significantly impairs the vision of the motor vehicle
operator.
(Prior Code, § 19-802)
§ 70.53  WINDSHIELD WIPERS REQUIRED.
   The windshield on every motor vehicle as defined by SDCL § 32-3-1(1) except
farm tractors and motorcycles, shall be equipped with a device or devices for
cleaning rain, snow or other moisture from the windshield, which device or
devices shall be operated by the driver of the vehicle. No person shall operate
a motor vehicle upon the streets or highways unless such vehicle shall be
equipped with such device or devices in good working order capable of cleaning
the windshield thereof and which device or devices shall provide the driver a
clear view of the street or highway.
(Prior Code, § 19-803)
§ 70.54  REAR VISION MIRROR REQUIRED.
   Every motor vehicle entitled to be licensed in South Dakota and the City of
Lead shall be equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the driver a
view of the street or highway for a distance of at least 200 feet to the rear
of such vehicle, whether operated singly or towing another vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 19-804)
§ 70.55  HORN REQUIRED.
   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a street or highway shall be equipped
with a horn in good working order capable of emitting sound audible under
normal conditions from a distance of at least 200 feet.
(Prior Code, § 19-805)
§ 70.56  SIRENS AND WHISTLES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be equipped with or for any person
to use upon a vehicle any siren, or any compression or spark plug whistle, or
any exhaust horn, or whistle which does not produce a harmonious sound, or for
any person at any time to use a horn otherwise than a loud or harsh sound by
means of a horn or other warning device.
(Prior Code, § 19-806)
§ 70.57  EXHAUST SYSTEM AND MUFFLER.
   (A)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on a street or highway unless
such motor vehicle is equipped with an exhaust system and muffler both in good
working condition and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual
noise.
   (B)   Exhaust systems on passenger or passenger-carrying vehicles used on
any street or highway shall discharge the exhaust fumes at a location to the
rear of the vehicle body or direct the exhaust fumes outward from the side of
the vehicle body at a location rearward of any operable side windows.
   (C)   Exhaust systems on property-carrying vehicles used on any street or
highway shall discharge the exhaust fumes at a point rearward of the passenger
carrying compartment.
   (D)   No person shall use a "muffler cut out" on any motor vehicle upon a
street or highway.
(Prior Code, § 19-807)
§ 70.58  HEADLIGHTS REQUIRED.
   Every motor vehicle other than a motorcycle, road roller, road machinery, or
farm tractor shall be equipped with at least two headlamps with at least one on
each side of the front of the motor vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 19-808)
§ 70.59  TAILLIGHTS REQUIRED.
   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semi-trailer and pole trailer, except as
otherwise provided in this section, and any other vehicle which is being drawn
at the end of a combination of vehicles shall be equipped with at least two
tail lamps mounted on the rear, which when lighted as required in SDCL § 32-17-
4 shall emit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 1,000 feet to the
rear. However, motor vehicles, trailers, semi trailers, and pole trailers
manufactured and assembled prior to July 1, 1973, shall have one tail lamp
mounted on the left side of the rear which when lighted as required in SDCL §
32-17-4 shall emit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to
the rear. Motorcycles and
motor driven cycles, except mopeds as defined in §
70.01, shall have at least one tail lamp, which when lighted as required in
SDCL § 32-17-4 shall emit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 250
feet to the rear. On a combination of vehicles, only the tail lamps on the rear
most vehicle need actually be seen from the distance specified. On vehicles
with more than one tail lamp, the lamps shall be mounted on the same level and
as widely spaced laterally as practicable. Every tail lamp upon every vehicle
shall be located at a height of not more than 72 inches nor less than 15
inches.
(Prior Code, § 19-809)
§ 70.60  STOP LIGHTS REQUIRED.
   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semi trailer, and pole trailer shall be
equipped with two or more stop lamps, except that motor vehicles, trailers,
semi trailers, and pole trailers manufactured and assembled prior to July 1,
1973, and motorcycles and motor driven cycles shall be equipped with at least
one stop lamp. The stop lamp shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle at a
height of no more than 70 inches nor less than 15 inches. The stop lamp shall
display a red light from a distance of not less than 300 feet to the rear in
normal sunlight, except for a moped, which distance shall be not less than 150
feet. The stop lamp shall be actuated upon application of the service (foot)
brake which may be incorporated with one or more lamps.
(Prior Code, § 19-810)
§ 70.61  ILLUMINATION OF LICENSE PLATES.
   Either the rear lamps required by §
70.59 or a separate lamp shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate
with a white light the rear registration plate and render it clearly legible
from a distance of 50 feet to the rear.  When the rear registration plate is
illumination by an electric lamp other than the required rear lamps, said lamps
shall be turned on or off only by the same control switch at all times whenever
headlamps are lighted.
(Prior Code, § 19-811)
§ 70.62  AUXILIARY DRIVING LIGHTS.
   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with up to three auxiliary driving lamps
mounted on the front at a height not less than 12 inches nor more than 24
inches above the level surface upon which the vehicle stands, and every such
auxiliary driving lamp or lamps shall meet the requirements and limitations of
§
70.58.  No auxiliary driving lamp mounted on a motor vehicle, other than a fog
lamp, may be lighted at any time the lighted headlamps on the vehicle are on
low beam position.
(Prior Code, § 19-812)
§ 70.63  SPOT LAMPS; AIMING AND ADJUSTMENT.
   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not to exceed one spot lamp and every
lighted spot lamp shall be so aimed and used upon approaching another vehicle
that no part of the high intensity portion of the beam will be directed to the
left of the prolongation of the extreme left side of the vehicle, nor more than
100 feet ahead of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 19-813)
§ 70.64  ADJUSTMENT OF OTHER LAMPS.
   Any device other than headlamps, spot lamps, or auxiliary driving lamps,
which projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 25 candle power
shall be so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the
surface on which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 50 feet from the
vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 19-814)
§ 70.65  MOTORCYCLES REQUIRED TO HAVE HEADLAMPS.
   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with a headlamp which shall comply with
the requirements and limitations set forth in SDCL §§ 32-17-5 and 32-17-6.
(Prior Code, § 19-815)
Cross reference:
   Motorcycles, see
Chapter 75
§ 70.66  HEADLAMPS ON MOPEDS.
   A moped shall be equipped with a headlamp which shall be sufficient
intensity to render clearly discernible a person or vehicle at a distance of
not less than 100 feet.
(Prior Code, § 19-816)
Cross reference:
   Regulation of bicycles, mopeds and other devices, see
Chapter 77
§ 70.67  BLUE LIGHTS ON FIRE VEHICLES.
   A motor vehicle operated by a member of an organized fire department may be
equipped with two flashing blue lights displayed to the front or one blue
rotating beacon light to be visible 360 degrees.  This provision shall not
relieve the driver of such vehicles from the duty to drive with due regard for
the safety of all persons using the street or highway nor shall it protect the
driver of any such vehicle from the consequence of a reckless disregard of the
safety of others.  No person shall use a light described in this section except
a fireman while actually en route to the scene of a fire or other emergency
requiring his services as a fireman, who has been authorized in writing to so
use a blue light.  Such authorization shall be given by the Fire Chief only to
members of the department who are in good standing.
(Prior Code, § 19-817)
§ 70.68  SEAT BELT USE REQUIRED.
   Every operator and front seat passenger of a motor vehicle operated on a
city street shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt system,
required to be installed in the passenger vehicle when manufactured pursuant to
Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208 (49 C.F.R. 571.208) in effect
January 1, 1989, at all times when the vehicle is in forward motion. The driver
of the motor vehicle shall secure or cause to be secured a properly adjusted
and fastened safety seat belt system on any passenger in the front seat who is
at least five years of age but younger than 18 years of age.
(Prior Code, § 19-818)
§ 70.69  ONE-WAY GLASS, ADHESIVE FILM OR OTHER GLAZE IN REAR WINDOW PROHIBITED.
   No motor vehicle required to be registered in this state and which is
operated on the city streets may be equipped with one-way glass, adhesive film
or other glaze in the windows that reduces light transmission below 35%.
(Prior Code, § 19-819)
CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Adoption of traffic regulations
   
71.02   Reckless driving
   
71.03   Careless driving
   
71.04   Exhibition driving
   
71.05   Reasonable and lawful speed
   
71.06   Unreasonably slow speed
   
71.07   Restrictions as to speed
   
71.08   Establishment of speed zones
   
71.09   Wrong way on a one-way street
   
71.10   Right-of-way at intersections
   
71.11   Yielding right-of-way to emergency vehicles
   
71.12   Left turning vehicles
   
71.13   Turn signal required
   
71.14   U-turn prohibited in no-passing zone or where unsafe
   
71.15   Passing in a no-passing zone
   
71.16   Designation of no-passing zones; pavement striping; marking no-passing
zone
   
71.17   Following too close
   
71.18   Maximum number of passengers in front
   
71.19   Yielding right-of-way to pedestrian making proper crossing
   
71.20   Jaywalking; duty to yield right-of-way to vehicles
   
71.21   Indication of right-of-way by stop or yield signs
   
71.22   Stop and yield signs to designate through streets
   
71.23   Action required at stop signs; place of stopping
   
71.24   Yield sign
   
71.25   Standing or parked vehicles; unobstructed lane required
   
71.26   Dead storage
   
71.27   Position of parking on two-way road
   
71.28   Position of parking on one-way road
   
71.29   No parking zones posted by city
   
71.30   Opening of doors on traffic side of stopped vehicles
   
71.31   Removal of vehicles improperly parked or standing
   
71.32   Disabled vehicle excepted
   
71.33   Places where standing and parking prohibited
   
71.34   Places where parking prohibited
   
71.35   Places where parking prohibited; exception for loading or unloading
   
71.36   Unauthorized movement of another vehicle into prohibited area
   
71.37   Physically handicapped persons entitled to park without time
limitations
   
71.38   Use of privileges by non-handicapped person
   
71.39   Unauthorized parking in handicapped space
   
71.40   Time limit on parking
   
71.41   Emergency vehicles; circumstances under which may disregard traffic
regulations
   
71.42   Emergency vehicles; particular regulations which may be disregarded
   
71.43   Emergency vehicles; use of emergency signals required
   
71.44   Emergency vehicles; duty of operator
   
71.45   Emergency vehicles; duty of other motorists upon approach
   
71.46   Emergency vehicles; stop required upon approaching stopped emergency
vehicle using signals
   
71.47   Following fire apparatus; minimum following and parking distance
   
71.48   Driving over fire hose prohibited
   
71.49   Duty of motorist to slow or stop in obedience to amber of red signal of
school bus
   
71.50   Failure to stop on signal or eluding police vehicle
   
71.51   Fleeing from police
   
71.52   Unsafe backing prohibited
   
71.53   Through streets
   
71.54   Policy for snow removal and cleaning of streets
   
71.55   Prohibited operation/parking during street cleaning operation
   
71.56   Snow emergency
   
71.57   Uniform Traffic Device Code adopted
   
71.58   Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverage in vehicle
   
71.59   Lane driving
   
71.60   Other traffic-control devices; directions by police officer
Cross-reference:
   Definitions, see §
70.01
§ 71.01  ADOPTION OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   The Board of Commissioners shall have the power by resolution and not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Traffic Code to make traffic
regulations as follows:
   (A)   To designate crosswalks, establish safety zones and mark traffic lanes
by appropriate lines, devices or places as it may deem necessary.
   (B)   To prohibit turns and place markers indicating method of turns.
   (C)   To designate public carrier stands by appropriate signs.
   (D)   To put into effect parking limitations by proper signs, when such
parking would in its opinion interfere with traffic or create a hazardous
situation, or when necessary to provide for street maintenance.
   (E)   To place stop signs at such intersections as required for proper
traffic control.
   (F)   To designate areas within the city limits wherein diagonal parking
shall be necessary; otherwise parallel parking shall be the only type of
parking allowed within the city limits.
(Prior Code, § 19-600)
§ 71.02  RECKLESS DRIVING.
   No person shall drive any vehicle upon a highway or alley or upon the
property of a public or private school carelessly and heedlessly in disregard
of the rights or safety of others, or without due caution and circumspection
and at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger person
or property.
(Prior Code, § 19-601)
§ 71.03  CARELESS DRIVING.
   No person shall drive any vehicle upon a highway or alley or upon the
property of a public or private school carelessly and without due caution, at a
speed or in a manner so as to endanger any person or property, not amounting to
reckless driving as defined in §
71.02.
(Prior Code, § 19-602)
§ 71.04  EXHIBITION DRIVING.
   No person shall drive any vehicle upon a highway or alley or upon the
property of a public or private school in such a manner that creates or causes
unnecessary engine noise, tire squeal, skid or slide upon acceleration or
stopping; or that simulates a temporary race, or that causes the vehicle to
unnecessarily turn abruptly or sway.
(Prior Code, § 19-603)
§ 71.05  REASONABLE AND LAWFUL SPEED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle on any street
or highway located within the city limits at a speed greater than is reasonable
and prudent under the conditions then existing or at speeds in excess of those
fixed by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 19-604)
§ 71.06  UNREASONABLY SLOW SPEED.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the
normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced speed is
necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
(Prior Code, § 19-605)
§ 71.07  RESTRICTIONS AS TO SPEED.
   It shall be unlawful for any driver to drive any vehicle upon the streets of
the city at a greater speed than the following:
   (A)   Twenty miles an hour when passing a school during school recess or
while children are going to or leaving school during opening and closing.
   (B)   Twenty miles an hour on Main Street between Wall Street and the
intersection with South Main Street and Glendale Drive, and on Glendale Drive
from Main Street to Highway 14-A.
   (C)   Fifteen miles an hour on Julius Street between Wall Street and Blatt
Avenue.
   (D)   Twenty miles an hour on all streets not herein specifically given
except those otherwise set by resolution of the Commissioners and posted
thereon.
   (E)   No limits set herein shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles when
responding to emergency calls, provided that the drivers thereof sound audible
signals by siren or horn and a beacon light visible 360 degrees. This provision
shall not relieve the driver of such vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard to the safety of all persons using the street, nor shall it protect such
driver from the consequences of a reckless disregard of the safety of others.
(Prior Code, § 19-606)
§ 71.08  ESTABLISHMENT OF SPEED ZONES.
   The Commissioners of the City of Lead are authorized and empowered to
determine and establish upon any city street or any part thereof limited speed
zones, which speed limit shall constitute the maximum speed at which any person
may drive or operate any vehicle upon such zoned street or portion thereof so
zoned and on which street the maximum speed permissible in said zone has been
conspicuously posted by signs.
(Prior Code, § 19-607)
§ 71.09  WRONG WAY ON A ONE-WAY STREET.
   No person shall drive a vehicle the opposite direction of normal traffic
flow regulated by a one-way traffic arrow or sign posted at the exit end of the
street.
(Prior Code, § 19-608)
§ 71.10  RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection at approximately the
same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way
to the vehicle on the right. The driver of any vehicle traveling at an unlawful
speed shall forfeit any right-of-way which he might otherwise have hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 19-609)
§ 71.11  YIELDING RIGHT-OF-WAY TO EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   The driver of a vehicle upon a street or highway shall yield the right-of-
way to all emergency vehicles displaying audible signal and flashing lights.
(Prior Code, § 19-610)
Cross-reference:
   Emergency vehicles, see §§
71.41 through
71.46
§ 71.12  LEFT TURNING VEHICLES.
   The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute
an immediate hazard, but said driver, having so yielded and having given a
signal when and as required by this chapter, may make such left turn and the
drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from said opposite
direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn.
(Prior Code, § 19-611)
§ 71.13  TURN SIGNAL REQUIRED.
   A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be given
continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle
before turning.
(Prior Code, § 19-612)
§ 71.14  U-TURN PROHIBITED IN NO-PASSING ZONE OR WHERE UNSAFE.
   No vehicle, within a no-passing zone that is designated and marked shall be
turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction, nor may any such turning
movement be otherwise made unless it can be made on safety and without
interfering with other traffic.
(Prior Code, § 19-613)
§ 71.15  PASSING IN A NO-PASSING ZONE.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass any other vehicle
proceeding in the same direction when traveling on a no passing zone on any
streets so marked within the city limits.
(Prior Code, § 19-614)
§ 71.16  DESIGNATION OF NO-PASSING ZONES; PAVEMENT STRIPING; MARKING NO-PASSING
ZONE.
   Where signs or markings are in place to define a no-passing zone no driver
shall at any time drive in the left side of the roadway within such no-passing
zone or on the left side of any pavement striping designated to mark such no-
passing zone throughout its length.
(Prior Code, § 19-615)
§ 71.17  FOLLOWING TOO CLOSE.
   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicles
and the traffic upon and condition of the highway.
(Prior Code, § 19-616)
§ 71.18  MAXIMUM NUMBER OF PASSENGERS IN FRONT.
   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in
the front seat such a number of persons. exceeding three, as to obstruct the
view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with
the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 19-617)
§ 71.19  YIELDING RIGHT-OF-WAY TO PEDESTRIAN MAKING PROPER CROSSING.
   The driver of any vehicle upon a street or highway within a business or
residence district shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing such
street or highway within any clearly marked crosswalk or any regular pedestrian
crossing, except at intersections where the movement of traffic is being
regulated by traffic officers or traffic direction devices.
(Prior Code, § 19-618)
§ 71.20  JAYWALKING; DUTY TO YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY TO VEHICLES.
   Every pedestrian crossing a street or highway within a business or residence
district at any point other than a pedestrian crossing, crosswalk,
intersection, or regular pedestrian crossing shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles upon the street or highway.
(Prior Code, § 19-619)
§ 71.21  INDICATION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY BY STOP OR YIELD SIGNS.
   Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop signs
or yield signs as authorized in §
71.22.
(Prior Code, § 19-620)
§ 71.22  STOP AND YIELD SIGNS TO DESIGNATE THROUGH STREETS.
   The Commissioners of the City of Lead with reference to streets and highways
under their jurisdiction may designate main traveled or through streets and
highways by erecting at the entrance thereto from intersecting streets or
highways stop or yield signs.
(Prior Code, § 19-621)
§ 71.23  ACTION REQUIRED AT STOP SIGNS; PLACE OF STOPPING.
   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by
a stop sign shall come to a full stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if
none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if
none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a
view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to
any vehicle which has entered or is approaching the intersection from another
street or highway and shall not proceed into the intersection until certain
that such intersecting roadway is free from oncoming traffic which may affect
safe passage.
(Prior Code, § 19-622)
§ 71.24  YIELD SIGN.
   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such
sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions, or shall stop
if necessary as provided in §
71.23, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian legally crossing the
roadway on which he/she is driving, and to any vehicle in the intersection or
approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard.
Said driver having so yielded may proceed and the drivers of all other vehicles
approaching the intersection shall yield to the vehicle so proceeding,
provided, however, that if such driver is involved in a collision with a
pedestrian in a crosswalk or a vehicle in the intersection after driving past a
yield sign without stopping, such collision shall be deemed prima facie
evidence of his/her failure to yield right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 19-623)
§ 71.25  STANDING OR PARKED VEHICLES; UNOBSTRUCTED LANE REQUIRED.
   In no event shall any person park or leave standing any vehicle, whether
attended or unattended, upon any street or highway unless a clear or
unobstructed width of not less than ten feet upon the main traveled portion of
such street or highway opposite such standing vehicle shall be left for free
passage of other vehicles thereon.
(Prior Code, § 19-624)
§ 71.26  DEAD STORAGE.
   (A)   Vehicles. 
      (1)   Any vehicle, motorized, self-propelled or towed shall be deemed
dead storage if any of the following conditions exist:
         (a)   Not legally licensed in the current year;
         (b)   Not operable upon demand;
         (c)   Not moved within 72 hours from city streets or city-owned
parking lots.
      (2)   Exception to this section shall be if the owner leaves the area for
any reason and has notified the Police Department of that fact.  The owner
shall be responsible for any towing if an emergency arises and the city has to
remove the vehicle for the emergency.  Nothing in this section precludes the
Police Department from immediately removing a motor vehicle in violation of
division (A)(1)(a) and (b) above.
   (B)   Enforcement.  Any officer observing or receiving information of dead
storage shall observe and/or mark the vehicle for 72 hours. If said violation
is there after 72 hours, a notice to remove and a $25 citation will be issued.
If said violation remains there after a notice to remove is given the vehicle
shall be towed off city property or street.  If the same vehicle is found to be
in violation of the dead storage ordinance a second time, the second and
subsequent citations shall be increased progressively by $25 each time up to
$100.  If the vehicle exhibits obvious signs that it has not been moved, (i.e.
two or more flat tires, snow build up on or around vehicle, expired license
plates) the officer may remove the vehicle immediately upon view without notice
to the owner of said vehicle.
   (C)   Vehicle disposal.  Vehicles towed under division (B) above may be
impounded in the city impound area or released to the towing company to dispose
of in compliance with state statute. Any vehicle towed to the city impound area
will require that a letter to the last registered owner and lien holder shall
be sent within 24 hours, unless towed during the weekend, then the letter shall
be sent the following Monday.  If vehicles are held unclaimed for more than ten
days, the city may publish a notice of abandonment. Such notice shall allow the
registered owner 30 days to reclaim vehicles by paying all fines, towing and
storage against said vehicles. After 30 days, the city may sell vehicles by
sealed bid.  A bill of sale will be issued upon all sales.
(Prior Code, §§ 19-624A, 624B, 624C)  (Am. Ord. 1017-13, passed 5-20-2013)
§ 71.27  POSITION OF PARKING ON TWO-WAY ROAD.
   Except as otherwise provided in §§
71.28 and
71.29 every vehicle stopped or parked upon a two- way roadway shall be so
stopped or parked with the right hand wheels parallel to and within 12 inches
of the right hand curb or edge of the roadway.
(Prior Code, § 19-625)
§ 71.28  POSITION OF PARKING ON ONE-WAY ROAD.
   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way street or roadway shall be so
stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the street or roadway, in the
direction of authorized traffic movement, with its right hand wheels within 12
inches of the right hand curb or edge of the street or roadway, or its left
hand wheels within 12 inches of the left hand curb or edge of the street or
roadway.
(Prior Code, § 19-626)
§ 71.29  NO PARKING ZONES POSTED BY CITY.
   The Commissioners of the City of Lead with respect to streets and highways
under their jurisdiction may place signs prohibiting or restricting the
stopping, standing or parking of vehicles on any street or highway where in
their opinion, as evidenced by resolution or order entered in its minutes, such
stopping, standing or parking is dangerous to those using the street or highway
or where the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would unduly interfere
with the free movement of traffic thereon. Such signs be official signs and no
person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in violation of the restrictions
stated on such signs.
(Prior Code, § 19-627)
§ 71.30  OPENING OF DOORS ON TRAFFIC SIDE OF STOPPED VEHICLES.
   No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
(Prior Code, § 19-628)
§ 71.31  REMOVAL OF VEHICLES IMPROPERLY PARKED OR STANDING.
   Whenever any peace officer shall find a vehicle standing upon a street or
highway in violation of the provisions of §
71.25, he/she is hereby authorized to move such vehicle or require the driver
or person in charge of such vehicle to move such vehicle to a position
permitted under said sections.
(Prior Code, § 19-629)
§ 71.32  DISABLED VEHICLE EXCEPTED.
   The provisions of §
71.31 shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on a
main traveled street or highway in such manner and to such extent that it is
impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving such vehicle in such
position.  The driver of said disabled vehicle shall notify the police
immediately that his/her vehicle is disabled and the means that they will have
it removed.
(Prior Code, § 19-630)
§ 71.33  PLACES WHERE STANDING AND PARKING PROHIBITED.
   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance
with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control
device, no person shall stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
   (A)   By blocking a public or private driveway not his/her own;
   (B)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
   (C)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
   (D)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signals, stop sign,
yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway;
   (E)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the
side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of
said entrance when properly sign posted;
   (F)   At any place where official signs prohibit standing;
   (G)   Small cars only may park on Main Street in the city in the first stall
to the west of any such intersection. A small car is defined as a motor vehicle
which is five feet wide by 14 feet long by five feet high or less;
   (H)   No large motor vehicle shall park on any street within the city a
large motor vehicle is defined as a motor vehicle with three or more axles on
one chassis or in combination with more than one chassis.
(Prior Code, § 19-631)
§ 71.34  PLACES WHERE PARKING PROHIBITED.
   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance
with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control
device, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle:
   (A)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;
   (B)   On a sidewalk;
   (C)   Within an intersection;
   (D)   On a crosswalk;
   (E)   With its left side to curb;
   (F)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
   (G)   At any place where official signs, yellow markings or both prohibits
stopping.
(Prior Code, § 19-632)
§ 71.35  PLACES WHERE PARKING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING.
   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance
with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control
devise, no person shall park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading merchandise or passengers:  At any place were official signs prohibit
parking.
(Prior Code, § 19-633)
§ 71.36  UNAUTHORIZED MOVEMENT OF ANOTHER VEHICLE INTO PROHIBITED AREA.
   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his/her control into any
such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful.
(Prior Code, § 19-634)
§ 71.37  PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PERSONS ENTITLED TO PARK WITHOUT TIME
LIMITATIONS.
   Any physically handicapped person, who displays special license plates or a
serially numbered certificate on an automobile used in transporting him/her
shall be entitled to park without limitation in areas where parking is normally
restricted by time factors. Provided, however, that any municipality may, by
ordinance, prohibit parking on any street or highway for the purpose of
creating a fire lane. or to provide for the accommodation of heavy traffic
during morning and afternoon rush hours, and the privileges extended to such
handicapped persons shall not apply, on streets or highways where and during
such times as parking is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 19-635)
§ 71.38  USE OF PRIVILEGES BY NON-HANDICAPPED PERSON.
   No person who is not physically handicapped shall exercise the privileges
granted a physically handicapped person.
(Prior Code, § 19-636)
§ 71.39  UNAUTHORIZED PARKING IN HANDICAPPED SPACE.
   Any vehicle not displaying a serially numbered certificate or special
license plate may not park in a parking space on public or private property
designated as reserved for the physically handicapped. Violation of this
section will be subject to a $50 fine.
(Prior Code, § 19-637)
§ 71.40  TIME LIMIT ON PARKING.
   (A)   Such period of time as shall be established by resolution of the Board
of Commissioners and plainly marked at the area restricted.
   (B)   Restriction shall be enforced on Saturdays, Sundays, or Holidays.
(Prior Code, § 19-638)
§ 71.41  EMERGENCY VEHICLES; CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH MAY DISREGARD TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS.
   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law
or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise
the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions stated
in §§
71.42 and
71.43.
(Prior Code, § 19-6-639)
Cross-reference:
   Yielding right-of-way to emergency vehicles, see §
71.11
§ 71.42  EMERGENCY VEHICLES; PARTICULAR REGULATIONS WHICH MAY BE DISREGARDED.
   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
   (A)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this Traffic Code;
   (B)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing
down as may be necessary for safe operation;
   (C)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions.
(Prior Code, § 19-640)
Cross-reference:
   Yielding right-of-way to emergency vehicles, see §
71.11
§ 71.43  EMERGENCY VEHICLES; USE OF EMERGENCY SIGNALS REQUIRED.
   The exemptions granted in §
71.41 to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when such vehicle is
making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of law.
(Prior Code, § 19-641)
Cross-reference:
   Yielding right-of-way to emergency vehicles, see §
71.11
§ 71.44  EMERGENCY VEHICLES: DUTY OF OPERATOR.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of
his/her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(Prior Code, § 19-642)
Cross-reference:
   Yielding right-of-way to emergency vehicles, see §
71.11
§ 71.45  EMERGENCY VEHICLES; DUTY OF OTHER MOTORISTS UPON APPROACH.
   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of
audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of this Traffic Code, or of
a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible signal only,
the driver of every other vehicle shall immediately drive to a position as near
as possible to the right hand edge or curb of the street or highway, or in case
of a one-way street or highway the nearest edge or curb, clear of any
intersection of streets or highways, and shall stop and remain in such position
unless otherwise directed by a police or traffic officer until the authorized
emergency vehicle shall have passed.
(Prior Code, § 19-643)
Cross-reference:
   Yielding right-of-way to emergency vehicles, see §
71.11
§ 71.46  EMERGENCY VEHICLES; STOP REQUIRED UPON APPROACHING STOPPED EMERGENCY
VEHICLE USING SIGNALS.
   Upon approaching from any direction any stopped authorized emergency vehicle
making use of visual signals meeting the requirements of this Traffic Code, the
driver of every other vehicle shall come to a complete stop before he/she
reaches the stopped emergency vehicle and may, unless otherwise directed,
proceed with caution only after he has ascertained that it is safe to do so.
(Prior Code, § 19-644)
Cross-reference:
   Yielding right-of-way to emergency vehicles, see §
71.11
§ 71.47  FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS; MINIMUM FOLLOWING AND PARKING DISTANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle other than one on
official business to follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire
alarm closer than 500 feet or to drive into and park such vehicle within the
block where the fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a  fire alarm.
(Prior Code, § 19-645)
§ 71.48  DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE PROHIBITED.
   No vehicle shall drive over any unprotected hose of a Fire Department when
laid down on any street or highway, private road or driveway to be used at any
fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department official in
command.
(Prior Code, § 19-646)
§ 71.49  DUTY OF MOTORIST TO SLOW OR STOP IN OBEDIENCE TO AMBER OR RED SIGNAL
OF SCHOOL BUS.
   The operator of a motor vehicle on a two-lane street or highway meeting or
overtaking a school bus on which the amber warning lights are flashing shall
reduce the speed of his/her vehicle to not more than 20 miles per hour and
proceed past the school bus with caution. The operator of a motor vehicle when
he/she meets or overtakes a school bus on which the red signal lights are
flashing shall bring his/her vehicle to a complete stop not closer than 15 feet
from the school bus and shall remain stopped until the flashing red signal
lights are extinguished. The operator of a motor vehicle on a street or highway
providing two or more lanes in each direction need not stop when he/she meets a
school bus which is traveling in the opposite direction even though the school
bus is stopped and its red signal lights flashing. The operator of a motor
vehicle on a street or highway providing two or more lanes in each direction
shall stop when he overtakes a school bus traveling in the same direction when
the school bus is stopped and its red signal lights are flashing.
(Prior Code, § 19-647)
§ 71.50  FAILURE TO STOP ON SIGNAL OR ELUDING POLICE VEHICLE.
   No driver of a motor vehicle shall intentionally fail or refuse to bring
his/her vehicle to a stop, or shall otherwise flee or attempt to elude a
pursuing police vehicle, when given visual or audible signal to bring the
vehicle to a stop. The signal given by the police officer may be by hand,
voice, emergency light or siren. The officer giving such signal shall be in
uniform, prominently displaying his badge of office, and his vehicle shall be
appropriately marked showing it to be an official police vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 19-648)
§ 71.51  FLEEING FROM POLICE.
   No person shall flee from or attempt to elude a police officer under the
circumstances described in §
71.50.
(Prior Code, § 19-649)
§ 71.52  UNSAFE BACKING PROHIBITED.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not back that same unless such movement can be
made with safety and without interfering with other traffic.
(Prior Code, § 19-650)
§ 71.53  THROUGH STREETS.
   The Board of Commissioners may from time to time by resolution establish and
cause to be designated and marked certain streets or parts thereof as through
streets. After such streets or parts of streets have been so designated and
plainly marked, no vehicle shall enter such street without first coming to a
complete stop, and shall not thereafter enter said street until it has a clear
right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 19-651)
§ 71.54  POLICY FOR SNOW REMOVAL AND CLEANING OF STREETS.
   It is hereby declared to be in the best interest of the public policy and
public safety of the city to regulate and restrict the operation and/or parking
of vehicles on public streets during snow removal or cleaning of streets.
(Prior Code, § 19-652)
§ 71.55  PROHIBITED OPERATION/PARKING DURING STREET CLEANING OPERATION.
   No vehicle shall be operated or parked in such a manner as to interfere with
cleaning of streets by the city; and if operated or parked on any street where
the Street Department is cleaning therefrom, the owner or person in charge of
said motor vehicle shall move it at once upon request by law enforcement or the
city employee in charge of cleaning.  The Street Foreman shall have authority
to prohibit operation and/or parking on any street for which said street is
being cleaned. Notice of such prohibited operation or parking shall be given by
placing proper signs on said street, or by publishing a notice thereof in any
newspaper of general circulation within the city or by having announced on
local radio stations notice of street cleaning.  Any vehicle operated or parked
in violation of this section will be moved and/or cited by the city and the
cost thereof assessed against the person operating or parking such vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 19-652A)
§ 71.56  SNOW EMERGENCY.
   (A)   Operation of vehicles.  While snow removal is in effect, and until
such snow removal is terminated, no person shall operate a motor vehicle on any
street with snow removal, in such a manner or in such condition as to allow or
permit such vehicle to become stalled, either by reason of the fact that the
driving wheels of such vehicle are not equipped with tire chains or effective
snow tires.
   (B)   Leaving of stalled or disabled vehicle during snow storm prohibited. 
No person shall leave any motor vehicle in the driving lane due to its stalling
or becoming disabled, during a snow storm. If a vehicle becomes stalled or
disabled, the driver or the person in charge of the vehicle shall make
provisions to remove the vehicle in the most expeditious manner. Notification
shall be made to the Police Department immediately as to the location of the
vehicle.
   (C)   Declaring of snow emergency.  Law enforcement officer(s) or the Street
Foreman shall monitor the weather situation and if they feel that a snow
emergency should be declared, they shall contact the Police Chief or Assistant
Police Chief for confirmation to make the announcement.  Any snow emergency
shall include the following:
      (1)   Restriction placed:  Chains, no travel, four-wheel drives only,
street closures, etc.
      (2)   Notification of media:
         (a)   List what radio and television stations should be notified;
         (b)   All information should be faxed to insure that restrictions are
understood and announced correctly;
         (c)   If no fax available, call in announcement and explain that
announcement should be made as given;
         (d)   Update media with any changes or restrictions placed inside or
outside city limits to insure that citizens are informed.
      (3)   Duration of weather emergency:  If possible, time table of
restriction - In affect only during snow removal, in affect until snow
subsides, in affect until further notice, etc.
      (4)   Fines for violations of restrictions:
         (a)   Fines for above violations shall be $75 plus costs;
         (b)   Owner shall be responsible for any towing fees if vehicle must
be towed.
(Prior Code, § 19-652B, 652C, 652D)
§ 71.57  UNIFORM TRAFFIC DEVICE CODE ADOPTED.
   The Uniform Traffic Control Devices for streets and highways within the
city, as prepared by the National Joint Committee on Uniform Traffic-Control
Devices, as published by the U. S.  Department of Commerce, Bureau of Public
Roads, Washington, D. C. dated June, 1988, and approved as an American Standard
by the American Standards Association, a printed copy of which is on file in
the Finance Office, are hereby incorporated in this section.
(Prior Code, § 19-653)
§ 71.58  CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE IN VEHICLE.
   It shall be illegal for any person occupying a motor vehicle located upon a
city street or right-of-way of a public highway to consume any alcoholic
beverage or have a package or any receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage
in that person's possession unless the seal of the original package remains
unbroken or the alcoholic beverage is so removed from the passenger area of the
motor vehicle that no occupant of the motor vehicle has access to it.
(Prior Code, § 19-654)
§ 71.59  LANE DRIVING.
   On a roadway divided into lanes, a vehicle shall be driven as nearly as
practicable entirely within a single lane and may not be moved from such lane
until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made safely.
(Prior Code, § 19-655)
§ 71.60  OTHER TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES; DIRECTIONS BY POLICE OFFICER.
   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control device application thereto placed in accordance with the
provisions of this Traffic Code, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or
police officer, an subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 19-656)
CHAPTER 72:  ACCIDENTS
Section
   
72.01   Duty to stop
   
72.02   Immediate notice when person disabled
   
72.03   Failure to report accident with unattended vehicle
   
72.04   Hit and run; death or injury
   
72.05   Hit and run; property damage
   
72.06   Failure to report accident
   
72.07   Repair of vehicle with reportable damage prohibited unless required
notice affixed
   
72.08   Evidence of financial responsibility
Cross-reference:
   Definitions, see §
70.01
§ 72.01  DUTY TO STOP.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in any accident resulting in injury or
death to any person or damage to property shall immediately stop and give name
and address, and the name and address of the owner and the license number of
the vehicle he is driving to the person struck or the driver or occupants of
any vehicle collided with and shall render to any person injured in such
accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying of such person to a
physician or surgeon for medical treatment if it is apparent that such
treatment is necessary or is requested by the injured person.
(Prior Code, § 19-700)
§ 72.02  IMMEDIATE NOTICE WHEN PERSON DISABLED.
   In the event that none of the persons specified in §
72.01 are in condition to receive the information to which they otherwise would
be entitled, and no police officer is present, the driver of any vehicle
involved in such accident, after fulfilling all other requirements of §
72.01, insofar as possible on his/her part to be performed, shall forthwith
report such accident to the nearest office of a duly authorized police
authority and submit thereto the information specified in §
72.01.
(Prior Code, § 19-701)
§ 72.03  FAILURE TO REPORT ACCIDENT WITH UNATTENDED VEHICLE.
   The driver of any vehicle which collides with or is involved in an accident
with any vehicle or other property which is unattended resulting in any damage
to such other vehicle or property shall immediately stop and shall then and
there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle or other
property of his/her name, address and the name and address of the owner and the
license number of the vehicle he/she is driving or shall attach securely in a
conspicuous place in or on such vehicle or other property a written notice
giving his/her name, address and the name and address of the owner and the
license number of the vehicle he/she is driving and shall without unnecessary
delay notify the nearest office of a duly authorized police authority.  Every
such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary.
(Prior Code, § 19-702)
§ 72.04  HIT AND RUN; DEATH OR INJURY.
   Any driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury or
death to any person, who fail immediately to stop such vehicle at the scene of
such accident and comply with the provisions of §
72.01 shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 19-703)
§ 72.05  HIT AND RUN; PROPERTY DAMAGE.
   Any driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in damage to
property shall stop his/her vehicle at the scene of the accident and
immediately give his/her name and address and the name and address of the owner
of the vehicle.  If the damage is to another motor vehicle and the owner of the
damaged vehicle is not at the scene of the accident, the driver shall
immediately leave such information on the other vehicle. If the damage is to
property other than a motor vehicle, and the owner of the damaged property is
not at the scene, the driver shall leave such information with the owner of the
property or with a law enforcement agency as soon as possible.
(Prior Code, § 19-704)
§ 72.06  FAILURE TO REPORT ACCIDENT.
   The driver of any motor vehicle involved in an accident resulting in bodily
injuries or death to any person or property damage to an apparent extent of
$400 or more shall immediately by the quickest means of communication give
notice of such accident to the nearest available police officer who has
jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 19-705)
§ 72.07  REPAIR OF VEHICLE WITH REPORTABLE DAMAGE PROHIBITED UNLESS REQUIRED
NOTICE AFFIXED.
   The person in charge of any garage or repair shop shall not commence repair
on any motor vehicle which shows evidence of having been involved in a
reportable accident or struck by any bullet unless the vehicle bears the notice
provided for in SDCL § 32-34-10.
(Prior Code, § 19-706)
§ 72.08  EVIDENCE OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   Every person who drives a motor vehicle, required to be registered in this
state, if requested by a law enforcement officer as a secondary action when the
driver of the vehicle is detained for a suspected violation of this Traffic
Code or some other offense, shall provide evidence of financial responsibility.
(Prior Code, § 19-707)
CHAPTER 73:  PARKING METER REGULATIONS
Section
   
73.01   Definitions
   
73.02   Parking meter zones
   
73.03   Designation of parking spaces
   
73.04   Installation of parking meters
   
73.05   Violations
   
73.06   Collections
   
73.07   Reservation of authority
   
73.08   Fines
Cross-reference:
   Parking and storage regulations, see
Chapter 79
   Traffic Code definitions, see §
70.01
§ 73.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARKING METER.  Includes any mechanical device or meter installed for the
regulation of parking vehicles on the city streets by authority of this
chapter.  Each parking meter shall indicate by proper legend the legal parking
established by the city, and when operated shall at all times indicate the
balance of legal parking time, and at the expiration of such period shall
indicate illegal or overtime parking.
(Prior Code, § 19-900)
§ 73.02  PARKING METER ZONES.
   All meter parking zones hereto established by resolution or ordinance
continue in effect as though set forth here in full.  The City Commission may,
by resolution, amend such zones.
(Prior Code, § 19-901)
§ 73.03  DESIGNATION OF PARKING SPACES.
   Individual parking spaces shall be designated by the parking meter which
will indicate the front or rear end of each parking space.
(Prior Code, § 19-902)
§ 73.04  INSTALLATION OF PARKING METERS.
   Parking meters shall be installed on the curb or sidewalk immediately
adjacent to the parking space.
(Prior Code, § 19-903)
§ 73.05  VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter for
any person:
   (A)   To cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle owned or operated by
such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time
established for any parking meter zone, or to deposit in any parking meter any
coin for the purpose of parking beyond the maximum legal parking time.
   (B)   To permit any vehicle owned or operated by such person to remain in
any parking space adjacent to any parking meter while said meter is displaying
a signal indicating that the vehicle occupying such parking space has already
been parked beyond the prescribed period for such parking space.
   (C)   To permit any vehicle owned or operated by such person to be parked
where the front end of the motor vehicle is beyond the parking meter or where
the rear end of the vehicle is beyond the parking meter to the rear of the
parked vehicle.
   (D)   To deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy, or
impair the usefulness of any parking meter.
   (E)   To deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slugs,
devices or metal substances for lawful coins of the United States.
(Prior Code, § 19-904)
§ 73.06  COLLECTIONS.
   The Board of Commissioners shall designate some person or persons to make
regular collections of the money deposited in said parking meters, who shall
remove the sealed containers therein containing the coins deposited in said
meters, and deliver them with the seals unbroken to the City Finance Officer,
who shall break the seal, count the money and deposit such funds with the City
Finance Officer.
(Prior Code, § 19-905)
§ 73.07  RESERVATION OF AUTHORITY.
   The establishment of a parking meter zone shall not be construed as
prohibiting provisions for bus stops or unloading zones, or provisions for
different maximum parking limits within such zones, which may affected by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners and proper marking of the designated
area affected by such resolution.
(Prior Code, § 19-906)
§ 73.08  FINES.
   Fines for overtime parking may be set by resolution and existing fines are
hereby adopted.
(Prior Code, § 19-907)
CHAPTER 74:  TRAFFIC COURT REGULATIONS AND FINES
Section
   
74.01   Manner of arrest
   
74.02   Notice to appear
   
74.03   Appearance
   
74.04   Arrest on failure to appear
   
74.05   Dismissal by officer prohibited
   
74.06   Account for citations
   
74.07   Issuance of minor traffic tickets and payment to City Finance Officer
   
74.08   Bonding schedule
Cross-reference:
   Definitions, see §
70.01
§ 74.01  MANNER OF ARREST.
   Except in those cases where deposits for fines are not authorized by the
Board of Commissioners of the city and except when reasonably necessary to
secure appearance, a person charged with violation of a traffic ordinance of
the city by a police officer need not be arrested in the regular manner, but
may first be given an opportunity after notice to appear voluntarily to answer
for such traffic violations.
(Prior Code, § 19-1000)
§ 74.02  NOTICE TO APPEAR.
   A person charged with violation of a traffic ordinance shall be given a
citation to appear at the office of the Clerk of Courts at the date and time
stated in such citation, and that in the event of failure to do so a warrant
shall be issued for his/her arrest.  The citation shall state the time and
nature of the offense, describe the vehicle involved, and be in triplicate; one
copy to be given to the owner or driver charged with the offense or left in or
upon the vehicle involved in the violation; one copy to be filed with the
Department; and one copy to be filed with the Clerk of Courts.
(Prior Code, § 19-1001)
§ 74.03  APPEARANCE.
   A person who has received a citation of traffic violation through the police
shall within the time specified in such citation appear at the Clerk of Courts
office to answer to the charge set forth therein, according to the procedure of
the Court.
(Prior Code, § 19-1002)
§ 74.04  ARREST ON FAILURE TO APPEAR.
   Upon failure of a person to appear in response to a citation of a traffic
violation as herein provided, he/she shall be subject to arrest in the manner
otherwise provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 19-1003)
§ 74.05  DISMISSAL BY OFFICER PROHIBITED.
   A traffic violation shall not be excused or dismissed by any police officer
after the citation to appear has been served as herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 19-1004)
§ 74.06  ACCOUNT FOR CITATIONS.
   The Chief of Police shall take a receipt for each set of blank citations
issued to a police officer.  Each police officer to whom blank citations are
issued shall account for all citations at least once a month to said Chief of
Police.
(Prior Code, § 19-1005)
§ 74.07  ISSUANCE OF MINOR TRAFFIC TICKETS AND PAYMENT TO CITY FINANCE OFFICER.
   The police officers of the city are hereby authorized to issue to offenders
against minor traffic ordinances of the city, as shall be determined by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners, traffic tickets or citations upon
parking meter tickets not paid according to the terms therein; directing such
offender to appear within a reasonable time and pay to the Finance Officer of
the city the penalty as provided by resolution of the Board of Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 19-1006)  (Ord. 975-06, passed 11-27-2006; Ord. 990-09, passed
2-2-2009)
§ 74.08  BONDING SCHEDULE.
   Traffic fines under this Traffic Code that are applicable shall fall under
the bonding schedule set down by the 4th Circuit Court of Lawrence County.
(Prior Code, § 19-1007)
CHAPTER 75:  MOTORCYCLES
Section
   
75.01   Driver's license or motorcycle permit required
   
75.02   Motorcycle headlights
   
75.03   Handlebar height
   
75.04   Helmet required for minors
   
75.05   Muffler
   
75.06   Permanent seats
   
75.07   Position of motorcyclist
   
75.08   Carrying packages on motorcycle
   
75.09   Rider interfering with operator
   
75.10   Attachment to other vehicles prohibited
   
75.11   Motorcycle prohibited from overtaking in same lane
   
75.12   Operation between lanes prohibited
   
75.13   Policemen exempt from restrictions on use of lanes
   
75.14   Motorcycles restricted to two abreast
   
75.15   Eye protective device or windscreen required
Cross-reference:
   Definitions, see §
70.01
   Firearms, restriction on carrying on motorcycle, §
131.09
§ 75.01  DRIVER'S LICENSE OR MOTORCYCLE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person may operate a motorcycle, except a moped as defined in §
70.01, on any roadway or street without a motorcycle driver's license or permit
upon which a state testing officer has certified that such person is qualified
to operate such motorcycle.
(Prior Code, § 19-500)
§ 75.02  MOTORCYCLE HEADLIGHTS.
   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more than two
head lamps which shall comply with the requirements set forth in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 19-501)
Cross-reference:
   Headlamps required, see §
70.65
§ 75.03  HANDLEBAR HEIGHT.
   No person shall operate on a public street or highway a motorcycle on which
the handlebars or grips are more than 15 inches above the seat level when
depressed.
(Prior Code, § 19-502)
§ 75.04  HELMET REQUIRED FOR MINORS.
   It is unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to operations or ride
upon a motorcycle on the public streets or highways unless the person wears a
protective helmet of a type meeting Department of Transportation Motor Vehicles
Standard 218 as in effect on January 1, 1984.  It is unlawful for any person to
operate a motorcycle with any person under the age of 18 as a passenger if the
passenger is not wearing a protective helmet.
(Prior Code, § 19-503)
§ 75.05  MUFFLER.
   Every motorcycle shall at all times be equipped with an adequate muffler in
constant operation and properly maintained to prevent any excessive or unusual
noise, and no muffler or exhaust system shall be complete with a cutout,
bypass, or similar device.  It shall be unlawful to make any alterations either
by way of addition or modification of any original or stock muffler.
(Prior Code, § 19-505)
§ 75.06  PERMANENT SEATS.
   A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and
regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other
person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle
is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride
upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons, or upon
another seat firmly attached to the motorcycle at the rear or side of the
operator.
(Prior Code, § 506)
§ 75.07  POSITION OF MOTORCYCLIST.
   A person shall ride upon a motorcycle only while sitting astride the
motorcycle and the seat thereof, facing forward.
(Prior Code, § 19-507)
§ 75.08  CARRYING PACKAGES ON MOTORCYCLE.
   No person shall operate a motorcycle while carrying any package, bundle, or
other article which prevents him from keeping both hands on the handlebars.
(Prior Code, § 19-508)
§ 75.09  RIDER INTERFERING WITH OPERATOR.
   No operator shall carry any person, nor shall any person ride, in a position
that will interfere with the operation or control of the motorcycle or the view
of the operator.
(Prior Code, § 19-509)
§ 75.10  ATTACHMENT TO OTHER VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   No person riding upon a motorcycle shall attach himself to the motorcycle to
any other vehicle on a roadway.
(Prior Code, § 19-510)
§ 75.11  MOTORCYCLE PROHIBITED FROM OVERTAKING IN SAME LANE.
   The operator of a motorcycle shall not overtake and pass in the same lane
occupied by the vehicle being overtaken.  This section shall not apply to
motorcycles being operated two abreast in the same lane, or a motorcycle and a
bicycle being operated two abreast in the same lane.
(Prior Code, § 19-511)
§ 75.12  OPERATION BETWEEN LANES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall operate a motorcycle between adjacent lanes of traffic, or
between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 19-512)
§ 75.13  POLICEMEN EXEMPT FROM RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF LANES.
   Sections §§
75.11 and
75.12 shall not apply to police officers in the performance of their official
duties.
(Prior Code, § 19-513)
§ 75.14  MOTORCYCLES RESTRICTED TO TWO ABREAST.
   Motorcycles shall not be operated more than two abreast in a single lane.
(Prior Code, § 19-514)
§ 75.15  EYE PROTECTIVE DEVICE OR WINDSCREEN REQUIRED.
   No person may operate a motorcycle unless he/she is wearing an eye
protective device or unless the motorcycle is equipped with a windscreen of
sufficient height and design so as to provide adequate eye protection to the
operator when seated on the motorcycle in the normal operating position.
However, no person may operate a mototcycle during the time period when
headlights must be lighted while wearing an eye protective device that is
tinted or shaded to reduce the light transmittance of the device to a level
below 35%.
(Prior Code, § 19-515)
CHAPTER 76:  SNOWMOBILES
Section
   
76.01   Speeding; reckless driving; muffler
   
76.02   Licensed driver
   
76.03   Operation on roadway
   
76.04   Flagging
   
76.05   Licensing and registration of snowmobiles
   
76.06   Lights; when required
   
76.07   Safety equipment and inspections
   
76.08   Hours of permitted operation
   
76.09   Rules of the road
   
76.10   Restrictions on carrying a firearm
Cross-reference:
   Definitions, see §
70.01
§ 76.01  SPEEDING; RECKLESS DRIVING; MUFFLER.
   No person shall operate a snowmobile in the following manner:
   (A)   At a speed that is greater than is reasonable or prudent under the
circumstances;
   (B)   In any reckless way so as to endanger the person or property of
another;
   (C)   Without a functioning muffler.
(Prior Code, § 19-400)
§ 76.02  LICENSED DRIVER.
   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a street or highway unless
such person has a valid license as an operator under the provisions of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 19-401)
§ 76.03  OPERATION ON ROADWAY.
   Snowmobiles as defined in §
70.01 shall operate over designated roadways when the same shall be snow
covered or snow packed only, and such snowmobiles shall not be permitted to
operate on any sidewalks.
(Prior Code, § 19-402)
§ 76.04  FLAGGING.
   All snowmobiles shall exhibit a flag not less than ten inches and hung or
suspended five feet above ground level so that the entire area thereof is
visible from all directions while on the roadway, street or alley. Exception to
this shall be when traveling to the city limits from a residence or from city
limits to a residence or law enforcement and fire personnel riding snowmobiles
under emergency situations.
(Prior Code, § 19-402A)
§ 76.05  LICENSING AND REGISTRATION OF SNOWMOBILES.
   No snowmobile shall be operated within the city unless said snowmobile is
properly licensed by the State of South Dakota and the South Dakota snowmobile
license plates are properly affixed to said snowmobile.
(Prior Code, § 19-403)
§ 76.06  LIGHTS WHEN REQUIRED.
   Any snowmobile on any street or highway, operated during hours of darkness,
shall display a lighted headlamp and tail lamp.
(Prior Code, § 19-405)
§ 76.07  SAFETY EQUIPMENT AND INSPECTIONS.
   No snowmobile shall be driven on the roadway, street or alley when said
snowmobile is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person or property.
The city police may at any time upon reasonable cause to believe that a
snowmobile is unsafe or not equipped as required by this chapter, require the
driver of such vehicle to stop and submit such vehicle to an inspection and
test with reference thereto as may be appropriate.  No person shall operate any
vehicle which has been found unsafe except to return such snowmobile to his/her
residence, place of business or to a garage until said vehicle has been placed
in proper repair.
(Prior Code, §19-406)
§ 76.08  HOURS OF PERMITTED OPERATION.
   No snowmobile shall be operated within the city between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. except that a driver may drive during this restricted time
when he/she is coming into town to his/her residence or is leaving town to go
to his/her residence, when driving to and from work or by special authorization
by the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 19-407)
§ 76.09  RULES OF THE ROAD.
   Every operator of a snowmobile shall observe all of the rules of the road
pertaining to vehicles and in addition shall yield the right of way to motor
vehicles.  All ordinances of the city pertaining to the operation of vehicles
shall be applicable to the operation of snowmobiles and are adopted by
reference and made a part hereof, the same as if set forth fully herein.
(Prior Code, § 19-408)
§ 76.10  RESTRICTIONS ON CARRYING A FIREARM.
   No person other than a law enforcement officer or conservation officer shall
operate or ride on any snowmobile with any firearm in his possession.
(Prior Code, § 19-409)
CHAPTER 77:  REGULATION OF BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES AND COASTERS
Section
   
77.01   Bicycle license required; fine
   
77.02   Licensing agency
   
77.03   Removal or alteration of tags or numbers
   
77.04   License fee
   
77.05   Unauthorized use
   
77.06   Safe mechanical condition prerequisite to issuance of license
   
77.07   Compliance with mechanical standards
   
77.08   Sirens and whistles
   
77.09   Rules of the road
   
77.10   Riding bicycles on sidewalks
   
77.11   Riding bicycles on streets
   
77.12   Hitching on vehicles
   
77.13   Passengers on vehicles and other devices
   
77.14   Towing
   
77.15   Racing
   
77.16   Trick riding
   
77.17   Parking of bicycles
   
77.18   Riding in parks prohibited
   
77.19   Use of roller skates, skateboards and coasters prohibited in business
districts
   
77.20   Use of coasters, roller skates, skateboards and similar devices
   
77.21   Use of skateboards in residential areas
   
77.22   Hours for skateboard riding
   
77.23   Rules of the road for skateboards
   
77.24   Safety of skateboard rider
   
77.25   Manner of skateboard operation
   
77.26   Enforcement
   
77.27   Parents of skateboard riders
Cross-reference:
   Definitions, see §
70.01
   Mopeds, headlamps required, see
70.66
§ 77.01  BICYCLE LICENSE REQUIRED; FINE.
   No resident of the city shall operate any bicycle (defined as any device
which a person may ride, which is propelled by human power through a system of
belts, chains, or gears and which has wheels at least 20 inches in diameter and
a frame size of at least 14 inches) on any street, road, highway, or other
public property within the city, unless such bicycle is licensed in accordance
with this section.  No fine imposed for the violation of this section shall
exceed $5.
(Prior Code, § 19-1100)
§ 77.02  LICENSING AGENCY.
   The City of Lead shall be the licensing agency for the licensing of bicycles
in accordance with §
77.01.
(Prior Code, § 19-1101)
§ 77.03  REMOVAL OR ALTERATION OF TAGS OR NUMBER.
   No person shall willfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter
the number of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant to this chapter.  No person
shall remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license tag or registration
certificate during the time in which such license tag or registration
certificate is operative; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall
prohibit the city from stamping numbers on the frames of bicycles on which no
serial number can be found, or on which the number is illegible or insufficient
for identification purposes.
(Prior Code, § 19-1102)
§ 77.04  LICENSE FEE.
   The license fee to be paid for each bicycle licensed and pursuant to §
77.01 shall be paid upon receipt of license.  Said fees shall be $2 per license
issued.
(Prior Code, § 19-1103)
§ 77.05  UNAUTHORIZED USE.
   No person shall take any bicycle for the purpose of riding or propelling the
same upon any street, road, or highway without the consent of the owner.
(Prior Code, § 19-1104)
§ 77.06  SAFE MECHANICAL CONDITION PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   Any person applying for a bicycle license pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter must demonstrate to the Chief of Police or his/her designated
representative that the bicycle for which the applicant desires to secure
license plates meets the requirements of this chapter as to safe mechanical
condition.
(Prior Code, § 19-1105)
§ 77.07  COMPLIANCE WITH MECHANICAL STANDARDS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate a bicycle in the city
unless the bicycle is equipped as provided in this chapter and unless the
bicycle is in safe mechanical condition.
(Prior Code, § 19-1106)
§ 77.08  SIRENS AND WHISTLES.
   No person shall equip a bicycle with a siren or whistle or operate or use a
bicycle so equipped; provided, that nothing in this section prohibits the
equipping, operation or use of a bicycle with an unusual kind of bicycle horn
or bell as approved by the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 19-1107)
§ 77.09  RULES OF THE ROAD.
   It is unlawful for any person to ride or operate a bicycle in the city in
violation of the rules of the road as set forth in §§
77.10 through
77.18.
(Prior Code, § 19-1108)
§ 77.10  RIDING BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS.
   No person shall ride or operate a bicycle upon any sidewalk in a business
district.  Any person riding or operating a bicycle upon any sidewalk shall
exercise due care and shall yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and shall
give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
(Prior Code, § 19-1109)
§ 77.11  RIDING BICYCLES ON STREETS.
   Any person riding or operating a bicycle upon any street shall obey all
traffic regulations and operate said bicycle in a safe manner.  STREET means a
way or place of whatever nature publicly maintained and open to the use of the
public for purposes of travel.
(Prior Code, § 19-1110)
§ 77.12  HITCHING ON VEHICLES.
   No person riding or occupying any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, roller
blades, sled, skateboard, toy vehicle, moped, or any other similar human-
powered or motor-powered device shall attach the same or himself/herself to any
vehicle or device when upon a public right of way, or upon any land, property,
or facilities owned or controlled by the city.
(Prior Code, § 19-1111)
§ 77.13  PASSENGERS ON VEHICLES AND OTHER DEVICES.
   No person riding or operating a bicycle, when upon a public right-of-way or
upon space lands owned and/or controlled by the city, to carry another person
upon the bicycle; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply to
bicycles which are built for two persons to ride and propel the same or to the
carrying of a child when the child is securely fastened to a seat designed to
carry a child or to the rider or operator if the child is under two years of
age.
(Prior Code, § 19-1112)
§ 77.14  TOWING.
   No person riding or operating a bicycle, moped, sled, toy vehicle, or any
other similar human-powered or motor-powered device upon a public right of way
or upon space lands owned and/or controlled by the city shall tow any other
vehicle or person, including a skateboard and rider, except that bicycle
trailers used for delivery or transportation of newspapers, magazines, or
merchandise may be towed when being used in such activity.
(Prior Code, § 19-1113)
§ 77.15  RACING.
   No person riding or operating a bicycle, moped, skateboard, roller skates,
roller blades, sled, toy vehicle, or any other similar human-powered or motor-
powered device upon a public right-of-way, or upon any land, property, or
facilities owned or controlled by the city, shall participate in any race,
speed, or endurance contest unless such race, speed, or endurance contest has
the written permission of the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 19-1114)
§ 77.16  TRICK RIDING.
   No person riding or operating a bicycle, moped, coaster, roller skates,
roller blades, sleds, skate board, or toy vehicle shall perform any acrobatic,
fancy, stunt, or trick riding upon any public right-of-way, or upon any space,
land, property or facilities owned or controlled by the city.
(Prior Code, § 19-1115)
§ 77.17  PARKING OF BICYCLES.
   No person shall park a bicycle against any window or parking meter or on the
main traveled portion of the sidewalk, nor in such manner as to constitute a
hazard to pedestrians, traffic or property.
(Prior Code, § 19-1116)
§ 77.18  RIDING IN PARKS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall ride or operate a bicycle or any motor driven conveyance
within city parks except on streets through such parks.
(Prior Code, § 19-1117)
§ 77.19  USE OF ROLLER SKATES, SKATEBOARDS, AND COASTERS PROHIBITED IN BUSINESS
DISTRICTS.
   No person shall skate with roller skates, or roller blades, propel any
coaster wagon or vehicle or ride any skateboard upon any sidewalk, or roadway,
or upon any public right-of-way, or upon any land, property or facilities owned
or controlled by the city, if such right-of-way, land, property or facility is
located within any business district of the city.
(Prior Code, § 19-1118)
§ 77.20  USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES, SKATEBOARDS AND SIMILAR DEVICES.
   No persons upon roller skates, roller blades, or riding in or by means of
any coaster, skateboard, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any
roadway or upon any city-owned, operated, or controlled parking lots, garages,
or other city owned property and facilities.
(Prior Code, § 19-1119)
§ 77.21  USE OF SKATEBOARDS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   The riding of skateboards shall be permitted upon private sidewalks and
roadways in residential areas of the city with the exception that the riding of
skateboards shall not be permitted:
   (A)   Upon any public or private sidewalk or ramp, or access ways specially
designed for use by the handicapped;
   (B)   Upon any private or public property where not otherwise prohibited by
any provisions of this section, when such property has been posted pursuant to
this section.  The City Commission or the designee is authorized to post or
erect or cause to be posted or erected, signs, at the owners' expense,
prohibiting the riding of skateboards or similar devices, in or on those
premises for which such a request has been made to, and approved by, the City
Commission or their designee.
(Prior Code, § 19-1120)
§ 77.22  HOURS FOR SKATEBOARD RIDING.
   No person shall ride a skateboard in the city from sunset to sunrise the
following day.
(Prior Code, § 19-1121)
§ 77.23  RULES OF THE ROAD FOR SKATEBOARDS.
   Persons riding skateboards, as otherwise permitted under this chapter, shall
obey the following rules of the road:
   (A)   Yield the right-of-way to pedestrians whenever and wherever they are
encountered;
   (B)   Not impede or interfere with the flow of vehicular traffic;
   (C)   Yield to approaching vehicles when entering any roadway;
   (D)   When on sidewalks, proceed with due care and at a safe speed;
   (E)   Not allow any other person, or persons, to ride the skateboards
simultaneously with the rider.
(Prior Code, § 19-1122)
§ 77.24  SAFETY OF SKATEBOARD RIDER.
   Persons who ride skateboards shall not wear headphones while riding
skateboards.
(Prior Code, § 19-1123)
§ 77.25  MANNER OF SKATEBOARD OPERATION.
   No person shall ride a skateboard recklessly, or in such a manner as to
cause danger or injury to himself/herself or to others.
(Prior Code, § 19-1124)
§ 77.26  ENFORCEMENT.
   Where any provisions of this chapter or of state law with respect to
bicycles has been violated by any juvenile under the age of 18 years, the Chief
of Police may prohibit the operation upon the streets, alleys, and public
places in the city for a period not to exceed 30 days of a bicycle so used in
such violation, and in such event the bicycle so used in such violation may be
impounded by the Chief of Police or his/her designee and retained during the
period of operation which is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 19-1125)
§ 77.27  PARENTS OF SKATEBOARD RIDERS.
   The parent of any child, and/or the guardian of any ward, shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 19-1126)
CHAPTER 78:  ABANDONED, DERELICT AND JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
   
78.01   Declaration of public interest
   
78.02   Definitions
   
78.03   Parking or leaving dismantled or other such motor vehicle declared
nuisance
   
78.04   Storing past six months on private property prohibited
   
78.05   Removal
   
78.06   Reserved
   
78.07   Duty of private property owners
   
78.08   Notice to remove
   
78.09   Racing or antique vehicles
 
   
78.99   Penalty
§ 78.01  DECLARATION OF PUBLIC INTEREST.
   Abandoned, derelict, and junk motor vehicles constitutes a hazard to the
health and welfare of the people of the city in that such vehicles can harbor
noxious diseases, furnish shelter and breeding places for vermin, and present
physical dangers to the safety and well being of children and other citizens. 
Abandoned, derelict, and junk motor vehicles also constitutes a blight on the
landscape of the city and, therefore, are a detriment to the environment.
(Prior Code, § 19-1200)
§ 78.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any motor vehicle which is left unattended on any
public street, alley, highway or public parking lot or other public place or
left on private property without the permission of the landowner or tenant for
more than 72 consecutive hours.
   ANTIQUE VEHICLE.  Any motor vehicle that is 30 or more years old and is
being held for antique collection purposes.
   APPROPRIATE COVER.  Any covering that is manufactured, designed or intended
for covering objects which is of a neutral color and does not cause attraction
to its presence.
   COVERED.  The terms or phrases shall have the meaning that no parts of the
vehicle shall be showing or visible except for the lower half of the vehicle
wheels and tires.
   JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES.  Any motor vehicle which does not have lawfully affixed
thereto unexpired license plates and a current motor vehicle safety inspection
sticker, if applicable, or which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled,
inoperable or discarded.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled or towed vehicle including, but not
limited to, automobiles, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-
carts, golf carts, campers, and trailers.
(Prior Code, § 19-1201)  (Ord. 990-09, passed 2-9-2009)
§ 78.03  PARKING OR LEAVING DISMANTLED OR OTHER SUCH MOTOR VEHICLE DECLARED
NUISANCE.
   (A)   The presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junk
or partially dismantled motor vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public
property, is hereby declared a public nuisance. 
   (B)   Exemptions:
      (1)   Any motor vehicle enclosed within a building;
      (2)   Any motor vehicle properly screened from public view on private
property;
      (3)   Any motor vehicle stored in conjunction with a properly zoned
vehicle repair business, provided that all such vehicles are covered by a dated
work order and invoice signed by the vehicle owner authorizing their repair;
      (4)   Any motor vehicle in operable condition, specifically adapted or
designed for operation on drag strips or raceways, on private property and
covered with an appropriate cover to screen it from view;
      (5)   Any motor vehicle retained on private property by the owner for
antique collection purposes, currently licensed as such, and covered with an
appropriate cover to screen it from view;
      (6)   Any motor vehicle stored on private property for six months or less
with an appropriate cover to screen it from view.
(Prior Code, § 19-1202)  (Ord. 990-09, passed 2-2-2009)
§ 78.04  STORING PAST SIX MONTHS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   No person shall store an appropriately covered motor vehicle on private
property for longer than six months. Exemptions in §§
78.03 and
79.04 are applicable.
(Prior Code, § 19-1203)
§ 78.05  REMOVAL.
   Whenever any police officer finds an abandoned motor vehicle or junk motor
vehicle on public property he shall follow the procedures set forth in §
71.26(A) and (B). Nothing in this section precludes the Police Department from
immediately removing a motor vehicle which causes an obstruction, hazard to
traffic or is in violation of §
71.26(A).
(Prior Code, § 19-1204)
§ 78.06  RESERVED.
§ 78.07  DUTY OF PRIVATE PROPERTY OWNERS.
   No person owning, in charge of, or in control of any real property within
the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow
any abandoned or junk motor vehicle of any kind to remain on such property
longer than ten days.
(Prior Code, § 19-1206)
§ 78.08  NOTICE TO REMOVE.
   It shall be the duty of the Public Safety Department to notify, in writing,
the property owner advising of the nuisance vehicle and ordering the removal or
abatement of the ordinance violation within five business days or within a time
set by the enforcing officer as deemed reasonable as such. The notification
will advise that failure to comply with such notice shall result in the vehicle
being removed by the city and that all fines, fees, and costs associated with
the vehicle removal will be the responsibility of the property owner.
(Prior Code, § 19-1207)  (Ord. 990-09, passed 2-2-2009; Ord. 1036-15, passed 7-
20-2015)
§ 78.09  RACING OR ANTIQUE VEHICLES.
   No owner or occupant of private property shall have an uncovered motor
vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or designed for operation on
drag strips or raceways or an uncovered motor vehicle retained on private
property for antique collection purposes, all as defined by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 19-1208)
§ 78.99  PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Traffic Code shall be
guilty of a Class II misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $200 and/or 30 days incarceration for each day the
violation remains hereafter.
(Prior Code, § 19-1209)
CHAPTER 79:  PARKING AND STORAGE REGULATONS
Section
   
79.01   Declaration of public interest
   
79.02   Vehicle parking and storage requirements within residential zone
   
79.03   Limitation on number of vehicles; outside
   
79.04   Recreational vehicles (RVs) and all trailers; parking and storage
limits
   
79.05   Parking and storage variance permits; requirements, criteria and fee
   
79.06   Public parking on Main Street
Cross-references:
   Definitions, see §
70.01
   Parking meter regulations, see
Chapter 73
   Traffic violations concerning parking, see
Chapter 71
§ 79.01  DECLARATION OF PUBLIC INTEREST.
   (A)   The physical appearance of residential neighborhoods make a
significant contribution to the total community image.  The allowance of
reasonable amount of vehicular parking and storage without having a detrimental
effect upon residential neighborhoods is needed.  It is necessary to regulate
the location for parking and storage of vehicles in order to prevent the
creation of pedestrian and vehicular safety hazards.  Vehicle parking and
storage can adversely impact the character of residential neighborhoods,
therefore it is necessary to:
      (1)   Limit the number of vehicles which can be parked or stored outside
of a building;
      (2)   Establish the areas in which recreational vehicles can be stored;
      (3)   Impose weight limitations upon the types of vehicles which can be
stored in residential areas.
   (B)   The regulations prescribed in this chapter shall not supersede nor
nullify private covenants that may lawfully impose other restrictions on the
use of property.
(Prior Code, § 19-1300)
§ 79.02  VEHICLE PARKING AND STORAGE REQUIREMENTS WITHIN RESIDENTIAL ZONE.
   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to regulate the parking and
storage of vehicles in residential zones.  The city recognizes that the
parking  and storage  of  various  types of vehicles  is customarily accessory
to residential uses.
   (B)   It shall be illegal to park or store in a residential zone:
      (1)   Any vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (G.V.W.R.) of 10,001
pounds or greater outside an  enclosed building on or within public right-of-
way.
      (2)   Any construction vehicles, equipment or trailers required to move
such equipment not in an enclosed building on private property or within the
public right-of-way unless authorized by a city parking variance permit.
      (3)   Any vehicle in a driveway in such manner that it creates a
pedestrian or vehicular safety hazard.
(Prior Code, § 19-1301)
§ 79.03  LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF VEHICLES; OUTSIDE.
   Subject to §
79.01(A)(2), the maximum number of vehicles parked shall be one vehicle per
licensed driver up to three per occupied residence.  This limitation shall
apply to the parking of vehicles on or in the public right-of-way within 500
feet of the occupied residence, measured linearly along the road/street right-
of-way.  This restriction shall not apply to the parking of guest vehicles as
long as said parking does not exceed ten days.
(Prior Code, § 19-1302)  (Ord 1028-14, passed 8-18-2014)
§ 79.04  RECREATIONAL VEHICLES (RVS) AND ALL TRAILERS; PARKING AND STORAGE
LIMITS.
   (A)   Storage standards:
      (1)   Storage is allowed inside of an enclosed building or on private
property.
      (2)   Storage is prohibited within the public right-of-way or in city
public parking lots.
   (B)   Limitations:
      (1)   No recreational vehicle shall be used in such a manner as to
constitute a temporary dwelling unit except in recreational vehicle parks (RVP)
only.
      (2)   No recreational vehicle shall be temporarily or permanently
connected to wastewater or water lines or a source of electricity while parked
in the public right-of-way.
      (3)   For the purpose of this section, a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE shall be
defined as a vehicle used primarily for sport, amusement or leisure travel.
      (4)   For the purpose of this section, a vehicle which meets the
definition of a recreational vehicle and is used primarily for personal
transportation on a daily basis shall not be classified as a recreational
vehicle.
   (C)   Temporary parking:
      (1)   Parking is allowed for a period not to exceed 24 hours for loading
and unloading of recreational vehicles.
      (2)   Any vehicle which is parked in the same vicinity for over 24 hours
is presumed to be stored.
      (3)   Exception to section shall be given by a temporary parking variance
permit.
(Prior Code, § 19-1303)
§ 79.05  PARKING AND STORAGE VARIANCE PERMITS; REQUIREMENTS, CRITERIA AND FEE.
   (A)   In addition to the exceptions in §
79.03, variance permits from the parking and storage regulations are hereby
required.  Authorization will be granted if all of the following criteria are
met.
      (1)   That the proposed location of the vehicle will not create a
pedestrian or vehicular safety problem.
      (2)   The granting of the variance permit will not have an adverse impact
upon the surrounding properties and neighbors.
      (3)   Application is made to the city and the application fee is paid.
      (4)   Application fee shall be $5 per application request.
      (5)   The applicant demonstrate a need for the variance permit.
   (B)   Guidelines for review of variances.
      (1)   Pedestrian or vehicular safety.  The following traffic related
factors shall be considered:
         (a)   The speed limit;
         (b)   Vehicular traffic volume;
         (c)   Pedestrian traffic volume;
         (d)   Sight distance;
         (e)   Physical design characteristics of the sidewalk and street.
      (2)   No adverse impact.
         (a)   The granting of a variance permit shall not be detrimental to
public health, safety and welfare or injurious to surrounding property or
neighbors.
         (b)   The granting of a variance permit shall not be inconsistent with
any plans adopted by the city.
         (c)   The granting of a variance permit shall not weaken the general
purpose of the zoning ordinance or its regulations.
         (d)   The variance permit, if granted, shall only be to the extent
necessary to afford a reasonable use of the public right-of-way.
      (3)   Conditions of approval.  Special conditions may be imposed upon
variance permit approvals in order to alleviate or mitigate potential adverse
impacts. Conditions must relate to the vehicle or the location in public right-
of-way.
      (4)   Application for requested variance permit.  Any owner of record, or
authorized agent for said owner, whose authorization shall be made part of the
application record, may submit an application for a variance permit to the
Police Department for processing.  A submitted complete application shall
include the location on public right-of-way to be used. The permits shall be
issued for no more than five days and shall expire automatically from the date
of issuance. The above referenced location on public right-of-way shall be
specific as to the street for which the variance is requested.
      (5)   Review procedure.  Variance permit requests are under the
jurisdiction of the Police Department and are governed by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 19-1304)
§ 79.06  PUBLIC PARKING ON MAIN STREET.
   Public parking on Main Street shall be maintained on the south side of Main
Street from Galena Street to Siever Street.
(Ord. 1010-12, passed 12-3-2012)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
90.   CEMETERIES
         
91.   ANIMALS
         
92.   ASSEMBLIES, PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
         
93.   PUBLIC NUISANCES
         
94.   STREETS; PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
CHAPTER 90:  CEMETERIES
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Municipal cemeteries
   
90.02   Plat of cemeteries
   
90.03   Sale of lots
   
90.04   Cemetery records
   
90.05   Disposition of proceeds
   
90.06   Improvements and general care
   
90.07   Cemetery Caretaker position created
   
90.08   Duties of Cemetery Caretaker
   
90.09   Digging of graves
   
90.10   Setting of headstones
   
90.11   Burial permits
   
90.12   Operation rules
   
90.13   Visitors
Perpetual Care Fund
   
90.25   Creation
   
90.26   Loans from the fund
   
90.27   Records and accounts of Finance Officer
   
90.28   Annual audit
   
90.29   Extent of care
   
90.30   Perpetual care fees
   
90.31   Settlement of sales transactions
   
90.32   Handling of funds
   
90.33   Casket enclosures
   
90.34   Burial permits
Cemetery Licenses
   
90.45   Definition; license required
   
90.46   Subcontractors
   
90.47   Compliance with regulations
   
90.48   Revocation of license
   
90.49   Insurance; bond
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01  MUNICIPAL CEMETERIES.
   The territories heretofore conveyed to the city or presently being used by
the city under homes take permit for use as cemeteries and previously known as
the South Lead Cemetery, the Catholic Cemetery (adjoining the South Lead
Cemetery), the Mountain Lawn Cemetery and the Holy Cross Cemetery shall all be
known as municipal cemeteries of the city and the same are hereby placed under
the immediate direction and control of the Mayor of the city, subject at all
times to the supervision of the Lead City Commission.
(Prior Code, § 5-100)
§ 90.02  PLAT OF CEMETERIES.
   The Community Development Officer shall prepare a plat of the cemeteries,
which shall be subdivided into blocks and lots and subdivisions of lots and
which the plat shall be filed in the office of the City Finance Officer and
shall be used and referred to in disposing of lots herein provided; provided,
however, that the Community Development Officer shall have the right to lay out
and plat for burial purposes any and all obsolete and unused streets and alleys
contained in the cemeteries.
(Prior Code, § 5-101)
§ 90.03  SALE OF LOTS.
   Lots or subdivisions of lots in the cemeteries shall be sold upon
application to the City Finance Officer. The payment of the price of the lots
and the perpetual care fee shall be in cash and the price of the lots and the
perpetual care fee shall be that which is set from time to time by the Lead
City Commission. The deed or burial permit issued by the City Finance Officer
shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Finance Officer giving
and granting unto the applicant the right to use for burial purposes the lot or
subdivision thereof so applied for, subject to all the conditions and
limitations under which the right of burial is granted to the city and other
conditions and limitations as are set out in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-102)
§ 90.04  CEMETERY RECORDS.
   (A)   In addition to all of the records required to be kept by the laws of
the state relating to cemeteries, burial and removal of dead and the like, the
following records shall be kept by the appropriate city officials.
   (B)   The City Finance Officer shall:
      (1)   Have on file a complete plat or map of the cemeteries, showing the
exact location of the cemeteries, and describing or indicating all sections,
lots, interments and the like, of the cemeteries, and all other information as
may be required of law or ordinance;
      (2)   Keep a complete record of all lots that have been sold and all
certificates of purchase issued and the names and addresses of all purchasers;
      (3)   Keep a complete record of all burial permits issued, fees paid to
the City Finance Officer the names and addresses of all persons buying the
permits, a record of all disinterments made and fees paid therefor;
      (4)   Keep a book furnished and owned by the city, known as the burial
record book in which shall be recorded the decedent's age and the date and
cause of his or her death, and the number of the lot and block of his or her
burial, copies of burial or removal permits, and all other information which
may be required by law or ordinance, or which the Lead City Commission deems
important; and
      (5)   Keep all or any other records which he or she shall deem important
or necessary.
(Prior Code, § 5-103)
§ 90.05  DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.
   All moneys derived from the sale of the lots as herein provided shall be
deposited by the City Finance Officer in the General Fund.
(Prior Code, § 5-104)
§ 90.06  IMPROVEMENTS AND GENERAL CARE.
   (A)   The planting of trees, shrubs, flowers or other plants and the
construction of curbs, artificial walks, fencing, coping or enclosure of any
kind whatsoever, will not be permitted to be done upon lots or graves by the
owners thereof in the Mountain Lawn Cemetery and the Holy Cross Cemetery. All
of the above will be allowed in the South Lead Cemetery (including the Catholic
portion thereof) except fencing, which will not be allowed. All plantings will
be by the city under the supervision of the Mayor, according to adopted plans.
No gravel, stone, brick or any chairs, benches, boxes, shells, trinkets, toys
or similar articles will be allowed to be placed upon graves or upon other
portions of lots.
   (B)   No elevated lots, grave mounds or structures other than monuments will
be allowed in any of the municipal cemeteries.
   (C)   In the South Lead Cemetery (including the Catholic portion thereof)
upright monuments shall be allowed provided they are properly placed under the
supervision of the city.
   (D)   In the Mountain Lawn Cemetery (including the Catholic portion thereof)
monuments shall be flush with the surface of the ground and must be placed in
accordance with the direction of the Cemetery Sexton.
   (E)   Water for irrigation will be supplied by the city.
      (1)   All irrigating in the sections of the cemetery where perpetual care
is required and on walkways shall be done by cemetery employees.
      (2)   Persons using water on other lots must provide the hose and
equipment, and unnecessary waste of water is prohibited. Privilege of using
water will be denied to those found wasting it.
(Prior Code, § 5-105)
§ 90.07  CEMETERY CARETAKER POSITION CREATED.
   There is hereby created the position of Cemetery Caretaker of the South Lead
Cemetery and Cemetery Caretaker of the Mountain Lawn-Holy Cross Cemetery who
shall be hired by contract with the city as an independent contractor, and who
shall be paid in the manner and in the amount as set by resolution by the Lead
City Commission.
(Prior Code, § 5-106)
§ 90.08  DUTIES OF CEMETERY CARETAKER.
   The duties of the Cemetery Caretaker of the South Lead Cemetery and the
Mountain Lawn-Holy Cross Cemetery shall be those as set by motion of the Lead
City Commission and shall be incorporated within the contract entered into for
the services and duties by and between the Cemetery Caretaker and the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-107)
§ 90.09  DIGGING OF GRAVES.
   No grave shall be dug by anyone until the time that a permit has been
received from the Cemetery Sexton and then the grave shall be dug only in the
location designated by the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-108)
§ 90.10  SETTING OF HEADSTONES.
   No headstone shall be set in any of the cemeteries until the city has issued
a permit for the same and then the headstone may be set only in the exact
location and in the manner designated by the city.
(Prior Code, § 5-109)
§ 90.11  BURIAL PERMITS.
   Before a grave may be dug, the owner of the burial site shall first secure a
burial permit from the City Finance Officer and he or she, or his or her
representatives, shall submit the same to the Cemetery Sexton. Burial permits
shall be issued only to owners of burial sites, or their representatives. The
charge for the burial permit shall be set by the Lead City Commission.
(Prior Code, § 5-110)
§ 90.12  OPERATION RULES.
   (A)   Lots are sold for no other purpose than for the burial of the human
dead, and incidental uses that are suitable and proper for a cemetery lot, but
under restrictions as contained in these rules.
   (B)   All interments in lots shall be restricted to members of the immediate
family, or relatives to the proprietor thereof, unless permission to the
contrary be obtained from the city.
   (C)   No sale, assignment or transfer of a lot shall be valid without the
consent of the city, endorsed upon the transfer or assignment, and entered on
record by the city.
   (D)   The city does not agree to give joint deeds to lots sold. No
obligation exists, when persons hold lots in partnership by agreement among
themselves as to lots to be used by each, but the city will not undertake to
enforce the agreements.
   (E)   When more than one person claims an interest in a lot, no visible
dividing line will be allowed.
   (F)   No lot owner shall have the right to have a body interred in his or
her lot for a remuneration, sale or hire of space.
   (G)   Should there be an interment on a lot for which full payment has not
been made as per the terms of contract, the city reserves the right to disinter
the remains and remove the burial together with any monument or other structure
thereon, to some other portion of the cemetery equal in price to the amount
paid on the lot, after the actual cost of removal has been deducted.
   (H)   When a lot owner dies intestate, the heirs will be recognized
according to the laws of the state which are in force at the time of the death.
   (I)   It shall be the duty of the heirs or devisees to file with the city
full proof of the ownership upon the death of the owner of any lot.
   (J)   To prevent relatives from disposing of their family lot and
disinterring the bodies therein, lot owners may reconvey lots to the city to be
held in perpetual trust for their permanent interment and for other persons as
the lot owner may designate.
(Prior Code, § 5-111)
§ 90.13  VISITORS.
   (A)   No person shall write on, deface or injure any monument, or any other
structure in the cemetery, nor disturb the peace.
   (B)   Persons who have not accompanied a funeral to the cemetery must not
congregate around a grave or vehicles while ceremonies are in progress.
   (C)   Motor vehicles, excluding motorcycles or snowmobiles, must be driven
carefully in the cemetery and not exceed 10 mph. They shall not be driven
anywhere except on the established driveways. It shall be a misdemeanor for
motorcycles or snowmobiles to be driven anywhere within a cemetery.
   (D)   All persons are required to keep on the walks and roads, and under no
circumstances are allowed to sit upon, walk upon, or otherwise occupy any
private lot not belonging to them or to a member of their family. No person
shall place papers, decayed flowers or any rubbish on lots or in roadways and
walks.
(Prior Code, § 5-112)  Penalty, see §
90.99
PERPETUAL CARE FUND
§ 90.25  CREATION.
   (A)   The Lead City Commission shall create and maintain a permanent fund
from gifts, bequests made by any person by will or otherwise, from all sums
derived from the perpetual care fee, and from any other sums that may from time
to time be appropriated by the Lead City Commission for the purpose of
providing for the perpetual care of the municipal cemeteries.
   (B)   The city shall use the income generated from the Fund for the
improvement and care of the cemeteries.
(Ord. 746-83, passed 5-2-1983)
§ 90.26  LOANS FROM THE FUND.
   The Perpetual Care Fund shall be invested or loaned out at interest in
amounts as may be determined by the Lead City Commission and upon security as
is deemed appropriate by the Lead City Commission.
(Ord. 746-83, passed 5-2-1983)
§ 90.27  RECORDS AND ACCOUNTS OF FINANCE OFFICER.
   The City Finance Officer shall keep a permanent record of all monies
received for the Perpetual Care Fund and the amount paid in for each cemetery
lot, and the amounts paid in or set aside for general improvements, and shall
keep an accurate account of the interest received and collected from the funds
invested or loaned at interest.
(Ord. 746-83, passed 5-2-1983)
§ 90.28  ANNUAL AUDIT.
   The books and accounts of the City Finance Officer and the securities upon
which the Perpetual Care Fund is loaned shall be audited annually.
(Ord. 746-83, passed 5-2-1983)
§ 90.29  EXTENT OF CARE.
   Perpetual care consists of watering the lot, mowing, trimming, raking,
refilling as necessary, re- seeding as needed, and all care necessary to
maintain the property to the best of the ability of the city.
(Ord. 746-83, passed 5-2-1983)
§ 90.30  PERPETUAL CARE FEES.
   (A)   All holders of cemetery lots, including those who have held the lots
prior to the effective date of this section, shall be assessed a fee in the
amount of $100 per space for residents and $125 for non-residents for the
Perpetual Fund.
   (B)   The fees shall be collected upon the sale of any future space.
(Ord. 746-83, passed 5-2-1983; Ord. 825-90, passed 10-9-1990)
§ 90.31  SETTLEMENT OF SALES TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   All cemetery lots or grave spaces hereafter sold shall be settled for
at the time of purchase.
   (B)   No burial shall be made in a lot for which the city has not received
full settlement, except in cases where payment is to be made by the legal
representative from the funds of a decedent's estate. In those cases,
settlement may be deferred for a period not exceeding 60 days or until the
funds are available for settlement.
(Ord. 746-83, passed 5-2-1983)
§ 90.32  HANDLING OF FUNDS.
   All funds received for the Perpetual Care Fund shall be paid directly to the
City Finance Officer, who shall give the proper receipts therefor, and shall be
placed in the proper fund for the purposes herein expressed.
(Ord. 746-83, passed 5-2-1983)
§ 90.33  CASKET ENCLOSURES.
   (A)   No burial shall be allowed in the cemetery unless the casket is
enclosed in a concrete, steel or fiberglass or equally hard material container.
   (B)   The container shall have a minimum of 40 inches of fill covering it.
   (C)   In addition to this hard material container, the person or firm hired
to open and close the grave shall be required to tamp the grave upon closure.
(Ord. 746-83, passed 5-2-1983; Ord. 825-90, passed 10-9-1990; Ord. 896-97,
passed 6-23-1997)
§ 90.34  BURIAL PERMITS.
   Burial permits shall be presented to the Finance Office no later than 60
days following interment.
(Ord. 825-90, passed 10-9-1990)
CEMETERY LICENSES
§ 90.45  DEFINITION; LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to engage in business in the municipal cemeteries
without first having obtained a license therefor as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   The term CEMETERY CONTRACTOR shall mean and include anyone engaged in
business for the purpose of excavating burial plots, installing, erecting or
establishing any burial vault, grave marker or grave monument within the city's
cemeteries known as: South Lead, Mountain Lawn and Holy Cross.
(Ord. 854-93, passed 2-1-1993)  Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.46  SUBCONTRACTORS.
   Any person doing business as a subcontractor shall be construed as engaged
in the business of a cemetery contractor for which a license is required by
this subchapter.
(Ord. 854-93, passed 2-1-1993)
§ 90.47  COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the cemetery contractors to comply with all
ordinances related to excavating of burial plots, installing, erecting or
establishing any burial vault, grave marker or grave monument and all laws and
ordinances pertaining to regulating the activities engaged therein.
(Ord. 854-93, passed 2-1-1993)
§ 90.48  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   Any cemetery contractor's license may be revoked by the Lead City Commission
for repeated violations of any ordinance relating to the cemeteries or any
other ordinance relating to the work performed by the contractor/subcontractor.
The revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed for violating this
subchapter.
(Ord. 854-93, passed 2-1-1993)
§ 90.49  INSURANCE; BOND.
   (A)   No license shall be issued unless a certificate of insurance or other
proof is filed showing that the cemetery contractor carries liability insurance
not less than $5,000 per incident or claim.
   (B)   This subchapter, being necessary for the support of municipal
government, shall take effect upon the passage and publication thereof.
(Ord. 854-93, passed 2-1-1993)
§ 90.99  PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
CHAPTER 91:  ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.001   Definitions
   
91.002   Running at large
   
91.003   Dangerous or vicious animals
   
91.004   Destruction of dangerous or vicious animals
   
91.005   Confinement and notification of animals that bite
   
91.006   Nuisances
   
91.007   Keeping of fowl, rabbits or livestock restricted
   
91.008   Keeping of wild animals
   
91.009   Keeping of domestic animals
Cruelty to Animals
   
91.020   Generally
   
91.021   Poisoning animals
   
91.022   Killing or injuring animal of another
   
91.023   Harassment of service animal accompanying disabled person prohibited
   
91.024   Abusing leashed or confined animals
   
91.025   Sanitary conditions required
Owner's Requirements
   
91.035   Licenses required
   
91.036   Application for license
   
91.037   Vaccination required
   
91.038   License tax
   
91.039   License year
   
91.040   Issuance of tags
   
91.041   Replacement tag
   
91.042   Animal to wear tag
   
91.043   Animal already licensed
   
91.044   Impoundment
   
91.045   Owner’s responsibility
   
91.046   Impoundment fees
   
91.047   Holding, redemption of animals
   
91.048   Redemption by person other than owner
   
91.049   Disposition of unredeemed animals
   
91.050   Exception to time limits
Enforcement
   
91.065   Entering upon private property
   
91.066   Entering upon private property of animal's owner
   
91.067   Impounding procedures
Deer
   
91.080   Declaration of public interest
   
91.081   Definition
   
91.082   Nuisances
   
91.083   Exemption
 
   
91.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.001  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL.  Any living, vertebrate except human beings.
   ANIMAL CRUELTY. The intentional, willful and/or malicious infliction of
physical abuse that causes prolonged pain, serious injury or the death of an
animal or willful neglect, i.e. depriving the basic needs such as food, water
and/or shelter.
   ANIMAL ENCLOSURE. A small enclosed structure used for housing domestic farm
animals that are allowed within the city. Typically, a coop for chickens.
   ANIMAL RUN. An enclosure that is connected to and/or surrounding an animal
enclosure for the purpose of allowing domestic farm animals to leave the coop
while remaining in an enclosed environment.
   ANIMAL SHELTER.  A building or location used to hold impounded animals,
designated by the Lead City Commission.
   AT LARGE.  Off the premises of the owner, person in charge and not under the
restraint of the owner, person in charge or a member of the owner’s immediate
family, either by leash, cord or chain.
   BITE.  The grasping or tearing of clothing, any abrasion, scratch, puncture,
laceration, bruise or piercing of the skin inflicted by the teeth of an animal.
   DOMESTIC CHICKEN. A common gallinaceous farm bird (gallus domesticus) raised
for its edible eggs.
   DOMESTIC FARM ANIMAL. A domestic chicken. Not to include dogs and/or cats.
   EUTHANASIA.  Putting an animal down by the injection of sodium pentobarbitol
administered by a certified veterinarian.
   HABITUALLY ALLOW TO RUN AT LARGE.  Any owner of an animal that has been
impounded in the city animal shelter or a warning/citation issued to the owner
more than three times in any 12-month period and the owner is again found
allowing his or her animal to run at large shall be considered to habitually
allow to run at large.
   HARBORING.  Any animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or
sheltered for three consecutive days or more.
   HYBRID ANIMAL. The offspring of two animals of different breeds, species or
genera.
   IMPOUNDMENT.  Any animal found in violation of the provisions of this
subchapter may be seized and impounded by any police officer or Animal Control
Officer of the city. Impoundment may be in any animal shelter designated by the
Lead City Commission.
   KENNEL.  An establishment where animals are bred, raised, trained or
boarded.
   LIVE TRAP.  A trap that allows for the capturing of an animal alive and
uninjured.
   OFFICER.  Any police officer, Animal Control Officer or person employed by
the city to enforce this chapter.
   OWNER.  Any person or business keeping or harboring any animals.
   PET.  Any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.
   PUT DOWN.  The animal was killed by the means of euthanasia or in the case
of injury and the animal is suffering, a bullet fired into the head by a police
officer or Animal Control Officer.
   REDEEM. To physically take custody of the animal after all licensing,
vaccinations and fines are satisfied.
   RESTRAINT.  An animal is under restraint within the meaning of this
subchapter if it is controlled by a leash, cord, chain or if it is on or within
a vehicle being driven or parked on the street.
   VICIOUS ANIMALS.  Any animal that has done or communicated by its actions or
intention, habit tendency or propensity to do something harmful to people or
other animals.
   WILD/EXOTIC ANIMALS. The following types of animals, whether bred in the
wild or in captivity and any or all hybrids of these species:
      (1)   Class Mammalia.
         (a)   Order Carnivore:
            1.   Family felidae: all species of cats excluding domestic cats
(Felis catus);
            2.   Family canidae: including wolf-dog hybrids, except domestic
dogs (Canis familiaris);
            3.   Family ursidae: all species of bears;
            4.   Family hyaenidae: all species of hyena and aardwolf; and
            5.   Family procyonidae: raccoons, kinkajous, and coatimundis;
         (b)   Order Primates, all species of non-human primates excluding
humans; and
         (c)   Order Proboscidae, all elephant species.
      (2)   Class Reptilian:
         (a)   Order Crocodilia: all species of alligators, crocodiles,
caimans, gharials; and
         (b)   Order Squamata:
            1.   Family Atractaspidae: all species, such as mole vipers.
            2.   Family Boidae: anacondas (Genus Eunectes), boa constrictors
(Boa constrictor), Burmese pythons (Python molurus), reticulated pythons
(Python reticulatus), amethystine pythons (Morelia amethistina), scrub pythons
(Morelia kinghorni), Northern African pythons (Python sebae), Southern African
pythons (Python natalensis).
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Am. Ord. 1037-15, passed 8-3-2015; Am. Ord.
1045-16, passed 2-1-2016; Am. Ord. 1053-17, passed 6-5-2017; Am. Ord. 1059-18,
passed 5-21-2018)
§ 91.002  RUNNING AT LARGE.
   No owner, person in charge or immediate family member of any animal shall
permit the animal to run at large in the city and no animal shall run off the
premises of its owner unless on a restraint and accompanied by its owner,
person in charge or a member of the owner's immediate family.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.003  DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be within the discretion of the Police Department to declare
an animal vicious or dangerous, as provided in §
91.001 above, based upon the actions of the animal as observed by the officer
or by statements of witnesses.
   (B)   It shall be within the discretion of the Chief of Police of the city
to determine whether the animal should be destroyed by euthanization or banned
from the city. If the Chief of Police determines that euthanization is
required, a consultation with an accredited veterinarian may be considered.
   (C)   An owner of an animal declared vicious or dangerous may appeal the
declaration of the police officer or the determination of disposition by the
Chief of Police to the Lead City Commission.
   (D)   The owner will be given a hearing where the Lead City Commission may
uphold or overrule the police officer’s declaration or the Chief of Police’s
determination of disposition.
   (E)   For purposes of criminal prosecution, the owner of the animal is
entitled to independent judicial determination of whether the animal is vicious
or dangerous.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 942-02, passed 9-9-2002; Ord. 1037-15,
passed 8-3-2015)
§ 91.004  DESTRUCTION OF DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   Any dangerous or vicious animal, or animal having dangerous or vicious
propensities and tendencies, found at large after the owner has previous
knowledge or notice that the animal is dangerous or vicious, or has dangerous
or vicious propensities and tendencies, may be put down by any public safety
official without the official having to catch or impound the animal.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 1037-15, passed 8-3-2015)
§ 91.005  CONFINEMENT AND NOTIFICATION OF ANIMALS THAT BITE.
   If any animal shall bite any person, it shall then be the immediate duty of
the owner or person in charge, at the discretion of the public safety official,
to confine the animal inside the owner's residence, at a kennel or animal
hospital for a period of not less than ten days from the date of the bite and
the owner or person in charge shall immediately notify the Public Safety
Department concerning the circumstances of the biting and confirm that the
animal is being confined and provide proof of vaccination.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 1037-15, passed 8-3-2015)
§ 91.006  NUISANCES.
   Any animal within the city which constantly, continuously or regularly
barks, howls, chases or annoys animals, vehicles or persons or which damages or
destroys property, is hereby declared a nuisance, and a public safety official
may proceed to abate the nuisance.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 1037-15, passed 8-3-2015)
§ 91.007  KEEPING OF FOWL, RABBITS OR LIVESTOCK RESTRICTED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep enclosed or house any
livestock, ducks, geese, rabbits and/or domestic fowl in any animal enclosure
within the city.
   (B)   A maximum of six domestic chickens may be kept in a chicken coop not
situated within 50 feet of any occupied dwelling or any church, school, store
or public building other than the owner’s dwelling.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Am. Ord. 1053-17, passed 6-5-2017)  Penalty,
see §
91.999
§ 91.008  KEEPING OF WILD ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept on
their premises, any wild/exotic or vicious animal for display or for exhibition
purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee.
   (B)   This section shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks,
performing animal exhibitions or circuses. It shall be unlawful for any person
to keep or permit to be kept, any wild animal as a pet, provided however, the
city may issue temporary permission for the keeping, care and protection of
animals native to this area which have been deemed to be homeless, the
permission shall allow the person to retain the animal temporarily until a time
as the animal is deemed capable of survival.
   (C)   Slaughter of animals is prohibited.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 1037-15, passed 8-3-2015)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.009  KEEPING OF DOMESTIC ANIMALS.
   (A)   An application for a domestic farm animal license shall be completed
to the city finance office along with a one-time application fee; fee to be
determined by city resolution.
   (B)   The Finance Office shall not issue a license if, in the proceeding 12
months, the applicant or location to be licensed has been the subject of two or
more nuisance violations that resulted in a citation of this municipal code or
state law.
   (C)   Upon a second citation within a 12 month period for a violation of any
provision of this section or any other nuisance provision of this municipal
code or state law, the domestic farm animal license issued by the finance
office shall be null and void.
   (D)    The domestic farm animal license granted under this section is
immediately null and void upon the licensee's conviction of any cruelty to
animal charge.
   (E)   Each licensee shall meet the following criteria:
      (1)   A maximum of six domestic chickens may be kept on any licensed
premises.
      (2)   Domestic farm animals shall only be kept on residential property.
      (3)   Roosters are prohibited. 
      (4)   Domestic farm animals shall be housed in an animal enclosure that
is a strong, sturdy, secure and roofed structure that is fully enclosed.  The
enclosure shall be weather proof and predator safe.  A chicken coop shall have
nest boxes for egg-laying and perches on which the chickens can sleep.
      (5)   An animal run must be provided with any animal enclosure.  The
animal run shall consist of an attached fence to the enclosure and shall be
securely constructed with a hardware mesh type material and shall also have a
protective overhead mesh to keep the domestic farm animals contained. 
      (6)   Only one animal enclosure and run shall be allowed per property
lot.
      (7)   Animal enclosures and runs must be located at least 50 feet from
any neighboring residential structure, church, school, store or public building
(including any deck, porch or patio of any such buildings).
      (8)   Animal enclosures and runs may be placed closer than 50 feet to
neighboring structures if approval by the city and adjoining property owner(s)
is received.  All approvals shall be noted on the application.
      (9)   Animal enclosures and runs shall be in rear yards.  In individual
circumstances, enclosures and runs may be constructed in side yards but must be
approved by the city, and if applicable, adjoining property owner(s).  All
approvals shall be noted on the application.
      (10)   Animal enclosures and runs must be properly ventilated, clean, dry
and odor-free, always kept in a neat and sanitary condition and in a manner
that will not disturb the use or enjoyment of the neighboring lots due to
noise, odor or other adverse impacts.
      (11)   Domestic farm animals shall be kept in the animal enclosure or run
at all times.
      (12)   No domestic farm animals may be kept inside any residence.
      (13)   No building or structure to house domestic farm animals shall be
constructed on a lot prior to the time of occupancy of the principal structure.
      (14)   The animal enclosure and/or run shall not be placed on any
easements.
      (15)   Animal enclosures and manure storage shall be kept 20 feet from
streams, tributaries, ditches, storm water management facilities, drop inlets
and/or other storm drainage areas that would allow fecal matter to enter any
city storm drainage system or stream.  Dumping animal manure into the city's
storm drainage system is prohibited.
      (16)   Domestic farm animals shall be kept so that visibility from the
general public is substantially obstructed with a barrier approved by the city.
(Ord. 1053-17, passed 6-5-2017)  Penalty, see §
91.999
CRUELTY TO ANIMALS
§ 91.020  GENERALLY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to beat or wantonly or maliciously
torture or injure any animal in any manner, or to neglect to provide adequate
food, water and/or shelter for any animal in their care or under their control.
No person may subject an animal to cruelty and shall be charged as a felony
state law violation per SDCL 40-1-2.4.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 1037-15, passed 8-3-2015)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.021  POISONING ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully administer poison to any
animal, or to expose any poisonous substance so that it may be taken by an
animal. This does not apply to mice or rats.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 1045-16, passed 2-1-2016)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.022  KILLING OR INJURING ANIMAL OF ANOTHER.
   (A)   No person may intentionally kill any animal of any age or value that
is the property of another, nor intentionally injure any animal.
   (B)   This section may not be construed to prevent euthanasia by a licensed
veterinarian with proper authority from the animal's owner nor may not be
construed to prohibit euthanasia conducted by the municipality or under a
municipality's animal control activities.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.023  HARASSMENT OF SERVICE ANIMAL ACCOMPANYING DISABLED PERSON PROHIBITED.
   No person may maliciously beat, injure, attempt to injure, harass,
intimidate, entice, distract or otherwise interfere with any service animal
accompanying a person with a disability if the service animal is being
controlled by the person and the service animal is wearing a harness or other
control device normally used for service animals accompanying or leading
persons with disabilities.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.024  ABUSING LEASHED OR CONFINED ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to abuse, strike at, antagonize or
tease any animal under control by a leash or confined upon the owner’s premise.
   (B)   No owner or caretaker may leave a dog, cat, or other animal unattended
in a standing or parked vehicle in a manner that endangers the health or safety
of such animal. Reasonable force may be used to remove such animal by any
public safety officer or designee. No such person may be held civilly or
criminally liable for any damage caused by removing such animal from a vehicle.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 1037-15, passed 8-3-2015)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.025  SANITARY CONDITIONS REQUIRED.
   No person shall keep or maintain any building, property or enclosure where
any animal is kept, unless the same be at all times kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 1045-16, passed 2-1-2016)  Penalty, see §
91.999
OWNER'S REQUIREMENTS
§ 91.035  LICENSES REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to keep, maintain or
have in his or her custody or under his or her control, any animal without
having obtained a city license to do so from the city.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998)  Penalty, see §
91.999
§ 91.036  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Any person owning, keeping, maintaining or having in their custody any
animal shall acquire a license from the City of Lead.
   (B)   Each application shall be in writing stating name, sex, color and
other distinguishing characteristics of the animal and the name and address of
the applicant.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 1037-15, passed 8-3-2015; Ord. 1045-16,
passed 2-1-2016)
§ 91.037  VACCINATION REQUIRED.
   All owners shall maintain a record of vaccination issued by a veterinarian
licensed to practice within this state, evidencing vaccination against rabies
of the animal.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 1045-16, passed 2-1-2016)
§ 91.038  LICENSE TAX.
   Before any license shall be issued under this chapter, the applicant shall
pay a license tax as follows:
   (A)   Upon each animal neutered or spayed: $3; and
   (B)   Upon each animal not neutered or spayed: $10.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998)
§ 91.039  LICENSE YEAR.
   Every license issued under this chapter shall be valid for the calendar year
issued (January through December).
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 1045-16, passed 2-1-2016)
§ 91.040  ISSUANCE OF TAGS.
   It shall be the duty of the city, at the time of the issuance of a license
under this chapter, to furnish and deliver to the applicant for the license a
tag for each animal for which the license was issued, upon the tag shall be
stamped or engraved the number of the license and the year of issue.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 1037-15, passed 8-3-2015)
§ 91.041  REPLACEMENT TAG.
   In the event of the loss of any tag issued under this chapter, the City
Finance Office is hereby authorized to issue another tag upon payment to it the
actual cost of the same upon application being made therefor, and upon
satisfactory proof that the animal had been licensed before or that the tag has
been lost.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998)
§ 91.042  ANIMAL TO WEAR TAG.
   It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal licensed under this chapter
to place a collar around the neck of the animal, on which collar shall be
securely fastened the tag furnished by the City Finance Officer.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998)
§ 91.043  ANIMAL ALREADY LICENSED.
   Any person who acquires any animal already licensed must register the change
of ownership with the change of ownership with the City Finance Office. There
will be no charge to re-register an animal already licensed.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 1045-16, passed 2-1-2016)
§ 91.044  IMPOUNDMENT.
   Any animal found in violation of this chapter may be seized and impounded by
any public safety officer of the city. Impoundment may be in any animal shelter
designated by the Lead City Commission.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 1037-15, passed 8-3-2015)
§ 91.045  OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any animal impounded under
this chapter to contact the City of Lead to redeem the animal.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 1045-16, passed 2-1-2016)
§ 91.046  IMPOUNDMENT FEES.
   The fees charged for the impoundment of any animal under this chapter shall
be set by resolution. The fees shall be charged at the discretion of the
friends of the animal shelter.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998)
§ 91.047  HOLDING, REDEMPTION OF VACCINATED, LICENSED ANIMALS.
   (A)   Any vaccinated, licensed animal impounded may be held in the animal
shelter designated by the city for a period of 72 hours.
   (B)   The owner of any animal impounded under this chapter may redeem the
animal by paying or making payment arrangements for all fines and fees within
72 hours of impoundment.
   (C)   Payment arrangements shall be at the discretion of the City of Lead.
   (D)   After 72 hours, the disposition of the animal shall be at the
discretion of the Animal Shelter.
   (E)   Any unlicensed animal that is redeemed must also acquire an animal
license in addition to paying or making arrangements for all fees and fines.
   (F)   An unvaccinated animal that is redeemed must also provide proof of
vaccination within ten days or the animal may be impounded.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 1037-15, passed 8-3-2015; Ord. 1045-16,
passed 2-1-2016)
§ 91.048  REDEMPTION BY PERSON OTHER THAN OWNER.
   (A)   If the owner of any animal impounded under this chapter shall fail to
redeem the animal within the required time limits set forth in §
91.047 the city’s liability for the animal shall cease.
   (B)   After 72 hours, the custody and ownership of the unredeemed animal
shall be transferred to the Animal Shelter. Upon receiving ownership, the
Animal Shelter may allow adoption, placement or any other disposition deemed by
the Animal Shelter to be in the best interest of the animal.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 1045-16, passed 2-1-2016)
§ 91.049  DISPOSITION OF UNREDEEMED ANIMALS.
   Any animals impounded under this chapter and that have not been redeemed
within the required time limits set down in §§
91.047 and
91.048, may be adopted by the public and may be held over the time limits as
set forth.  If necessary, any animal not redeemed or adopted, may be put down
by a certified, licensed veterinarian, by the means of euthanasia as permitted
by municipalities under SDCL §§ 40-1-20 and 40-1-21.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 1037-15, passed 8-3-2015)
§ 91.050  EXCEPTION TO TIME LIMITS.
   If any animal displays signs of being aggressive, vicious, displays a nature
of aggression or poses a danger  towards humans or animals, a public safety
official, under SDCL § 40-1-24, may euthanize the animal to eliminate the
danger without holding the animal by the time limits set forth in §§ 91.047 and
91.048. Any impounded animal displaying any of the above characteristics shall
be given a minimum of 24 hours to calm down before being euthanized.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 1037-15, passed 8-3-2015)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 91.065  ENTERING UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   Whenever a public safety official, while pursuing an animal in violation of
this chapter, and the animal is on or goes on any private property other than
the property of the animal's owner, then, and in that event, the public safety
official is authorized and warranted to go on the property for the purpose of
catching or retrieving the animal for impoundment.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 1037-15, passed 8-3-2015)
§ 91.066  ENTERING UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY OF ANIMAL'S OWNER.
   (A)   If an animal is in violation of this chapter and is found on the
animal owner’s private property, the public safety official shall give or
attempt to give notice to the animal’s owner of the violation before catching,
retrieving or impounding the animal.
   (B)   If the owner of the animal is not available and it is not possible to
give notice to the animal’s owner, the public safety official shall be entitled
to enter upon the private property of the animal’s owner to catch or retrieve
the animal and the animal shall be impounded pursuant to this chapter and a
citation issued and delivered to the owner of the animal as soon thereafter as
is possible and reasonable.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 1037-15, passed 8-3-2015)
§ 91.067  IMPOUNDING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of any public safety official to attempt to
apprehend and take into custody any animal in violation of this chapter and
cause the same to be impounded in the animal shelter designated by the Lead
City Commission.
   (B)   The public safety official shall fill out an impoundment form for each
animal placed in the animal shelter, denoting day, hour, month, year, animal
type, sex, color, location found, tag numbers or lack of and name or
identification of the official performing the impoundment. If known, thepublic
safety official shall list the animal owner’s address. If a license number or
any other identifying feature or system is available, an attempt to contact the
owner shall be made.
   (C)   No public safety official shall release any animal from the animal
shelter unless the person redeeming the animal can provide proof to the city
that all fines and fees have been paid and provide proof of all required
vaccinations and licenses or have been given a specific date to have all fines
and fees paid, city license and proof of vaccination obtained.
   (D)   Animals can be released on weekends with proof of all fines, fees and
licenses being paid or arranged as set forth.
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 1037-15, passed 8-3-2015; Ord. 1045-16,
passed 2-1-2016)  Penalty, see §
91.999
DEER
§ 91.080  DECLARATION OF PUBLIC INTEREST.
   (A)   Baiting of deer by placing unnatural food sources upon any real
property within the city for the purpose of attracting deer to eat the
unnatural food source has the effect of enticing deer from their natural
habitat into an unnatural urban environment, thereby endangering the deer.
   (B)   This results in an unnatural growth of the deer population,
contributing to the unnatural loss of the deers' instinctive avoidance of
humans, leading to the reliance by deer upon the unnatural food source, and
also endangering persons and domestic animals, and resulting in damage to
property.
(Ord. 946-03, passed 2-3-2003)
§ 91.081  DEFINITION.
   UNNATURAL FOOD SOURCE is defined as any amount of grain, fruit, vegetables,
nuts, hay, salt blocks or other similar edible material or substance which has
the effect of attracting deer for the purpose of eating that material.
(Ord. 946-03, passed 2-3-2003)
§ 91.082  NUISANCES.
   No person within the corporate limits of the city shall place upon any
property or cause to remain thereon, any unnatural food source. It shall be an
affirmative defense to any prosecution hereunder that the unnatural food source
was placed not less than five feet above the ground and was not accessible to
deer, or that the unnatural food source was placed in good faith for a purpose
other than attracting deer or other wildlife and that the attraction of deer is
only an incidental result.
(Ord. 946-03, passed 2-3-2003)
§ 91.083  EXEMPTION.
   Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to any governmental
agency or to any employee or authorized agent thereof in the course of his or
her employment or agency. Specifically, nothing in this section shall be
construed to prohibit the baiting of deer by authorized governmental agents in
the furtherance of an approved plan to reduce deer population or in furtherance
of an approved plan to entice deer out of the urban environment into a less
urban and more natural environment.
(Ord. 946-03, passed 2-3-2003)
§ 91.999  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any public safety official may issue a citation to the owner of an
animal found at large. The fines charged for running at large shall be set by
resolution.
      (1)   First offense: $10;
      (2)   Second offense: $35; and
      (3)   Third offense or subsequent offense: $100.
   (C)   Any animal that has bitten a person or other animal shall be confined
inside the owner's residence, at a kennel or animal hospital for a period of
not less than ten days and the owner shall provide proof that the animal has
had vaccination for rabies by a certificate of vaccination from a veterinarian.
The owner of an animal that has bitten another person or animal may be given a
citation. The penalty for having an animal that bites a person or other animal
is a Class II misdemeanor.
   (D)   Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation violating any
of the sections of this chapter or refusing to pay of the fees as provided for
in this chapter, whether for a license or for redeeming an animal, shall have
criminal action brought against any known or provable owner to recover the
expense and fines in abating any nuisances under the sections of this chapter
from the person creating, permitting or maintaining the same, or in any other
manner allowed by the state.
   (E)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be 
charged with a Class II misdemeanor (SDCL 22-6-2).
   (F)   The penalty for baiting deer is a Class II misdemeanor (SDCL 22-6-2).
(Ord. 914-98, passed 9-21-1998; Ord. 946-03, passed 2-3-2003; Ord. 969-05,
passed 3-14-2005; Ord. 1037-15, passed 8-3-2015)
CHAPTER 92:  ASSEMBLIES, PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
Section
   
92.01   Permit required
   
92.02   Application for permit
   
92.03   Contents of permit
   
92.04   Matters considered in determining issuance of permit
   
92.05   Issuance
   
92.06   Time lapse between application, activity
   
92.07   Deviation from permit
   
92.08   Display of permit
   
92.09   Revocation of permit
   
92.10   Enforcement
   
92.11   Fee
§ 92.01  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to organize or hold or participate in
any parade, meeting, assembly or procession of persons and/or vehicles on the
streets or sidewalks of this city unless the activity shall have first been
authorized by a written permit therefor.
(Prior Code, § 9-100)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.02  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Any person desiring a permit required by the provisions of this chapter
shall make application therefor to the Chief of Police, which application shall
contain the following information:
   (A)   The name and address of the applicant;
   (B)   The name and address of the person the applicant represents;
   (C)   The exact time and date of commencement and termination of each act or
activity desired;
   (D)   The purpose, location and route of the act or activity, if applicable;
   (E)   The person, group, association or body to be authorized under the
permit to do the act or activity and the number of persons to participate; and
   (F)   Other relevant information as the Chief of Police may require for the
investigation of the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 9-101)
§ 92.03  CONTENTS OF PERMIT.
   Upon issuance of a permit required by this chapter, the same shall contain
therein all information contained in the application therefor and be signed by
the Chief of Police, and a signed copy of the same shall be kept with the
application, both on file in the office of the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 9-102)
§ 92.04  MATTERS CONSIDERED IN DETERMINING ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   In deciding whether to issue a permit under the provisions of this chapter,
the Chief of Police shall consider:
   (A)   Number of persons to participate;
   (B)   Anticipated traffic conditions at the time and date proposed for the
activity;
   (C)   Schedule of other similar activities for which permits may have been
issued;
   (D)   Adequacy of adult supervision for any minors scheduled to participate;
   (E)   Availability of city personnel whose presence on duty may be required
by the activity and by the necessity to protect the general public; and
   (F)   Adequacy of public facilities in the location proposed for the
activity to accommodate the proposed activity and the normal public use of
public facilities in the proposed location.
(Prior Code, § 9-103)
§ 92.05  ISSUANCE.
   The permit required by the provisions of this chapter shall be issued by the
Chief of Police upon application therefor; provided, however, that the permit
may be denied or refused if it shall appear that the applicant therefor or the
act or activity requested by the application shall be in violation of any
applicable provision of this code, state law or city ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 9-104)
§ 92.06  TIME LAPSE BETWEEN APPLICATION, ACTIVITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any activity authorized under this chapter to
commence within 24 hours from the date of the application therefor.
(Prior Code, § 9-105)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.07  DEVIATION FROM PERMIT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person participating in any act or activity for
which a permit has been granted under the provisions of this chapter to deviate
from or alter any of the terms or contents of the permit.
(Prior Code, § 9-106)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.08  DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Every person having a permit issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall have the permit in his or her possession during the activity
permitted thereby, and shall display the permit upon the request of any law
enforcement officer.
   (B)   Failure to display the permit shall be deemed a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 9-107)
§ 92.09  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Whenever the free passage of any street or sidewalk in the city shall
be obstructed by a crowd, congregation, parade, meeting, assembly or
procession, or the conduct of two or more persons except as authorized by any
permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the persons comprising the group shall
disperse or move when directed to do so by a police officer.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse and the refusal shall be
a violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-108)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.10  ENFORCEMENT.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the authority of any
officer to arrest a person engaged in any act or activity granted a permit
under this chapter, if the conduct of the person violates the laws of the
state, provisions of this code or ordinances of this city, or unreasonably
obstructs the public streets and sidewalks of this city, or engages in acts
that cause, or would tend to cause, a breach of the peace.
(Prior Code, § 9-110)
§ 92.11  FEE.
   A fee shall be paid as determined by resolution of the city.
(Prior Code, § 9-111)
CHAPTER 93:  PUBLIC NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   Nuisance prohibited
   
93.02   Enumeration
   
93.03   Notice to abate; issuance
   
93.04   Noncompliance deemed misdemeanor
   
93.05   Abatement by public safety official
   
93.06   Alternate abatement procedure
   
93.07   Recovery of expenses
Noise Regulations
   
93.20   Purpose and intent
   
93.21   Definitions and standards
   
93.22   Noises prohibited
   
93.23   Use district noise levels
   
93.24   Sound level measurement
   
93.25   Exemptions
   
93.26   Exceptions
   
93.27   Permit
   
93.28   Revocation of permit
   
93.29   Enforcement responsibility
   
93.30   Inspections
Abandoned and Nuisance Property
   
93.35   Definitions
   
93.36   Statement of findings and declarations
   
93.37   Determination that property is abandoned
   
93.38   Determination of property as nuisance
   
93.39   Notice of determination; Lead City Commission action
   
93.40   Costs of abatement
 
   
93.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Animals, see
Chapter 91
   Abandoned, derelict and junk motor vehicles, see Chapter 79
   General Offenses, see Title XIII
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01  NUISANCE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall create, commit, maintain or permit to be created, committed
or maintained any nuisance within the city.
(Prior Code, § 17-100)  Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.02  ENUMERATION.
   Whatever is dangerous to human health, whatever renders the ground, the
water, the air or food a hazard or injurious to human health, and the following
specified acts, conditions and things are, each and all of them, hereby
declared to constitute nuisances:
   (A)   Imperfect plumbing. Any imperfect, leaking, unclean or filthy sink,
water closet, urinal or other plumbing fixture in any building, used or
occupied by human beings;
   (B)   Garbage and refuse. Depositing, maintaining or permitting to be
maintained or to accumulate upon any public or private property, any household
waste water, sewage, garbage, tin cans, offal or excrement, any decaying fruit,
vegetables, fish, meat or bones, or any foul, putrid or obnoxious liquid
substance;
   (C)   Impure water. Any well or other supply of water used for drinking or
household purposes which is polluted or which is so construed or situated that
it may become polluted;
   (D)   Undressed hides. Undressed hides kept longer than 24 hours, except at
the place where they are to be manufactured, or in a storeroom or basement
whose construction is approved by the Health Department;
   (E)   Manure. The accumulation of manure, unless it be in a properly
constructed fly-proof pit, bin or box;
   (F)   Breeding place for flies. The accumulation of manure, garbage or
anything whatever in which flies breed;
   (G)   Stagnant water. Any excavation in which stagnant water is permitted to
collect;
   (H)   Weeds. Permitting weeds to grow to maturity on any private property,
including vacant lots;
   (I)   Poison ivy. Permitting poison ivy to be or to grow upon any private
property nearer than 15 feet from the sidewalk of any public streets;
   (J)   Dead animals. For the owner of a dead animal to permit it to remain
undisposed of longer than 24 hours after its death;
   (K)   Privies and cesspools. Erecting or maintaining any privy or cesspool
except where the sanitary privies and cesspools, the plans of which are
approved by the State Health Department;
   (L)   Improperly handling garbage. Throwing or letting fall on or permitting
to remain on any street, alley or public ground any manure, garbage, rubbish,
filth, fuel or wood while engaged in handling or removing any like substance;
   (M)   Rodents. Accumulations of junk, old iron, automobiles or parts
thereof, or anything whatever in which rodents may live or breed or accumulate;
   (N)   Bonfires. Burning, causing or permitting to be burned in any street,
alley or public ground or private property, any dirt, filth, manure, garbage,
sweepings, leaves, ashes, paper, rubbish or material of any kind;
   (O)   Parking livestock trucks or trailers in residential districts. Parking
or permitting a livestock truck or trailer to remain on any street, area or
public ground in a residential district when the truck or trailer gives off an
offensive odor or is contaminated with manure or other filth;
   (P)   Shoveling sidewalks. Failure to shovel sidewalks within 24 hours of
the end of a snowfall; and
   (Q)   Trees and bushes. Bushes and trees hanging onto streets, sidewalks or
walkways.
(Prior Code, § 17-101)  Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.03  NOTICE TO ABATE; ISSUANCE.
   Whenever a public safety official or other designee finds that a nuisance
exists within the city, a written notice shall be given to the person creating,
permitting or maintaining the nuisance to abate the same within five business
days or within a time set by the enforcing officer as deemed reasonable as
such.
(Prior Code, § 17-102)  (Ord. 1036-15, passed 7-20-2015)
§ 93.04  NONCOMPLIANCE DEEMED MISDEMEANOR.
   If any person who is served a written notice to abate a nuisance under the
provisions of this subchapter shall fail to do so within the time allowed in
the notice, he or she shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 17-103)  Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.05  ABATEMENT BY PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICIAL.
   In the event a person shall fail to abate any nuisance, following written
notice to do so, a public safety official shall cause the nuisance to be
abated.
(Prior Code, § 17-104)  (Ord. 1036-15, passed 7-20-2015)
§ 93.06  ALTERNATE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   In addition to any method of abatement of nuisance within the city provided
by the provisions of this subchapter, any nuisance found within the city may be
abated in the manner provided by state law.
(Prior Code, § 17-105)
§ 93.07  RECOVERY OF EXPENSES.
   The city may recover the expenses incurred by the city in abating any
nuisance under the provisions of this subchapter from the person creating,
permitting or maintaining the same in a civil suit instituted for that purpose,
or in any other manner allowed by state law.
(Prior Code, § 17-106)  (Ord. 1036-15, passed 7-20-2015)
NOISE REGULATIONS
§ 93.20  PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   This subchapter is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health,
safety, welfare, peace, quiet and tranquility for the citizens of the city and
persons or visitors frequenting the city through the reduction, control and
prevention of noise which is disruptive and constitutes an annoyance to such
citizens and persons.  The City Commission acknowledges and recognizes the
topography of the city and that businesses are located primarily along the
streets and highways which travel through the valley of the city and that
sounds and noise rising from such highways and streets is easily heard and
echoes above such streets and alleys to the hillsides where most of the
citizens of the city reside.  It is the intent of this subchapter to establish
regulations and controls which will allow the use of sound amplification
equipment within the city and to reduce unreasonably loud, raucous, annoying
and disruptive noise which is harmful and detrimental to individuals and the
community in general in the enjoyment of life, privacy, property and conduct of
business.
(Ord. 1062-18, passed 10-1-2018)
§ 93.21  DEFINITIONS AND STANDARDS.
   All terminology used in this subchapter and not defined in this section
shall be in conformance with applicable American National Standards Institute
publications or those from its successor publications or bodies. For the
purposes of this subchapter, certain words and phrases used in this subchapter
are defined as follows:
   AMBIENT SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. The sound pressure level of the all-
encompassing noise associated with a given environment, usually a composite of
sounds from many sources.
   BOUNDARY. The property boundary (line).
   CONTINUOUS SOUND. Any sound which exists, essentially without interruption,
for a period of ten minutes or more.
   CYCLICALLY VARYING NOISE. Any sound which varies in sound level such that
the same level is obtained repetitively at reasonably uniform intervals of
time.
   DECIBEL. A logarithmic and dimensionless unit of measure often used in
describing the amplitude of sound. Decibel is denoted as "dBA."
   DEVICE. Any mechanism which is intended to produce, or which actually
produces, noise when operated or handled.
   DYNAMIC BRAKING DEVICE. (Commonly referred to as Jacobs Brake) means a
device used primarily on trucks for the conversion of the engine from an
internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking
without the use of wheel brakes.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. A motor vehicle used in response to any emergency or to
protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger.
   EMERGENCY WORK. Work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition
following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property
from an imminent exposure to danger.
   GENERATING LAND USE DISTRICT. The zoning use established by city zoning
ordinances at which the noise is generated.
   IMPULSIVE NOISE. A noise containing excursions usually less than one second,
or sound pressure level using the fast meter characteristic.
   LIVE MUSIC or ENTERTAINMENT. Any person or group performing in person.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is self-propelled by mechanical power.
   MUFFLER. An apparatus consisting of a series of chambers or baffle plates
designed for the purpose of transmitting gases while reducing sound emanating
from such apparatus.
   NOISE. Any sound which is unwanted or which causes or tends to cause an
adverse psychological or physiological effect on human beings.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE. Any sound which annoys or disturbs reasonable persons
with normal sensitivities, or which injures or endangers the comfort, repose,
health, hearing, peace and safety of other persons.
   PERSON. Any human being, firm, association, organization, partnership,
business, trust, corporation, company, contractor, supplier, installer, user,
owner or operator, including any municipal corporation or its officers or
employees.
   PLAINLY AUDIBLE NOISE. Any noise for which the information content of that
noise is unambiguously transferred to the listener, such as, but not limited
to, understanding of spoken speech, comprehension of whether a voice is raised
or normal, or comprehension of musical rhythms.
   PROPERTY BOUNDARY. Any well-defined line exterior to any enclosed structure,
at the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real
property owned by one person from that owned by another person.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, or alley or
similar place which is owned or controlled by a public governmental entity.
   PURE TONE. Any sound which can be distinctly heard as a single pitch or a
set of single pitches.
   RECEIVING LAND USE DISTRICT. The zoning use established by city zoning
ordinances at which the noise is heard.
   REPETITIVE IMPULSIVE NOISE. Any noise which is composed of impulsive noises
that are repeated at sufficiently slow rates such that a sound level meter set
at fast meter characteristic will show changes in sound pressure level greater
than ten dBA.
   SOUND. A temporal and spatial oscillation in pressure, or other physical
quantity, in a medium with interval forces that causes compression and
rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at finite speed to distant
points.
   SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument, including a microphone, amplifier, RMS
detector and integrator, time averager, output meter and/or visual display and
weighting networks, that is sensitive to pressure fluctuations. The instrument
reads sound pressure level when properly calibrated, as specified by the
American National Standards Institute.
   SOUND PRESSURE. The instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and
the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space due to sound.
   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. The sound pressure level as measured with a sound
level meter using the A-weighting network.  The standard notation is dBA or dB
(A).
   STATIONARY NOISE SOURCE. Any device, fixed or movable, which is located or
used on property other than a public right-of-way.
   STEADY NOISE. A sound pressure level which remains essentially constant
during the period of observation, i.e., does not vary more than six dBA when
measured with the slow meter characteristic of a sound level meter.
   USE DISTRICT. Those districts established by the city zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 1062-18, passed 10-1-2018)
§ 93.22  NOISES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   General prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person to make,
continue, or cause to be made or continued any noise disturbance within the
limits of the city.
   (B)   Specific prohibitions. The following acts are declared to be in
violation of this chapter:
      (1)   Horns and signaling devices. Sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any motor vehicle on any street or public place within the city
therein, except as a danger warning signal or the sounding of any such
signaling device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.
      (2)   Radios, television sets, musical instruments and similar devices.
         (a)   Using, operating or permitting the use or operation of any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, television, phonograph, drum or other
machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound in such a manner
as to violate §
93.28 or cause a noise disturbance.
         (b)   The operating of any such device between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. (the following day) in such a manner as to be plainly audible at
the property boundary of the source or plainly audible at 50 feet from such
device when operated within a vehicle parked on a public right-of-way or
plainly audible at 100 feet from such device when operated within a moving
vehicle.
      (3)   Hawkers and peddlers. Selling anything by outcry within any area of
the city therein zoned primarily for residential uses in such a manner as to
violate §
93.28 or cause a noise disturbance. The provisions of this division shall not
be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food, and
beverages at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses, and other
similar licensed public entertainment events, or occasional sale of property by
public auction.
      (4)   Loading operation. Loading, unloading, opening or otherwise
handling boxes, crates, containers, garbage containers or other objects between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (the following day) in such a manner as
to violate §
93.28 or cause a noise disturbance.
      (5)   Construction work. Operating, or causing to be used or operated,
any equipment used in construction, repair, alteration or demolition work on
buildings, structures, streets, alleys, or appurtenances thereto in:
         (a)   Residential or commercial land use districts between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (the following day).
         (b)   Any land use districts where such operation exceeds the sound
level limits for an industrial land use.
      (6)   Power equipment. Operating or permitting to be operated any power
equipment used for home or building repair or grounds maintenance, including,
but not limited to power saws, sanders, lawn mowers, generators or garden
equipment, in residential or commercial zones outdoors between the hours of 10:
00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (the following day).
      (7)   Commercial power equipment. Operating or permitting to be operated
any power equipment, except construction equipment used for construction
activities, including but not limited to chain saws, pavement breakers, log
chippers or powered hand tools in residential or commercial land use districts
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. (the following day).
      (8)   Dynamic braking devices. Operating any motor vehicle with an
unmuffled dynamic braking device engaged except for the aversion of imminent
danger.
      (9)   Defect in vehicle. Operating or permitting to be operated or used
any motor vehicle which, by virtue of disrepair or manner of operation,
violates §
93.28 or causes a noise disturbance.
      (10)   Standing motor vehicles. The operating or causing or permitting to
be operated any motor vehicle or any auxiliary equipment attached thereto in
such a manner as to violate §
93.28 or cause a noise disturbance for a consecutive period longer than 15
minutes during which such vehicle is stationary in a residential zone.
      (11)   Recreational vehicles and snowmobiles. Operating a recreational
vehicle or snowmobile in a manner which violates §
93.28 or causes a noise disturbance.
(Ord. 1062-18, passed 10-1-2018)  Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.23  USE DISTRICT NOISE LEVELS.
   (A)   Maximum permissible sound levels. It shall be unlawful for any person
to operate or permit to be operated any stationary source of sound in such a
manner as to create a sound pressure level of any measurement period (which
shall not be less than ten minutes unless otherwise provided in this chapter)
which exceeds the limits set forth for the following generating property land
use districts when measured at the boundary of the generating property.
      (1)   Normal sound.
 
Generating Land Use Districts  Time                    Sound Level Limit (dBA)
(Zoning)
Residential                    7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 60
Residential                    10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 55
Commercial or business         At all times            70
Industrial                     At all times            75
 
      (2)   When a noise source can be identified and its noise measured in
more than one land use district, the limits of the most restrictive use shall
apply at the boundaries between different land use districts.
   (B)   Correction for character of sound.
      (1)   For any stationary source of sound which emits a pure tone,
cyclically varying sound or repetitive impulsive sound, the limits set forth in
division (A) of this section shall be reduced by five  dBA.
      (2)   Notwithstanding compliance with division (B)(1) of this section, it
shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated any
stationary source of sound which emits a pure tone, cyclically varying or
repetitive impulsive sound that creates a noise disturbance.
(Ord. 1062-18, passed 10-1-2018)  Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.24  SOUND LEVEL MEASUREMENT.
   Sound level measurements shall be made with a sound level meter using the A-
weighting scale, in accordance with standards promulgated by the American
National Standards Institute or other reasonable standards adopted and tested
by the Police Department.
(Ord. 1062-18, passed 10-1-2018)
§ 93.25  EXEMPTIONS.
   The following uses and activities shall be exempt from noise level
regulations:
   (A)   Noise of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure relief
valves.
   (B)   Noise resulting from any authorized emergency vehicles when responding
to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency, such as police, fire and
ambulance sirens or warning devices and loudspeakers used in connection with
crimes, disasters or emergencies.
   (C)   Noise resulting from emergency work.
(Ord. 1062-18, passed 10-1-2018)
§ 93.26  EXCEPTIONS.
   The following exceptions shall be allowed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m. in residential or commercial land use zones. These uses and
activities are not required to obtain a sound permit unless otherwise stated:
   (A)   School outdoor concerts and music activities including marching band
activities, concerts, and parades, sporting activities with musical components,
art festivals and student fund-raisers.
   (B)   Religious organizations conducting worship services outdoors,
including, but not limited to, operation of a bell for religious activity.
   (C)   The City of Lead, including, but not limited to, Parks and Recreation
Department-sponsored activities; community events, parades, festivals or
celebrations in conjunction with declared special events.
   (D)   Construction work. Operating, or causing to be used or operated, any
equipment used in construction, repair, alteration, or demolition work on
buildings, structures, streets, alleys or appurtenances in any land use
district where such operation causes a sound pressure level no more than 75 dBA
measured at a distance of 50 feet, up to one hour after sunset.
   (E)   Domestic power equipment. Operating or permitting to be operated any
power equipment used for home or building repair or grounds maintenance,
including, but not limited to, a power saw, sander, lawn mower or garden
equipment in residential or commercial zones at a sound pressure no more than
75 dBA measured at a distance of 50 feet, up to one hour after sunset.
   (F)   Commercial power equipment. Operating or permitting to be operated any
power equipment, except construction equipment used for construction
activities, including but not limited to chain saws, pavement breakers, log
chippers or powered hand tools in residential or commercial land use districts
at a sound level no more than 80 dBA measured at a distance of 50 feet, up to
one hour after sunset.
   (G)   Athletic games, contests, entertainment shows or events.
   (H)   Outdoor live entertainment in commercial or special use zones,
provided the max dBA at the boundary does not exceed 80 dBA.
(Ord. 1062-18, passed 10-1-2018)
§ 93.27  PERMIT.
   (A)   Applications for a permit for relief from the noise restrictions in
this subchapter for an activity shall be made to the city finance office.
Permits must comply with the following:
      (1)   Application shall be made on a form provided by the city Finance
Officer.
      (2)   Application shall be made a minimum of 48 hours before the City
Commission meeting, at which the permit shall be considered.  (For instance,
the City Commission meeting on a Monday will require the permit to be submitted
to City Hall on the preceding Thursday).
      (3)   The permit shall be posted at the activity.
   (B)   Applications for a permit from the noise restrictions of this
subchapter on the basis of hardship for a temporary, ongoing, or continuous
necessary business activity may be made to the city finance office. Permits
shall comply with the following:
      (1)   Application shall be made on a form provided by the finance office.
      (2)   No reasonable alternative is available to the applicant.
      (3)   The permit may prescribe any reasonable conditions or requirements
deemed necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the city or the surrounding
neighborhood.
      (4)   The City Commission may periodically review the permit and, if
findings warrant, revise the terms and conditions of the permit or revoke the
permit.
(Ord. 1062-18, passed 10-1-2018)
§ 93.28  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   A permit issued under this chapter may be revoked or terminated by the city
if the noise which is produced under the permit becomes unreasonably loud,
raucous, jarring, disturbing, disruptive or annoying to residents or other
persons within the city.
(Ord. 1062-18, passed 10-1-2018)
§ 93.29  ENFORCEMENT RESPONSIBILITY.
   The Police Department shall have exclusive responsibility to investigate,
issue citations and submit reports for this subchapter as it relates to both
stationary sources and vehicular sources to the City Commission.
(Ord. 1062-18, passed 10-1-2018)
§ 93.30  INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police or authorized representatives are authorized to
make inspections of all noise sources and to take measurements and tests
whenever necessary to determine the quantity and character of noise.
   (B)   No person shall hinder or interfere with any authorized person while
in the performance of their duties under this subchapter.
(Ord. 1062-18, passed 10-1-2018)
ABANDONED AND NUISANCE PROPERTY
§ 93.35  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR.  The person(s) that are designated by the municipality
to enforce the Building Codes or ordinances.
   MUNICIPALITY.  The City of Lead.
   OWNER.  The holder or holders of title to a property.
   PROPERTY.  Any building or structure and the land appurtenant thereto.
(Ord. 991-09, passed 1-26-2009)
§ 93.36  STATEMENT OF FINDINGS AND DECLARATIONS.
   The city finds and declares that:
   (A)   Abandoned properties, particularly those located within community
areas or in close proximity to occupied residences and businesses, create a
wide range of problems for the communities in which they are located, creating
public health problems, fostering criminal activity and otherwise diminishing
the quality of life for residents and business operators in those areas;
   (B)   Abandoned properties diminish the property values of neighboring
properties and have a negative effect on the quality of life of adjacent
property owners, increasing the risk of property damage through arson and
vandalism and discouraging neighborhood stability and revitalization;
   (C)   For these reasons, abandoned properties are presumptively considered
nuisances, in view of their negative effects on nearby properties and the
residents or users of those properties;
   (D)   The continued presence of abandoned properties in the city acts as a
significant barrier to community revitalization and to the regeneration of the
city's business centers;
   (E)   It is the responsibility of a property owner to maintain his or her
property in sound condition and prevent it from becoming a nuisance to others.
The failure by an owner to comply with legitimate orders to demolish, stabilize
or otherwise repair his or her property creates a presumption that the owner
has abandoned the property; and
   (F)   Many abandoned buildings still have potential value for residential
and other uses and, wherever feasible, the buildings should be preserved rather
than demolished; particularly buildings that have historic or architectural
value, or contribute to maintaining the character of neighborhoods or
streetscapes.
(Ord. 991-09, passed 1-26-2009)
§ 93.37  DETERMINATION THAT PROPERTY IS ABANDONED.
   Any property that has not been legally occupied for a period of two years,
and is in need of rehabilitation, as determined by the City Building Inspector,
shall be deemed an abandoned property.
(Ord. 991-09, passed 1-26-2009)
§ 93.38  DETERMINATION OF PROPERTY AS NUISANCE.
   A property may be determined to be a nuisance if any of the following
conditions are met:
   (A)   The property has been found to be unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use;
   (B)   The condition and vacancy of the property materially increases the
risk of fire to the property and adjacent properties;
   (C)   The property is subject to unauthorized entry leading to potential
health and safety hazards; the owner has failed to take reasonable and
necessary measures to secure the property; or the municipality has secured the
property in order to prevent the hazards after the owner has failed to do so;
   (D)   The presence of vermin or the accumulation of debris, uncut vegetation
or physical deterioration of the structure or grounds have created potential
health and safety hazards and the owner has failed to take reasonable and
necessary measures to remove the hazards; or
   (E)   The dilapidated appearance or other condition of the property
materially affects the welfare, including the economic welfare, of the
residents of the area in close proximity to the property, and the owner has
failed to take reasonable and necessary measures to remedy the conditions.
(Ord. 991-09, passed 1-26-2009)
§ 93.39  NOTICE OF DETERMINATION; LEAD CITY COMMISSION ACTION.
   (A)   Once the property has been determined, by the Building Inspector, that
it has been abandoned or that it is a nuisance, the property owner(s) shall be
notified that they shall be required to appear at a public hearing that shall
take place at a Lead City Commission meeting.
   (B)   This hearing shall be set within 30 days of the notice that the
property owner(s) receives from the city. The hearing notification will also be
published in the city's newspaper for two consecutive weeks and the property
shall have proper notification signs posted by the Building Inspector.
   (C)   The owner(s) shall be required to prepare and submit a rehabilitation
plan to the Lead City Commission, addressing the concerns, stated by the
Building Inspector, of the property in question. The Lead City Commission may
choose to accept the plan as presented, modify the plan as desired or refuse to
accept the plan in its entirety.
   (D)   If the Lead City Commission accepts the rehabilitation plan as
presented or modifies the plan as desired, the owner(s) of the property must
meet the timetable established by the arranged plans. If the owner(s) do not
meet the timetable, then the city may take possession of the property to remedy
the nuisance in whatever manner it determines necessary.
   (E)   If the Lead City Commission refuses to accept the rehabilitation plan,
then the city may take possession of the property to remedy the nuisance in
whatever manner it determines necessary.
   (F)   If the owner(s) are not present, or refuse to attend the scheduled
hearing, then the city may take possession of the property to remedy the
nuisance in whatever manner it determines necessary.
(Ord. 991-09, passed 1-26-2009)
§ 93.40  COSTS OF ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Any costs associated with the abatement of a nuisance shall be a lien
against the property and is subject to the special assessment provisions of
SDCL §§ 21-10-6 and 10-23-1.1.
   (B)   The Lead City Commission may also commence a civil action against the
owner of the real property for its costs of abatement in lieu of the special
assessment provisions of SDCL §§ 21-10-6 and 10-23-1.1.
(Ord. 991-09, passed 1-26-2009)
§ 93.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
93.01 through
93.07 shall be guilty of a Class II misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $200 and/or 30 days incarceration each day
the violation remains thereafter.
   (C)   A violation of §§
93.20 through
93.24 is a Class II misdemeanor which may be punishable by a fine up to $200
and 30 days incarceration.
   (D)   (1)   In addition to the imposition of other penalties, violations of
§§
93.22 through
93.30 of this chapter are deemed and declared to be a nuisance, and as such,
may be subject to summary abatement by means of a restraining order or
injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
      (2)   Citations for a Class 2 misdemeanor to any person who violates this
title or any amendment hereto. The citation for a Class 2 misdemeanor is
punishable by the maximum punishment set forth by the laws of the State of
South Dakota. Each day that any violation of §§
93.22 through
93.30 is in effect shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 970-05, passed 3-14-2005; Ord. 973-06, passed 7-24-2006; Am. Ord. 1062-
18, passed 10-1-2018)
 
CHAPTER 94:  STREETS; PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
94.001   Names of streets
   
94.002   Numbering of structures and lots
Sidewalk Construction
   
94.015   Supervision of and specifications for sidewalk construction
   
94.016   Permit required
   
94.017   Repair of sidewalk
   
94.018   Failure to comply; misdemeanor
   
94.019   Special assessments
   
94.020   Maintenance of public stairways by benefitting property owner(s)
Removal of Snow from Sidewalks
   
94.030   Duty of owner
   
94.031   City may remove
   
94.032   Failure to remove snow; misdemeanor
   
94.033   Notice to remove snow and ice
   
94.034   Snow into streets
   
94.035   Additional precautions
   
94.036   Vehicle marking
Excavation
   
94.045   Supervision
   
94.046   Permit required
   
94.047   Permit fee
   
94.048   Condition of issuance
   
94.049   Refilling excavations
   
94.050   Restoring pavements or street surfacing to former condition
   
94.051   Protection of public
   
94.052   Excavations near street
Use of Streets and Public Places
   
94.065   Obstructing streets, sidewalks and public places
   
94.066   Receiving goods and merchandise
   
94.067   Materials in street; permits
   
94.068   Use of sidewalks
   
94.069   Clearance of overhanging projections over streets and sidewalks
   
94.070   Eave pipes
   
94.071   Care and maintenance of city right-of-way
Retaining Walls
   
94.085   Property owner's duty
   
94.086   Condemnation procedure
   
94.087   Failure to comply; misdemeanor
   
94.088   Special assessment
Weeds
   
94.100   Definition
   
94.101   Duty of owner, manager or lessee
   
94.102   Notice to cut weeds and maintain vegetation
   
94.103   Failure to comply; misdemeanor
   
94.104   Cost assessed
Private Driveways and Parking Areas
   
94.115   Definitions
   
94.116   Permits required
   
94.117   Fees
   
94.118   General requirements
   
94.119   One- and two-family residential driveways and parking areas
   
94.120   Multi-family residential driveways and parking areas
   
94.121   Assembly and educational building driveways and parking areas
   
94.122   Commercial driveways and parking areas
   
94.123   Industrial driveways and parking areas
   
94.124   Existing driveways and parking areas
Weight Restrictions on City Streets
   
94.135   Maximum weight of vehicle or combination of vehicles; axles
   
94.136   Formula for weight on group of consecutive axles
   
94.137   Combination vehicles deemed single for weight purposes
   
94.138   Maximum weight per tire; spacing of axles
   
94.139   Tire width defined
   
94.140   Single-trip permit for moving building or other oversize load;
carrying and inspection of permit
   
94.141   Enforcement; requiring driver to stop and submit to inspection of
vehicle and a weighing
   
94.142   Reduced load maximums; extension of period; changing restrictions
   
94.143   Reduced weight maximums on specific roads; notice
 
   
94.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Snow emergency, see §
71.56
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.001  NAMES OF STREETS.
   The names of the streets in the city are hereby fixed and adopted in
accordance with and as shown by Map "A" entitled "Streets and Wards of the City
of Lead" on file in the office of the City Finance Officer.
(Prior Code, § 18-100)
§ 94.002  NUMBERING OF STRUCTURES AND LOTS.
   (A)   Authority of Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall have the
authority to designate the number of any structure or lot in the city. If any
structure or lot is incorrectly numbered, the Building Inspector may order the
owner to correctly number the same and it shall be unlawful for the owner not
to comply. The number of any structure hereinafter constructed shall be
determined by the Building Inspector at the time of issuance of the building
permit.
(Prior Code, § 18-200)
   (B)   Completion of work. Building Inspector shall have the authority to set
reasonable time limits for completion of work, described in the building
permit.
(Prior Code, § 18-201)
Penalty, see §
10.99
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
§ 94.015  SUPERVISION OF AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The construction of all new sidewalks upon or along all streets in the
city shall be done under the direct supervision of the city's engineer.
   (B)   The repair or replacement of existing sidewalks shall be supervised by
the Building Inspector. Sidewalk construction shall be of concrete and shall
conform to specifications recommended by the city's engineer and approved by
the Lead City Commission.
   (C)   Wooden sidewalks shall be permitted only by the approval of a variance
and after consultation with the city's engineer.
(Prior Code, § 18-300)
§ 94.016  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Prior to the construction of any sidewalks upon or along any street in the
city, the contractor or person for the owner of the abutting property shall
secure a permit from the Building Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 18-301)
§ 94.017  REPAIR OF SIDEWALK.
   (A)   The Building Inspector shall have full power to condemn existing
sidewalks which need repairs or which constitute a safety hazard, and to
require the abutting property owner to make repairs by serving written notice.
   (B)   The written notice shall specify the nature of repairs required and
the deadline date for the completion of repairs.
(Prior Code, § 18-302)
§ 94.018  FAILURE TO COMPLY; MISDEMEANOR.
   Any person who shall fail to make the repairs within the time specifically
set out in the written notice shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 18-303)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.019  SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   Upon failure of the property owner to make repairs as required in §
94.017 above, the Lead City Commission shall cause the repairs to be made in
accordance with §§
94.115 through
94.124 below, and that part of SDCL Chapter 9-46 which deals with sidewalk
improvements.
(Prior Code, § 18-304)
§ 94.020  MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC STAIRWAYS BY BENEFITTING PROPERTY OWNER(S).
   (A)   Publicly owned stairways used as the primary access to private
property, as determined by the Lead City Commission, may be required to be
maintained by the benefitting property owner(s) to standards of the Lead City
Commission.
   (B)   These standards may include snow removal, weed control, removal of
overhanging projections and general repairs.
(Prior Code, § 18-305)
REMOVAL OF SNOW FROM SIDEWALKS
§ 94.030  DUTY OF OWNER.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner, manager or lessee of property
abutting upon any sidewalk, to avoid slippery conditions dangerous to public
travel, to keep sidewalks free from ice and snow at all times.
   (B)   All sidewalks shall be free from ice and snow no later than 24 hours
after snowfall, except in unusual circumstances.
(Prior Code, § 18-400)  (Ord. 930-00, passed 10-30-2000)
§ 94.031  CITY MAY REMOVE.
   If the owner, manager or lessee of property abutting a sidewalk fails or
refuses to remove snow and/or ice within the time period specified in §
94.030 above or to keep sidewalks free from snow and ice at all times, the
Public Safety Administrator or designee may have the snow and/or ice removed
and the cost of removal and any associated fines shall be charged against the
property owner, manager or lessee.
(Prior Code, § 18-401)  (Ord. 930-00, passed 10-30-2000; Ord. 996-09, passed
11-2-2009)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.032  FAILURE TO REMOVE SNOW; MISDEMEANOR.
   It is unlawful for any property owner, manager or lessee to fail to comply
with §
94.030 above, and failure to comply shall be a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 18-403)  (Ord. 930-00, passed 10-30-2000)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.033  NOTICE TO REMOVE SNOW AND ICE.
   (A)   The Public Safety Administrator or designee shall, by public notice to
owners, managers and/or lessees of any lot abutting upon any sidewalk, require
all snow and ice on the sidewalk to be removed per city ordinance. The public
notice may be given generally by one annual publication in the official
newspaper of the city.
   (B)   The public notice shall provide that each owner, manager or lessee of
all lots abutting upon any sidewalk within the city shall maintain the sidewalk
to avoid slippery conditions at all times and shall have all sidewalks clear of
snow and ice no less than 24 hours after snowfall, and shall further provide
that in case of failure to comply the city will cause the same to be shoveled
or cleared and assess the cost thereof and any applicable fines and
administrative fees against the owner, manager or lessee. One public notice
shall be sufficient for the winter season.
   (C)   The city shall attempt to contact the owner, manager or lessee of
properties in violation prior to the city causing the shoveling or clearing
thereof. Failure to actually make contact with the owner, manager or lessee
shall not prohibit the city from enforcing this subchapter.
   (D)   During any one winter season, the attempt to contact the owner,
manager or lessee will not be made if two or more violations have occurred.
Upon the third winter seasonal violation, the city will cause the nuisance to
be abated without notice and will continue to the same, for the winter season,
for each subsequent violation.
(Ord. 930-00, passed 10-30-2000; Ord. 1044-16, passed 2-16-2016)
§ 94.034  SNOW INTO STREETS.
   (A)   Any individual or business who deliberately or intentionally removes
snow or ice and places it into a public street, road or travel way shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to §
94.999.
   (B)   Placement of snow onto a street department-created pile or windrow
will be allowed.
   (C)   Placement of hand-shoveled snow or ice, by residential homeowners or
tenants, onto public streets, roads or travel ways prior to the removal of the
snow by street crews shall be allowed. This placement of snow must be of a
reasonable nature and must not create an additional burden to city crews.
   (D)   Individuals or businesses will not be allowed to plow snow onto public
streets, roads or travel ways under any circumstances.
(Ord. 996-09, passed 11-2-2009)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.035  ADDITIONAL PRECAUTIONS.
   If it is prohibitive or not practical to remove ice that has frozen onto the
sidewalk, the owner shall place some suitable material upon the same to prevent
slipping or falling.
(Ord. 996-09, passed 11-2-2009)  Penalty, see §
94.999
§ 94.036  VEHICLE MARKING.
   Vehicles parked on or adjacent to city streets that are indistinguishable
from the surrounding environment, due to snowfall, shall be considered a
hazard. The owners/operators of such vehicles shall be required to mark the
vehicle in a manner that the city snow plow operators are made aware of the
hazard. The markings must be on each end of the hazard and visible to snow plow
operators.
(Ord.996-09, passed 11-2-2009)  Penalty, see §
94.999
EXCAVATION
§ 94.045  SUPERVISION.
   The City Street Foreman shall monitor all excavations made for any purpose
in streets, alleys or public grounds and shall require compliance with all the
requirements of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 18-500)
§ 94.046  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No excavation shall be made in or under any street, parking, sidewalk,
alley or public ground and no earth, soil, paving, gravel or other material
shall be removed without a permit issued by the City Street Foreman.
   (B)   A permit may not be required to begin emergency excavations necessary
to protect existing structures or repair public or private utilities; however,
a permit shall be obtained the morning of the first working day after the work
has commenced.
(Prior Code, § 18-501)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.047  PERMIT FEE.
   (A)   The fee for the permit required by this subchapter shall be determined
by resolution of the city.
   (B)   No fee provided for by this section shall be charged for excavations
made for municipal purposes by departments of the city.
(Prior Code, § 18-502)
§ 94.048  CONDITION OF ISSUANCE.
   (A)   In the event that any permit required by this subchapter is for
excavating in or under any street, parking area or sidewalk, no permit shall be
granted until an application has been filed with the city and the Lead City
Commission has approved the following:
      (1)   A surety bond in the sum of $5,000 or project cost, whichever is
greater, for faithful performance of all duties required by the city and for
repayment to the city for all damages growing out of the carelessness or
negligence of the licensee; and
      (2)   A certificate of insurance showing that the applicant has in effect
a statutory worker's compensation insurance policy including employer's
liability coverage in the amount of $100,000 and a liability policy covering
business operations including coverage for explosion, collapse and underground
hazards commonly referred to as XCV coverage, and including coverage for owned
and non-owned vehicles with limits of not less than $100,000 for each
occurrence, and $100,000 for injury to or destruction of the property of
others. The certificate shall contain a statement to the effect that the policy
cannot be cancelled or substantially altered without ten days prior written
notice to the city.
   (B)   The permit shall contain a statement and shall be issued only upon the
express condition that the permittee shall refill the excavation in accordance
with the instructions of the City Street Foreman and restore the pavement or
surfacing, as the case may be, to its former condition and maintain it in the
condition for a period of three years from the time of the completion of the
work authorized by the permit.
   (C)   Work performed under municipal contracts is exempted from the
requirements hereinafter set forth.
(Prior Code, § 18-503)
§ 94.049  REFILLING EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   The Lead City Commission shall adopt, and may amend, and the City
Street Foreman shall enforce a code of rules and regulations which shall set
forth the manner in which various types of excavations shall be back-filled or
refilled and the manner in which pavement, or other street surfacing, shall be
replaced.
   (B)   The City Street Foreman may require a compacting test prior to
placement of pavement or street surfacing.
   (C)   This compacting test will be required on any excavations in streets
that are five years old or less.
(Prior Code, § 18-504)
§ 94.050  RESTORING PAVEMENTS OR STREET SURFACING TO FORMER CONDITION.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the City Street Foreman to keep on file, all
copies of permits issued hereunder and to inspect from time to time, all
pavement or other street surfacing, disturbed pursuant to the permits.
   (B)   If the pavements or surfacing are not restored and notice thereof in
writing by regular mail shall be given the permittee, who shall put the same in
good condition within the time specified in the written notice.
   (C)   If the permittee fails after notice given to restore and maintain the
pavement or the surface thereof, the City Street Foreman may provide for the
necessary repairs and the permittee shall pay the cost thereof, and until he or
she pays the same no other permit shall be issued to him or her or any person
on his or her behalf.
(Prior Code, § 18-505)
§ 94.051  PROTECTION OF PUBLIC.
   Any person receiving a permit to make excavations in or upon any street,
alley, sidewalk or public ground shall, during the progress and continuance of
the work, erect and maintain around the same both by day and night suitable
guards, fences, lanterns and signals so as to prevent injury to person,
animals, or vehicles. Lighted warning devices shall be kept lighted from
sundown until sunrise.
(Prior Code, § 18-506)
§ 94.052  EXCAVATIONS NEAR STREET.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or occupant of any lot to make or
cause to be made any excavation on the lot adjacent to any street, alley,
public ground or traveled road, or roadway, except the same be securely guarded
so as to prevent the injury of any person or animal passing upon or along the
same.
(Prior Code, § 18-507)  Penalty, see §
10.99
USE OF STREETS AND PUBLIC PLACES
§ 94.065  OBSTRUCTING STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall obstruct or encumber any street, sidewalk or public place in
the city in any manner except as hereinafter provided.
(Prior Code, § 18-600)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.066  RECEIVING GOODS AND MERCHANDISE.
   It shall be lawful for any person to place on three feet in width of the
outer edge of the sidewalk in front of his or her premises for a period not
exceeding three hours any goods or merchandise which may be in the act of
receiving or delivering.
(Prior Code, § 18-602)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.067  MATERIALS IN STREET; PERMITS.
   The Building Inspector is authorized to grant permission in writing to any
person to deposit and keep building materials in any public street, road or
alley adjacent to the building to be erected or repaired, for a period of time
not exceeding six consecutive months; but the permission shall not excuse the
obstruction or occupancy with the material of more than one-third in width of
any sidewalk or more than one-third in width of the carriage way of any street
or road, or the placing of the material in a way so as to impede the free flow
of water in the side gutter.
(Prior Code, § 18-603)
§ 94.068  USE OF SIDEWALKS.
   No use shall be made of sidewalks which shall endanger pedestrian traffic.
(Prior Code, § 18-604)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.069  CLEARANCE OF OVERHANGING PROJECTIONS OVER STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   The minimum clearance of overhanging projections over streets and sidewalks
in the city shall be as follows:
   (A)   Trees, shrubs or bushes introducing upon public street, road, alley or
sidewalk shall be trimmed by the owner of the abutting premises so that no
bough or branch thereof shall project lower than 12 feet above the surface of
any sidewalks thereon;
   (B)   Awnings or canopies over the sidewalk shall have a minimum clearance
above the sidewalk of seven feet;
   (C)   All signs shall have a clearance above the sidewalks of at least eight
feet, six inches, and shall not project beyond a plumb line two feet inside the
outer edge of the sidewalk; and
   (D)   All other overhanging projections shall have a minimum clearance of
ten feet above the sidewalk and 12 feet above the street, road or alley.
(Prior Code, § 18-605)  (Ord. 898-97, passed 1-12-1998)
§ 94.070  EAVE PIPES.
   No person shall, on any street, place or maintain any pipe leading from the
eaves of any building in a position so that the water discharged thereby flows
upon or over any public sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 18-607)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.071  CARE AND MAINTENANCE OF CITY RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   The care, mowing and maintenance of city right-of-way, including the
area between the property line and street curb shall be the responsibility of
the owner, manager or lessee of the abutting property. This includes the
requirements of §§
94.030 through
94.036 above.
   (B)   Those persons are jointly and severally liable for the care,
maintenance, mowing and snow removal.
   (C)   If city personnel find that any portion of the right-of-way has not
been maintained, mowed or shoveled as required by division (A) above, the city
designee shall notify the owner, manager or lessee of any property that the
person must mow, maintain or shovel.
      (1)   The notice will be given on the first offense only. Notice under
this division (C) is sufficient if hand delivered or telephoned to the owner,
manager or lessee.
      (2)   If the person so notified fails to mow, maintain or shovel as
required by the notice, the  city designee may cause the mowing or maintenance
thereof and charge the costs thereof, set by resolution, plus an additional
amount up to $25 for administrative costs to the person so notified.
   (D)   If any person fails or refuses to pay when due any charge imposed
under this section, the City Finance Officer, may in addition to it, take other
collection remedies and certify due and unpaid charges to the County Treasurer
for collection.
(Ord. 903-97, passed 12-15-1997)
RETAINING WALLS
§ 94.085  PROPERTY OWNER'S DUTY.
   (A)   The preservation of lateral support to street, alley or roadway, as
constructed and the public use, is the obligation of the abutting property
owner.
   (B)   Whenever a wall, bulkhead or retaining wall has been properly placed
on private property and the wall is used to support any of the above, it shall
be the duty of the owner of the property to keep the wall in repair and to
maintain or replace it if necessary to provide adequate lateral support.
(Prior Code, § 18-700)
§ 94.086  CONDEMNATION PROCEDURE.
   Upon receipt of a request or complaint, it shall be the duty of the Building
Inspector and, if necessary, the city's engineer to make inspections of walls,
retaining walls or bulkhead walls that support public sidewalks or roadways and
when necessary to condemn any wall which needs repairs or must be replaced, and
to require the abutting owner of the property to repair same by serving written
notice requiring repairs to be made within ten days or a longer period
specified in the notice.
(Prior Code, § 18-701)
§ 94.087  FAILURE TO COMPLY; MISDEMEANOR.
   Any person, corporation, partnership or firm who shall fail to make the
repairs within the time specified by written notice shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 18-702)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.088  SPECIAL ASSESSMENT.
   Upon failure of the property owner to make repairs as required in §
94.086 above, the Lead City Commission shall cause the repairs to be made in
accordance with SDCL Chapter 9-45 and Chapter 9-46 that deals with special
assessments for public improvements for maintenance and repairs.
(Prior Code, § 18-703)
WEEDS
§ 94.100  DEFINITION.
   (A)   Weeds of all kinds are hereby declared a nuisance.
   (B)   Unmaintained vegetation of any kind is hereby declared a nuisance.
   (C)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      NOXIOUS WEEDS.  Weeds that have been designated by the state as noxious
weeds.
(Prior Code, § 18-800)  (Ord. 930-00, passed 10-30-2000; Ord. 993-09, passed 6-
1-2009)
§ 94.101  DUTY OF OWNER, MANAGER OR LESSEE.
   It shall be the duty of the owner, manager or lessee of any lot in the city
to keep the lot free from unmaintained vegetation and weeds or to cut the weeds
or maintain vegetation. This requirement shall apply not only to the lot but
also to the area between the lot line and the street surface within the right-
of-way adjoining the lot.
(Prior Code, § 18-801)  (Ord. 930-00, passed 10-30-2000)
§ 94.102  NOTICE TO CUT WEEDS AND MAINTAIN VEGETATION.
   (A)   The Public Safety Administrator or designee shall, by public notice to
owners, managers and/or lessees of any lot within the city, require all weeds
on that lot be cut and removed, or unmaintained vegetation to be properly
maintained. The public notice may be given generally by one annual publication
in the official newspaper of the city.
   (B)   The notice shall provide that each owner, manager or lessee of all
lots within the city shall cut and keep cut at all times all weeds, and shall
properly maintain all other vegetation, and shall further provide that in case
of failure to comply, the city will cause the same to be cut or maintained and
assess the cost thereof and any applicable fines and administrative fees
against the owner, manager or lessee.
   (C)   By posting written notice on each lot within the city requiring weeds
to be cut or vegetation to be maintained, the city shall regard this as having
contacted the owner, manager or lessee of the lot.
   (D)   Properties within the community of the city that are infested with
noxious weeds, will be declared a public nuisance and shall be mitigated
immediately by the property owner or by the city, and any costs of this
mitigation shall be assessed against the owner, manager or lessee of the
property.
(Prior Code, § 18-802)  (Ord. 930-00, passed 10-30-2000; Ord. 993-09, passed 6-
1-2009; Ord. 1044-16, passed 2-16-2016)
§ 94.103  FAILURE TO COMPLY; MISDEMEANOR.
   Failure to cut weeds and keep them cut at all times during the growing
season or to properly maintain vegetation is a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 18-803)  (Ord. 930-00, passed 10-30-2000)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.104  COST ASSESSED.
   If the owner, manager or lessee of any lot fails to cut weeds or properly
maintain vegetation on any lot as are required, the Building Inspector may
cause the weeds and noxious vegetation to be cut, or unmaintained vegetation to
be appropriately maintained and for that purpose may enter upon any lot or
parcel of land. The expense thereof and any associated fines, shall be
certified to the Finance Officer and the same shall be levied as a special
assessment assessed against the owner, manager or lessee of the property.
(Prior Code, § 18-804)  (Ord. 930-00, passed 10-30-2000)
PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING AREAS
§ 94.115  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROACH.  The area of transition from the street to the driveway surface.
This area shall be the full width of the driveway and not less than five feet
long, measured from the edge of the street or the back of the curb if present.
   CARPORT.  A covered area, accessible by and commonly used for vehicle
parking or storage, enclosed on no more than two sides.
   DRIVEWAY.  Vehicular access or route from the public right-of-way to a
parking area, carport or garage.
   DRIVEWAY ACCESS.  The area directly in front of and to the sides of the
approach to a distance adequate to facilitate maneuvering of vehicles into and
out of the driveway.
   GARAGE.  A building that is accessible by and is commonly used for vehicle
parking or storage.
   PARKING AREA.  The entire area within the boundaries of vehicular access,
used for parking or storage of licensable vehicles.
   PRIVATE DRIVEWAY OR PARKING AREA.  Driveway or parking area that is not a
publicly owned right-of-way.
   STORAGE SHED.  A building that is too small or of inadequate construction to
house vehicles and is used primarily for storage of personal items.
   VEHICLE.  Any car, truck, van, sport utility, trailer, camper, motor home,
motorcycle, snowmobile, boat or other RV.
(Ord. 921-99, passed 5-10-1999)
§ 94.116  PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or widen a driveway
off of any public street or create or expand a parking area without first
obtaining a permit from the Building Official.
   (B)   The driveway permit will authorize the applicant to establish a
driveway access to the street, which will include the installation of the
approach. A separate building permit will be necessary for creating, expanding
or hard surfacing of any of the driveway or parking area beyond the approach.
   (C)   Exception: the building permit fee may be waived, by the Building
Official, if the driveway beyond the approach and any parking area will not be
hard surfaced and it will be no more than four parking spaces excluding any
spaces in garages.
   (D)   The application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Detailed site plan, including all existing and proposed
improvements;
      (2)   Storm drainage plan, including any drop inlets, city storm sewer
connections and direction of flow;
      (3)   Snow removal plan that provides for snow storage during heavy
snows;
      (4)   Existing parking and how it is affected by proposed driveway/
parking area; and
      (5)   Location and width of proposed driveway.
(Ord. 921-99, passed 5-10-1999)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.117  FEES.
   (A)   The driveway permit fee shall be set by resolution of the city and
shall be collected by the Building Official at the time of application.
   (B)   The building permit fee shall be as set by the Lead City Commission.
   (C)   Any costs incurred by the city for required engineering review of
larger parking areas shall be paid by the developer (i.e. storm drainage
requirements, approach design and the like).
(Ord. 921-99, passed 5-10-1999)
§ 94.118  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All private driveways shall be constructed at the sole expense of the
owner and all private driveways leading from a public street shall have an
approach, approved by the city's engineer, which shall be designed and
constructed to provide for adequate drainage and shall conform to the design
characteristics of the street.
   (B)   In order to establish or widen a driveway off of any public street or
create or expand a parking area the design must meet the following
requirements:
      (1)   Surface material must provide support for the weight of the
vehicles intended to use the driveway and must be of a composition that will
not create excessive dust or be picked up by vehicle tires and tracked onto
streets (i.e. dirt/mud);
      (2)   The approach shall be of concrete, the full width of the driveway,
and no less than five feet long measured from the edge of the street or the
back of the curb, if present, to protect the edge of the street from erosion
and other damage (alternative materials may be accepted by the Building
Official if the situation dictates). (If a concrete curb and gutter is in place
at the driveway entrance on the street, it must be maintained continuous across
the driveway.);
      (3)   If the driveway or approach crosses a public sidewalk, the sidewalk
must be constructed of concrete as required by ordinance, and must conform to
the design of the existing sidewalk (no steps should be allowed in public
sidewalks unless authorized by the Building Official);
      (4)   Establishing of the driveway must not eliminate more parking spaces
to provide access to the driveway than are gained;
      (5)   The owner shall be responsible to control storm drainage from the
entire driveway and parking area;
      (6)   The owner shall be responsible to provide space to store snow
during heavy snow storms or shall haul excess snow away. Snow may not be placed
in the right-of-way;
      (7)   Long driveways that provide access to buildings that are more than
100 feet from the right-of-way, as measured in travel distance on an approved
route, shall be at least 12 feet wide;
      (8)   All driveways shall be designed to provide adequate visibility, to
drivers of vehicles entering the right-of-way, to see oncoming traffic to a
reasonable distance;
      (9)   Stop signs shall be provided on the exit driveways on all
commercial and industrial driveways and parking areas and all other driveways
and parking areas having more than 12 parking spaces; and
      (10)   Driveways must also meet Uniform Fire Code requirements for Fire
Department access, as adopted by the city, if applicable (U.F.C. Article 9, §§
901 and 902).
         (a)   The turning radius referred to in U.F.C. § 902.2.2.3 shall be 35
feet.
         (b)   The maximum grace referred to in U.F.C. § 902.2.2.6 shall be
14%.
         (c)   The maximum angle of departure shall be designed to prevent
"high centering" or "bumper dragging" of fire apparatus
(Ord. 921-99, passed 5-10-1999)
§ 94.119  ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING AREAS.
   For the purpose of this section, these specific rules shall apply: U.F.C.
Article 9, §§ 902.2.1 and 902.2.2 are modified for this section as allowed in §
902.2.1, exception #3 as follows:
   (A)   The measurement of 150 feet referred to in U.F.C. § 902.2.1 shall be
measured, along an approved route, from the Fire Department access to the main
entrance as long as the distance from the main entrance to all other entrances
is not more than 100 feet. (These distances are based on the standard pre-
connected hose lines on fire apparatus of 200 feet and high rise packs with 100
feet.)
   (B)   The unobstructed width referred to in U.F.C. § 902.2.2.1 shall be
allowed to be a minimum of 12 feet and the vertical clearance shall be a
minimum of 12 feet if the travel distance on the driveway to the furthest
building is less than 500 feet.
(Ord. 921-99, passed 5-10-1999)
§ 94.120  MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING AREAS.
   For the purpose of this section these specific rules shall apply:
   (A)   Surface materials shall be concrete or asphalt (alternate materials
may be approved by the Building Official if substantial evidence is given to
show that use of the proposed material will not create a public nuisance. If a
nuisance actually occurs at a later date, the Building Official may require
concrete or asphalt at that time to correct the nuisance); and
   (B)   ADA requirements must be met.
(Ord. 921-99, passed 5-10-1999)
§ 94.121  ASSEMBLY AND EDUCATIONAL BUILDING DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING AREAS.
   For the purpose of this section, these specific rules shall apply:
   (A)   Surface materials shall be concrete or asphalt (alternate materials
may be approved by the Building Official if substantial evidence is given to
show that use of the proposed material will not create a public nuisance. If a
nuisance actually occurs at a later date the Building Official may require
concrete or asphalt at that time to correct the nuisance); and
   (B)   ADA requirements must be met.
(Ord. 921-99, passed 5-10-1999)
§ 94.122  COMMERCIAL DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING AREAS.
   For the purpose of this section, these specific rules shall apply:
   (A)   Surface materials shall be concrete or asphalt (alternate materials
may be approved by the Building Official if substantial evidence is given to
show that use of the proposed material will not create a public nuisance. If a
nuisance actually occurs at a later date the Building Official may require
concrete or asphalt at that time to correct the nuisance); and
   (B)   ADA requirements must be met.
(Ord. 921-99, passed 5-10-1999)
§ 94.123  INDUSTRIAL DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING AREAS.
   For the purpose of this section, these specific rules shall apply to the
following: within the confines of the limited access areas of the industrial
complex surface materials may be as deemed adequate by the owner, however,
drainage control, dust control and load carrying capability must be considered
in the design.
(Ord. 921-99, passed 5-10-1999)
§ 94.124  EXISTING DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING AREAS.
   (A)   Driveways and parking areas legally in existence prior to this chapter
may remain, as is, so long as they do not create a public nuisance to the
surrounding properties or right-of-way.
      (1)   Driveways or parking areas that cause water damage due to
uncontrolled run-off, washing of surface materials off of the property,
excessive dust or other nuisances or safety hazards are considered to be
creating a public nuisance.
      (2)   The property owner, upon notification by the Building Official,
shall correct all nuisances within the time allowed in the notice and shall
take permanent corrective action as required by the Building Official.
   (B)   If changes are made to existing driveways or parking areas, the entire
driveway/parking area must be brought up to meet current applicable ordinances.
(Ord. 921-99, passed 5-10-1999)
WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS ON CITY STREETS
§ 94.135  MAXIMUM WEIGHT OF VEHICLE OR COMBINATION OF VEHICLES; AXLES.
   (A)   No motor vehicle or combination of vehicles operating on a public
street of the city, excluding those under the jurisdiction of the Department of
Transportation of the state or the city, may have a weight:
      (1)   In excess of 20,000 pounds on any one axle, or in excess of the
tire weight per inch of tire width prescribed by §
94.138 below, including all enforcement tolerances;
      (2)   In excess of 34,000 pounds on any tandem axle, or in excess of the
tire weight per inch of tire width prescribed by §
94.138 below, including all enforcement tolerances; or
      (3)   In excess of the maximum, weight on two or more consecutive axles
as determined by the formula detailed in §
94.136 below, or in excess of the tire weight per inch of tire width prescribed
by §
94.138 below. However, in no instance may the gross weight of any vehicle or
combination of vehicles exceed 80,000 pounds.
   (B)   Two consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry a gross load of 34,000
pounds each, provided the overall distance between the first and last axles of
the consecutive sets of tandem axles is 36 feet or more. A violation of this
section is a Class 2 misdemeanor.
(Ord. 971-06, passed 5-22-2006)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.136  FORMULA FOR WEIGHT ON GROUP OF CONSECUTIVE AXLES.
   (A)   For the purposes of §
94.135 above, the maximum gross weight on a group of two or more consecutive
axles allowable on a public street shall be determined by the following
formula:
         W = 500 [LN/(N-1) + 12N + 36]
   (B)   In applying the above formula, "W" equals the overall gross weight on
any group of two or more consecutive axles to the nearest 500 pounds. "I"
equals the distance measured longitudinally to the nearest foot from the
foremost axles to the rearmost axle in a group of two or more consecutive
axles, and "N" equals the number of axles in group under consideration.
(Ord. 971-06, passed 5-22-2006)
§ 94.137  COMBINATION VEHICLES DEEMED SINGLE FOR WEIGHT PURPOSES.
   Any combination of vehicles being operated upon the public streets of the
city shall, for the purposes of §
94.135 above, be deemed to be a single vehicle.
(Ord. 971-06, passed 5-22-2006)
§ 94.138  MAXIMUM WEIGHT PER TIRE; SPACING OF AXLES.
   (A)   No vehicle equipped with pneumatic tires may be operated or moved upon
any street in this city, if the weight of the vehicle and the load thereon
resting upon the surface of the street exceeds:
      (1)   Six hundred pounds on any inch of the tire width on:
         (a)   An axle equipped with dual tires;
         (b)   A steering axle;
         (c)   An axle of an oversize or overweight vehicle that cannot be
readily reduced in size or weight and is operating with a permit issued under §
94.140 below; or
         (d)   An axle of a trailer being towed by a vehicle with a gross
vehicle weight rating of 11,000 pounds or less.
      (2)   Five hundred pounds on any inch of the tire width on any other type
of axle.
   (B)   In no instance may the weight on any axle or combination of axles
exceed the maximum weight limits specified in §
94.135 above. A violation of this section is a Class 2 misdemeanor.
(Ord. 971-06, passed 5-22-2006)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.139  TIRE WIDTH DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TIRE WIDTH.  When applied to pneumatic tires, the diameter of the cross-
section of the tires as customarily measured and rated by the manufacturers of
motor vehicles and tires.
(Ord. 971-06, passed 5-22-2006)
§ 94.140  SINGLE-TRIP PERMIT FOR MOVING BUILDING OR OTHER OVERSIZE LOAD;
CARRYING AND INSPECTION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The Lead City Commission or the Public Works Director, upon the
direction of the Lead City Commission, may issue a written permit (for a fee or
fees to be fixed by a resolution of the Lead City Commission) authorizing an
applicant to move any kind or form of vehicle or building for a single trip
over a route upon city streets to be designated by the Public Works Director to
any point in or through the city, despite the fact that the maximum
specifications of the vehicle and load or budding exceed the maximum vehicle
and load specifications set forth in this subchapter.
   (B)   A written permit issued pursuant to this section shall be carried in
the vehicle and shall be open to inspection by any peace officer or authorized
agent of the authority granting the permit
(Ord. 971-06, passed 5-22-2006)
§ 94.141  ENFORCEMENT; REQUIRING DRIVER TO STOP AND SUBMIT TO INSPECTION OF
VEHICLE AND A WEIGHING.
   Any law enforcement officer may, upon reasonable belief that any motor
vehicle is being operated in excess of the per axle maximum limits or any gross
vehicle weight restrictions or is in a condition that is unsafe and an
endangerment to the driver, or other occupant or any person on the streets or
other roads of this city, require the driver of the motor vehicle to stop and
submit to an inspection of the motor vehicle and its equipment, license plates
and registration certificate and may require them to proceed to the nearest
certified scale to verify whether it is being operated in excess of the weight
restrictions. A violation of this section is a Class 2 misdemeanor.
(Ord. 971-06, passed 5-22-2006)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.142  REDUCED LOAD MAXIMUMS; EXTENSION OF PERIOD; CHANGING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The maximum axle and axle group loadings as set forth in §
94.135 above shall be reduced during the period from April 1 to April 13 by the
Lead City Commission. However, during this period, the Lead City Commission or
the Public Works Director, upon motion approved by the Lead City Commission,
may increase, lessen or remove those restrictions if the road conditions
warrant, which restriction changes will be effective upon the erection and
maintenance of signs designating the same.
   (B)   If the road conditions warrant, the Lead City Commission may extend
the time period in this section by resolution. Nothing in this requirement,
however, removes or interferes with the authority of the Lead City Commission
or the Public Works Director upon its direction to impose restrictions as set
forth in §
94.138 above. A violation of this section is a Class 2 misdemeanor.
(Ord. 971-06, passed 5-22-2006)
§ 94.143  REDUCED WEIGHT MAXIMUMS ON SPECIFIC ROADS; NOTICE.
   (A)   If, for any reason, the streets of this city are rendered incapable of
bearing the customary traffic without undue damage, or if it is considered by
the Lead City Commission that the streets or any section of them under its
jurisdiction would be damaged or destroyed by heavy traffic by reason of
thawing or excessive moisture, or for any reason, the maximum load weight per
axle shall be reduced and limitations may also be placed on the gross weight of
any vehicle.
   (B)   Notice of any restriction under this section shall be given by placing
at each end of that section of road on which the allowable weight limit is
reduced and at points of intersection, as deemed necessary by the Public Works
Director.
   (C)   Signs of substantial construction shall conspicuously indicate the
limitations on the maximum load weight per axle or other limitations on the
gross weight of any vehicle. If a driver exceeds the weight limits allowed for
in this section, the violation will constitute a Class 2 misdemeanor
(Ord. 971-06, passed 5-22-2006)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.999  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which
no other penalty is specified shall be subject to the provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any individual or business that fails to remove snow or ice or
arrange for the removal of snow or ice within the period prescribed in §
94.030 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine.  Fines will be
assessed as follows:
         (a)   First offense:  $50;
         (b)   Second offense:  $75;
         (c)   Third offense:  $100; and
         (d)   Each subsequent offense:  $100.
      (2)   Additionally, the city shall be entitled to assess a $50 fee for
the costs of arranging the snow or ice removal. The city shall also collect
from the owner, manager or lessee of the property the actual cost to a
contractor for the snow or ice removal.  In the event the removal is done by
city employees, the sum of $60 per employee per hour, plus materials, shall be
assessed the property.
      (3)   Any individual or business who violates the provisions of §
94.034 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a maximum fine of $100.
      (4)   Each day the above-described failure or conduct continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 996-09, passed 11-2-2009)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
110.   GENERAL BUSINESS PROVISIONS
         
111.   LICENSING AND PERMITS
         
112.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL BUSINESS PROVISIONS
Section
Miscellaneous Provisions
   
110.001   Amusements
   
110.002   Fortune telling and clairvoyants
Peddlers
   
110.015   Definition
   
110.016   Exceptions to subchapter
   
110.017   Entrance to premises restricted
   
110.018   Refusing to leave
   
110.019   Misrepresentation
   
110.020   Hours of operation
   
110.021   Chapter 111 applicable
   
110.022   Required
   
110.023   Application
   
110.024   Display
   
110.025   Duration
Pawnbrokers
   
110.035   Definition
   
110.036   Chapter 111 applicable
   
110.037   Record of transactions
   
110.038   False information
   
110.039   Access to records
   
110.040   Dealing with minors
   
110.041   License fee
Special
   
110.055   Carload produce or produce sold from temporary location
Pool Halls and Bowling Alleys
   
110.070   License required
   
110.071   License granted
   
110.072   Application for license
   
110.073   Billiard hall/pool hall defined
   
110.074   Minors under 18 years not allowed
   
110.075   License fee
Vehicles for Hire
   
110.085   License required
   
110.086   Application
   
110.087   License fee
   
110.088   Insurance required
   
110.089   License granted
House Movers
   
110.100   License required
   
110.101   Application for license
   
110.102   License fee
   
110.103   Bond
   
110.104   Permit
   
110.105   Injury to property
   
110.106   Obstructing street or railway
Plumbers
   
110.120   Definitions
   
110.121   License required
   
110.122   Application required
   
110.123   License fees
   
110.124   General regulations of licensees
Electricians
   
110.135   Definitions
   
110.136   License required
   
110.137   Application and license fee
   
110.138   General regulations of licensees
Building Contractors
   
110.150   Definition; license required
   
110.151   Fees
   
110.152   Subcontractors
   
110.153   Compliance with regulations
   
110.154   Revocation of license
   
110.155   Insurance; bond
 
   
110.999   Penalty
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 110.001  AMUSEMENTS.
   (A)   Generally. No person shall conduct, operate, manage or sponsor any
Ferris wheels, merry-go-rounds or other amusement rides operated for hire or
for the purpose of promoting or advertising any trade or business, without
first having obtained a permit to do so from the city licensing officer.
(Prior Code, § 8-100)
   (B)   Bond or liability insurance required for amusement rides. No permit
shall be issued to any person under division (A) above until that person shall
comply with the applicable provisions contained in §§
111.01 through
111.13; nor until the person shall first file, with the City Finance Officer a
bond or certificate of liability insurance in the amount of at least $100,000
per person and $300,000 per occurrence, indemnifying the public against damages
sustained by reason of the operation of the ride. The bond or certificate of
insurance shall be subject to approval by the City Attorney. This section shall
apply to all persons, whether or not a license is required by any other
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-101)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.002  FORTUNE TELLING AND CLAIRVOYANTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to act as or profess to be a
fortuneteller, clairvoyant, palmist, astrologer or a practitioner of hypnotism,
spiritualism, magic or life reading for a fee without a license to do so.
(Prior Code, § 8-300)  Penalty, see §
110.999
PEDDLERS
§ 110.015  DEFINITION.
   The word PEDDLER shall include the terms TRANSIENT VENDOR, SOLICITOR and
ITINERANT MERCHANT and shall mean any person traveling from place to place,
house to house or street to street by foot or vehicle for the purpose of
selling merchandise or services and does not have a physical location of
business in the state, and shall also mean any person transacting a business of
the temporary or seasonal nature.
(Prior Code, § 8-200)  (Ord. 984-08, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 110.016  EXCEPTIONS TO SUBCHAPTER.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to solicitations, sales or
distributions made by charitable, educational or religious organizations which
have their principal place of activity in the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-201)
§ 110.017  ENTRANCE TO PREMISES RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any peddler to enter upon any private premises
without request or invitation from the owner or occupant.
(Prior Code, § 8-202)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.018  REFUSING TO LEAVE.
   Any peddler who enters upon premises owned or leased by another and
willfully refuses to leave the premises, having been notified by the owner or
possessor of the premises or his or her agent to leave the same, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 8-203)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.019  MISREPRESENTATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any peddler to make false or fraudulent statements
concerning the quality or nature of goods, wares, merchandise or services for
the purpose of inducing another to purchase the same.
(Prior Code, § 8-204)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.020  HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any peddler to engage in the business of peddling
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. unless by specific appointment with
a customer or a waiver of hours is granted by a city official.
(Prior Code, § 8-205)  (Ord. 984-08, passed 5-19-2008)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.021  CHAPTER 111 APPLICABLE.
   The provisions of
Chapter 111, insofar as the same may be applicable and not in conflict, shall
apply to and govern the issuance of any license under the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-206)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.022  REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler
within the city without first obtaining a permit to do so.
(Prior Code, § 8-207)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.023  APPLICATION.
   A peddler will be required to submit a complete peddler's license
application to the city and submit the required fee prior to transacting any
business within the city. The Lead City Commission will set a fee for the
peddler's license by resolution. In the event that a peddler's license
application is incomplete or deemed erroneous, or the fee is not paid, that
will be sufficient to deny the application.
(Prior Code, § 8-208)  (Ord. 984-08, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 110.024  DISPLAY.
   Every peddler having a permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter
and doing business within the city shall display his or her permit upon the
request of any person, and failure to do so shall be deemed a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 8-210)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.025  DURATION.
   Every permit issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be valid
for the period of time stated thereon, but in no event shall any like permit be
issued for a period in excess of 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 8-211)
PAWNBROKERS
§ 110.035  DEFINITION.
   Any person who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property or
other thing of value, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or
other thing of value on condition of selling the same back again at a
stipulated price, or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage on personal
property and by taking possession of the property or any part thereof so
mortgaged, is hereby declared to be a pawnbroker.
(Prior Code, § 8-400)
§ 110.036  CHAPTER 111 APPLICABLE.
   The provisions of
Chapter 111, insofar as the same may be applicable and not in conflict, shall
apply to and govern the issuance of any license under the provisions of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-401)
§ 110.037  RECORD OF TRANSACTIONS.
   All pawnbrokers, keepers of secondhand stores and dealers in secondhand
goods are required to keep a book open to the inspection of the public, in
which shall be entered by the pawnbroker or dealer the description of each
article of secondhand goods purchased or pawned and the price paid for or the
amount loaned on the goods opposite each entry in a column so designated, and
the seller shall be required by the pawnbrokers or dealer to sign his or her
name and write his or her address, giving the street number, if any, before the
pawnbroker or dealer shall pay the amount so loaned or the purchase price of
the article or articles so purchased.
(Prior Code, § 8-402)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.038  FALSE INFORMATION.
   Every pawnbroker, keeper of a secondhand store and dealer in secondhand
goods who makes a false entry in the record books required by this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 8-403)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.039  ACCESS TO RECORDS.
   All records kept by pawnbrokers within the city shall be open to inspection
by the city police at all reasonable times.
(Prior Code, § 8-404)
§ 110.040  DEALING WITH MINORS.
   No pawnbroker, keeper of any secondhand store or dealer in secondhand goods
shall loan on, purchase or receive from any person under the age of 18 years,
any goods of a secondhand character except the minor, at the time he or she
offers goods as security or sale, be accompanied by his or her parent or
guardian who shall be required by the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer to sign
his or her name opposite the description of the property so offered for
security or so sold.
(Prior Code, § 8-405)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.041  LICENSE FEE.
   Any person engaging in the business of pawnbroker in the city shall obtain a
license therefor and pay a license fee as determined by resolution of the city.
Application for license shall be in writing and approved by the Lead City
Commission. A PAWNBROKER is defined for the purposes of this section as any
person who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or other
valuable thing, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other
valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated
price, or who loans money secured by chattel mortgage on personal property and
by taking possession of the property or any part thereof so mortgaged.
(Prior Code, § 8-406)  Penalty, see §
110.999
SPECIAL
§ 110.055  CARLOAD PRODUCE OR PRODUCE SOLD FROM TEMPORARY LOCATION.
   (A)   Any person who shall sell or offer for sale, barter or exchange any
carload or less quantity of fruit, apples, vegetables, butter, cheese, eggs,
game or poultry, fresh or cured meats or any other merchantable commodity,
whether contained in any car, truck, depot or warehouse, or in any temporary
building or room temporarily occupied, shall pay a license fee as determined by
resolution of the city.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any regular
commission or other merchant having a storehouse or established place of
business in this city, nor to any person retailing goods, wares or merchandise
which are manufactured or produced by him or her.
(Prior Code, § 8-502)  Penalty, see §
110.999
POOL HALLS AND BOWLING ALLEYS
§ 110.070  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of operating a billiard hall, pool
hall or bowling alley for profit, without first apply for and securing a
license.
(Prior Code, § 8-600)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.071  LICENSE GRANTED.
   If the Lead City Commission is satisfied that the applicant is a proper
person to operate a billiard hall, pool hall or bowling alley and the place is
a proper place to conduct a like business, it shall approve the issuance of the
license.
(Prior Code, § 8-601)
§ 110.072  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   The application for the license, together with the required fee shall be
filed with the City Finance Officer.
(Prior Code, § 8-602)
§ 110.073  BILLIARD HALL/POOL HALL DEFINED.
   Any establishment maintaining four or more pool, snooker, billiard or bumper
pool tables, in any combination, shall be classified as a pool or billiard
hall.
(Prior Code, § 8-603)
§ 110.074  MINORS UNDER 18 YEARS NOT ALLOWED.
   (A)   No minor under 18 years of age unattended by his or her parent or
guardian shall loiter in any billiard hall, pool hall or bowling alley, wherein
alcoholic beverages are served.
   (B)   The owner or person in charge of any billiard hall, pool hall or
bowling alley, wherein alcoholic beverages are served, shall not allow or
permit any minor under 18 years of age unattended by his or her parent or
guardian to loiter in the billiard hall, pod hall or bowling alley.
(Prior Code, § 8-604)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.075  LICENSE FEE.
   The license fee for bowling alleys and pool halls shall be determined by
resolution of the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-605)
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
§ 110.085  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
transporting persons or property for profit or hire within the city without
first having obtained a license therefor.
(Prior Code, § 8-700)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.086  APPLICATION.
   A written application for license shall be made in regular form and in
addition shall state:
   (A)   Previous experience of the applicant in the business;
   (B)   A complete description of the vehicles to be used including state
license number and carrying capacity; and
   (C)   What motor carrier permit or permits from the Public Utilities
Commission of the state have been granted to the applicant covering the
operation of the vehicle for which a license is sought.
(Prior Code, § 8-701)
§ 110.087  LICENSE FEE.
   The annual license fee shall be $25 for each vehicle so employed in
transporting persons or property for hire or profit.
(Prior Code, § 8-702)
§ 110.088  INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person, before being granted a license shall secure and file with
the City Finance Officer a policy of liability and property damage insurance or
surety bond covering the operation of each vehicle for which a license is
sought.
   (B)   The bond or policy shall protect against liability to third persons
for personal injuries and property suffered or sustained by them as a result of
the operation of the vehicles and shall be in the amount of not less than
$100,000 for one person, and not less than $300,000 for more than one person
injured as a result of one accident, and not less than $50,000 for property
damage.
(Prior Code, § 8-703)  (Ord. 749-83, passed 5-23-1983)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.089  LICENSE GRANTED.
   The Lead City Commission shall approve the issuance of the license applied
for if it is satisfied that the applicant is a fit person to engage in the
business of transporting persons or property for hire, that his or her vehicles
and equipment are such as are consistent with the safety of the public, and
that the public convenience will be served by the granting of the license.
(Prior Code, § 8-704)
HOUSE MOVERS
§ 110.100  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person except a licensed house mover shall remove or move from one lot to
another any building or part of a building. This section shall not apply to
moving a building within the confines of a lot or contiguous lots when not
necessary to move the same over public property, public streets or property
belonging to another person.
(Prior Code, § 8-800)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.101  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Application for a house mover's license shall be in writing, filed
with Lead city officials.
   (B)   The application shall, in addition to other required information,
describe the equipment to be used by the applicant, and must be approved by the
Lead Building Official by endorsement on the application
(Prior Code, § 8-801)  (Ord. 1025-14, passed 1-21-2014)
§ 110.102  LICENSE FEE.
   The license fee for a house mover shall be as determined by resolution of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-802)
§ 110.103  BOND.
   Before issuance of the license, the applicant shall also file with the City
Finance Officer a bond running to the city in the penal sum of $5,000 with
sufficient sureties to be approved by the Lead City Commission, and conditioned
that the applicant, if license be granted to him or her, will conform to all
requirements and regulations relating to house moving which are now and which
may hereafter be established by the city, and that he or she will promptly fill
all basements left open as a result of moving, leave premises vacated in a safe
and sanitary condition, and repair and make good to the satisfaction of the
Lead City Commission any and all damage to any pavement, sidewalk, cross-walk,
hydrant, street, alley or other property done or caused by himself or herself,
his or her servants or employees, in moving any building, or in connection with
the moving thereof, and that he or she will immediately indemnify and save
harmless the city against any and all liability for damage, costs or expenses
arising or which may arise in favor of any person by reason of any negligence
on his or her part or on the part of his or her servants or employees in
connection with the moving of any building, or the use of any public street or
ground for that purpose.
(Prior Code, § 8-803)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.104  PERMIT.
   Before any person so licensed shall move any building or part of building
in, along or across any public street or ground within the city, he or she
shall obtain a permit so to do from the Lead Building Official, in which permit
may be prescribed the route to be taken in so moving the building or part
thereof, the length of time which may be consumed in the work, and any other
conditions which may be required in the interest of public safety.
(Prior Code, § 8-804)  (Ord. 1025-14, passed 1-21-2014)
§ 110.105  INJURY TO PROPERTY.
   Nothing in any license or permit granted hereunder shall be construed as
authorizing the holder thereof to break, injure or move any telegraph,
telephone or electric light poles or wires, or in any way injure shade trees or
other property without permission from the owner thereof.
(Prior Code, § 8-805)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.106  OBSTRUCTING STREET OR RAILWAY.
   No building or part of building shall be allowed to stand still in any open
public street or on any public ground for more than 24 consecutive hours, or to
obstruct any railway except with the consent of the railway company.
(Prior Code, § 8-806)  Penalty, see §
110.999
PLUMBERS
§ 110.120  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   JOURNEYMAN PLUMBER.  Any person who, by his or her knowledge, training and
experience is qualified and capable of doing plumbing work.
   PLUMBING.  The act of installing pipes, fixtures and equipment for the
conveyance of water, gas, sewage and other liquids.
   PLUMBING CONTRACTOR.  Any person contracting and responsible for the
installation of plumbing work.
(Prior Code, § 8-900)
§ 110.121  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall work as a journeyman plumber or plumbing contractor within
the city unless licensed and bonded as provided for in this chapter, except for
a person doing his or her own work on his or her own property.
(Prior Code, § 8-901)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.122  APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Application for a plumber's license shall be in writing, filed with
Lead city officials.
   (B)   The application must be approved by the Lead Building Official by
endorsement on the application.
(Prior Code, § 8-902)  (Ord. 1025-14, passed 1-21-2014)
§ 110.123  LICENSE FEES.
   The initial license fee which shall accompany the application for license
for a plumbing contractor, the contractor's annual license renewal fee and each
journeyman employee license fee, shall be determined by resolution of the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-903)
§ 110.124  GENERAL REGULATIONS OF LICENSEES.
   (A)   Every journeyman plumber shall at all times work under the control and
supervision of a plumbing contractor.
   (B)   Every plumbing contractor shall at all times have a licensed
journeyman plumber in immediate charge of any plumbing work.
   (C)   Every licensed plumbing contractor shall be held responsible for the
acts of his or her employees done under and by virtue of his or her license.
   (D)   The Lead City Commission may revoke any license issued under this
chapter for any violation of the Plumbing Code or the provisions of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-905)  Penalty, see §
110.999
ELECTRICIANS
§ 110.135  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPRENTICE ELECTRICIAN.  A person learning the trade, under supervision of
an electrical contractor, journeyman electrician or Class B Electrician.
   CLASS B ELECTRICIAN.  A person having the necessary qualifications,
training, technical knowledge and at least 18 months experience in wiring,
installing and repairing electrical apparatuses and equipment in accordance
with the standard rules and regulations established by the State Electrical
Board.
   ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR.  A person having the necessary qualifications,
training, experience and technical knowledge to plan, layout and supervise the
installation and repair of electrical wiring, apparatus and equipment for
electric light, heat and power in accordance with the standard rules and
regulations governing the work; and who undertakes or offers to undertake with
another to plan for, lay out, supervise and install or to make additions,
alterations and repairs in the installation of such work. A person must have
had at least two years' experience as a journeyman electrician before making
application for an electrical contractor's permit.
   ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT.  All installations of electrical conductors, fittings,
devices, appliances and fixtures.
   JOURNEYMAN ELECTRICIAN.  A person having the necessary qualifications,
training, technical knowledge and at least four years experience in wiring,
installing and repairing electrical apparatuses and equipment in accordance
with the standard rules and regulations established by the State Electrical
Board.
(Prior Code, § 8-1000)
§ 110.136  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in or work at the business of installing electrical
equipment within the city unless licensed and bonded in the manner provided for
in this subchapter with the following exceptions:
   (A)   A person doing his or her own work on his or her own property;
   (B)   Electrical installations in automotive equipment;
   (C)   Repair work on radios and household appliances; and
   (D)   The connection of portable electrical equipment to permanently
installed receptacles.
(Prior Code, § 8-1001)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.137  APPLICATION AND LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall be permitted to engage in the
business of installing any electric wiring or construct or install electrical
apparatuses or machinery in any building upon any premises within the limits of
the city without first procuring a contractor's license from the Lead Building
Official.
   (B)   Application for an electrical license shall be in writing, filed with
Lead city officials. 
   (C)   The application must be approved by the Lead Building Official by
endorsement on the application.
   (D)   The initial contractor’s fee and the annual renewal fees shall be as
determined by resolution of the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-1002)  (Ord. 1025-14, passed 1-21-2014)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.138  GENERAL REGULATIONS OF LICENSEES.
   (A)   Every journeyman electrician shall at all times work under the
supervision of an electrical contractor.
   (B)   Every electrical contractor shall at all times have a licensed
journeyman electrician in immediate charge of any electrical work.
   (C)   Every licensed electrical contractor shall be held responsible for the
acts of his or her employees done under and by virtue of his or her license.
   (D)   The Lead City Commission may revoke any license under this subchapter
for any violation of the Electrical Code or the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-1004)  Penalty, see §
110.999
BUILDING CONTRACTORS
§ 110.150  DEFINITION; LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to engage in business in the municipality as a
building contractor without first having obtained a license therefor as
hereinafter provided.
   (B)   The term BUILDING CONTRACTOR shall mean and include anyone engaged in
the business of a general building contractor, or any person engaged in the
construction, alteration or repair of buildings or other structures, or
sidewalk or street pavements or in any activity requiring a building permit.
   (C)   Application for a contractors license shall be in writing, filed with
Lead city officials.
   (D)   The application must be approved by the Lead Building Official by
endorsement on the application.
   (E)   Engaging in the construction, repair or alteration of any building or
structure or street or sidewalk pavement in the municipality for which a permit
is required under the ordinances of the municipality shall be construed as
doing business as a contractor in the municipality.
(Ord. 747-83, passed 5-2-1983; Ord. 1025-14, passed 1-21-2014)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.151  FEES.
   The initial license fee, which shall accompany the application for a
building contractor's license and the annual license renewal shall be
determined by resolution of the city.
(Ord. 747-83, passed 5-2-1983; Ord. 924-99, passed 11-17-1999)
§ 110.152  SUBCONTRACTORS.
   Any person doing business as a subcontractor shall be construed as engaged
in the business of a building contractor for which a license is required by
this subchapter.
(Ord. 747-83, passed 5-2-1983)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.153  COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
   It shall be the duty of all building contractors to comply with all
ordinances relating to the construction of buildings or other structures, to
the construction of streets or sidewalk pavements, and all laws or ordinances
pertaining to regulating the activities engaged in.
(Ord. 747-83, passed 5-2-1983)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.154  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Any building contractor's license may be revoked by the Lead City
Commission for repeated violations of any ordinance relating to:
      (1)   The construction of buildings;
      (2)   The use of streets, or the replacing of streets, sidewalks or
parkways; or
      (3)   Any other ordinance relating to the work performed by the
contractor.
   (B)   The revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed for violating
this subchapter.
(Ord. 747-83, passed 5-2-1983; Ord. 1025-14, passed 1-21-2014)
§ 110.155  INSURANCE; BOND.
   (A)   No permit shall be issued for the construction of a building or
structure in the city, or for the repair or alteration of the exterior of any
building or structure, unless a certificate or other proof is filed showing
that the contractor carries worker's compensation insurance and public
liability insurance with limits of at least $100,000 for each person and
$300,000 for each accident or bodily injury liability and $100,000 on property
damage liability.
   (B)   Before any contractor commences work for the city or any street or
highway or on any building or premises owned by the city, he or she shall file
with the City Finance Officer a certificate or other proof of showing that he
or she carries worker's compensation and public liability insurance as required
by ordinance and the term of his or her contract.
(Ord. 747-83, passed 5-2-1983)  Penalty, see §
110.999
§ 110.999  PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
CHAPTER 111:  LICENSING AND PERMITS
Section
   
111.01   Scope
   
111.02   Definitions
   
111.03   Application of regulations
   
111.04   City License Officer
   
111.05   Qualifications of applicants
   
111.06   Procedure for issuance of license
   
111.07   Determination of license fee
   
111.08   Contents of license
   
111.09   Duties of licensee
   
111.10   Transfer of license
   
111.11   Enforcement
   
111.12   Approval of bond
   
111.13   Terms
   
111.14   Fee schedule
   
111.15   Provisions do not limit fees
§ 111.01  SCOPE.
   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances,
except those specifically repealed by this chapter. Where this chapter imposes
a greater restriction upon person, premises or personal property than is
imposed or required by the existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or
deed, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
(Prior Code, § 11-100)
§ 111.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS.  Includes those specifically required to have permits and
licenses.
   CITY.  The City of Lead.
   CITY LICENSE OFFICER or LICENSE OFFICER.  The City Finance Officer, unless
otherwise specified in an ordinance pertaining to the regulation of a specific
area.
   INSIGNIA or its singular number INSIGNE.  Any tag, plate, badge, emblem,
sticker or any other kind of device which may be required for any use in
connection with any license.
   LEAD CITY COMMISSION.  The City Commission of the City of Lead.
   LICENSE or LICENSEE.  Includes respectively the words PERMIT, or PERMITTEE,
or the holder for any use or period of time of any similar privilege, wherever
relevant to any provision of this chapter or other law or ordinance.
   PERSON.  Includes individual natural persons, partnerships, joint
adventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts or corporations;
or any officers, agents, employees, factors or any kind of personal
representatives of any thereof, in any capacity, acting either for himself or
herself, or for any other person, under either personal appointment or pursuant
to law.
   PREMISES.  Includes all lands, structures, places, and also the equipment
and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and also any
personal property which is either affixed to, or is otherwise used in
connection with, any business conducted on the premises.
(Prior Code, § 11-101)
§ 111.03  APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance required. It shall be unlawful for any person, either
directly or indirectly, to conduct any business or non-profit enterprise, or to
use in connection therewith any vehicle, premises, machine or device, in whole
or in part, for which a license or permit is required by any law or ordinance
of this city, without a license or permit therefor being first procured and
kept in effect at all times as required by this chapter or other law or
ordinance of this city.
   (B)   Special sales. This chapter shall apply to all business in the nature
of special sales for which a license is required by any law or ordinance of
this city and it shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or
indirectly, to conduct any like sale except in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter.
   (C)   Agents responsible for obtaining license. The agents or other
representatives of non-residents who are doing business in this city shall be
personally responsible for the compliance of their principals and of the
businesses they represent with this chapter.
   (D)   Separate license for branch establishments. A license shall be
obtained in the manner prescribed herein for each branch establishment or
location of the business engaged in, as if each branch establishment or
location were a separate business; provided that warehouses and distributing
plants used in connection with and incidental or a business licensed under the
provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of
business or branch establishments. Each rental real property shall be deemed a
branch establishment or separate place of business for the purposes of this
chapter when there is a representative who is authorized to transact business
for the owner or owner's agent or there is a regular employee of the owner or
of the owner's agent working on the premises.
   (E)   Joint license. A person engaged in two or more businesses at the same
location shall not be required to obtain separate licenses for conducting each
of the businesses but, when eligible, shall be issued one license which shall
specify on its face all the businesses.
   (F)   No license required for mere delivery. No license shall be required of
any person for any mere delivery in the city of any property purchased or
acquired in good faith from the person at his or her regular place of business
outside the city where no intent by the person is shown to exist to evade the
provisions of this chapter.
   (G)   Special permits to non-profit enterprise. The City License Officer
shall issue special permits, without the payment of any license fees or other
charges therefor, to any person or organization for the conduct or operation of
a non-profit enterprise, either regularly or temporarily, when he or she finds
that the applicant operates without private profit, for a public, charitable,
educational, literary, fraternal or religious purpose. An applicant for a
special permit shall submit an application therefor to the City License
Officer, upon forms prescribed by the License Officer, and shall furnish
additional information and all other applicable rules and regulations except as
provided herein.
   (H)   Exclusions from chapter provisions. The provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to any public officer who may in pursuance of legal process
sell at public auction any property of any kind whatsoever, nor shall the
provisions of this chapter include or apply to persons engaged in the sale of
farm products only.
(Prior Code, § 11-102)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.04  CITY LICENSE OFFICER.
   (A)   Issue licenses. The City License Officer shall collect all license
fees and shall issue licenses in the name of the city upon approval of the City
Council, to all persons qualified under the provisions of this chapter and
shall:
      (1)   Make rules. Promulgate and enforce all responsible rules and
regulations necessary to the operation and enforcement of this chapter;
      (2)   Adopt forms. Adopt all forms and prescribe the information to be
given therein as to character and other relevant matters for all necessary
papers;
      (3)   Require affidavits. Require applicants to submit all affidavits and
oaths necessary to the administration of this chapter;
      (4)   Obtain endorsement. Submit all applications, in a proper case, to
interested city officials for their endorsements thereon as to compliance by
the applicant with all city regulations which they have the duty of enforcing;
      (5)   Investigate. Investigate and determine the eligibility of any
applicant for a license as prescribed herein;
      (6)   Examine records. Examine the books and records of any applicant or
licensee when reasonably necessary to the administration and enforcement of
this chapter; and
      (7)   Give notice. Notify any applicant of the acceptance or rejection of
his or her application and shall, upon his or her refusal of any license or
permit, at the applicant's request, state in writing the reasons therefor and
deliver them to the applicant.
   (B)   Information confidential. The License Officer shall keep all
information furnished or secured under the authority of this chapter in strict
confidence. The information shall not be subject to public inspection and shall
be kept so that the contents thereof shall not become known except to the
persons charged with the administration of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11-103)
§ 111.05  QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANTS.
   (A)   The general standards herein set out relative to the qualifications of
every applicant for a city license shall be considered and applied by the City
License Officer.
   (B)   The applicant shall:
      (1)   Citizenship. Be a citizen of the United States or a declarant
therefor as authorized by law;
      (2)   Loyalty. Not be, either individually or as a member of any party,
group or organization at the time of any application for a license or special
permit, an advocate or resort to any practices subversive of or designed for
the overthrow, destruction or sabotage of the government of the United States;
      (3)   Good moral character. Be of good moral character in making a
determination the City License Officer shall consider:
         (a)   Penal history. All convictions, the reasons therefor and the
demeanor of the applicant subsequent to his or her release;
         (b)   License history. The license history of the applicant, whether
the person, in previously operating in this or another state under a license,
has had a license revoked or suspended, the reasons therefor and the demeanor
of the applicant subsequent to that action; and
         (c)   General person history. Other facts relevant to the general
personal history of the applicant as he or she shall find necessary to a fair
determination of the eligibility of the applicant.
      (4)   No obligations to city. Not be in default under the provisions of
this chapter or indebted or obligated in any manner to the city except for
current taxes; and
      (5)   Compliance with zoning regulations. Present a certificate of
occupancy furnished by the Building Inspector to the effect that the proposed
use of any premises is not a violation of city zoning regulations.
(Prior Code, § 11-104)
§ 111.06  PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Formal application required.
      (1)   Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of
any ordinance or law of the city shall submit an application for the license to
the City License Officer.
      (2)   The application shall:
         (a)   Form of application. Be a written statement upon forms provided
by the City License Officer; a form shall include an affidavit, to be sworn to
by the applicant before a notary public of this state;
         (b)   Contents of application. Require the disclosure of all
information necessary to comply with §
111.05 above, and of any other information which the City License Officer shall
find to be reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this chapter; and
         (c)   Payment of fees. Be accompanied by the full amount of the fees
chargeable for the license.
   (B)   Issuance of receipts. Whenever a license cannot be issued at the time
the application for same is made, the City License Officer shall issue a
receipt to the applicant for the money paid in advance, subject to the
following conditions: the receipt shall not be construed as the approval of the
City License Officer for the issuance of a license; nor shall it entitle or
authorize the applicant to open or maintain any business contrary to the
provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Renewal license procedure.
      (1)   The applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit an
application for the license to the City License Officer.
      (2)   The application shall:
         (a)   Form of application. Be a written statement upon forms provided
by the City License Officer; the form shall include an affidavit, to be sworn
to by the applicant before a notary public of this state; and
         (b)   Contents. Require the disclosure of the information concerning
the applicant's demeanor and the conduct and operation of applicant's business
during the period preceding licensing as is reasonably necessary to the
determination by the License Officer of the applicant's eligibility for a
renewal license and to a possible adjustment of license fee.
(Prior Code, § 11-105)
§ 111.07  DETERMINATION OF LICENSE FEE.
   License fees shall be in the amounts established by resolution, and as
further determined under this section.
   (A)   Unexpired previous license. The following rules shall apply to a
person who, on the effective date of this chapter, holds a valid unexpired
license from the city for any business required to be licensed hereunder: the
unexpired license shall be valid until the beginning of the next licensing
period.
   (B)   Adjustment of fee. The License Officer shall require the payment of an
additional or higher license fee, to be prorated for the balance of the license
period, when a licensee places himself or herself in a like status under this
chapter by:
      (1)   Increasing the number of his or her employees;
      (2)   Augmenting the volume of business done by him or her;
      (3)   Expanding the size of the business, plant or premises;
      (4)   Increasing the number or size of his or her vehicles; or
      (4)   Making any other lawful and material change of any kind in his or
her business.
   (C)   Rebate of fee; general prohibition. Except as herein provided, no
rebate or refund of any license fee or part thereof shall be made by reason of
the non-use of the license or by reason of a change of location or business
rendering the use of the license or by reason of a change of location or
business rendering the use of the license ineffective.
(Prior Code, § 11-106)
§ 111.08  CONTENTS OF LICENSE.
   Each license issued hereunder shall state upon its face the following:
   (A)   The name of the licensee and any other name under which the business
is to be conducted;
   (B)   The kind and address of each business so licensed;
   (C)   The amount of license fee therefor;
   (D)   The dates of issuance and expiration thereof; and
   (E)   Other information as the License Officer shall determine.
(Prior Code, § 11-107)
§ 111.09  DUTIES OF LICENSEE.
   (A)   General standards of conduct. Every licensee under this chapter shall:
      (1)   Permit inspection. Permit all reasonable inspections of his or her
business and examinations of his or her books by public authorities so
authorized by law;
      (2)   Comply with governing law. Ascertain and at all times comply with
all laws and regulations applicable to the licensee's business;
      (3)   Operate properly. Avoid all forbidden, improper or unnecessary
practice or conditions which do or may affect the public health, morals or
welfare; and
      (4)   Cease business. Refrain from operating the licensed businesses on
premises after expiration of his or her license and during the period his or
her license is revoked or suspended.
   (B)   Display of license and insignia. Every licensee under this chapter
shall:
      (1)   Premises.
         (a)   Licenses. Post and maintain the license upon the licensed
premises in a place where it may be seen at all times; and
         (b)   Insignia. Affix any insignia delivered for use in connection
with business premises on the inside glass part of the window of the
establishment, facing the public way or on the inside glass part of the door
opening on the public way. The insignia shall be placed and maintained so as to
be plainly visible from the public way. Where the licensed premises does not
have a window facing a public way at street level, or a glass door opening upon
the public way, the insignia shall be affixed to the glass in the door, window
or prominent place in the nearest proximity to the principal public entrance to
the establishment and shall be placed and maintained so as to be plainly
visible from the public entrance.
      (2)   Vehicles.
         (a)   Effect of this chapter. Any general or special license fees
required for any kind of vehicle, for the privilege of being operated upon the
public highways, by any statute or ordinance, shall not abrogate, limit or
affect any further requirements of this chapter, or of other ordinance or law,
for additional and separate licenses, permits and insignia and fees for the
vehicles, or other uses, for and relating to the privilege of using the same in
the business so licensed;
         (b)   Motor vehicles; insignia. Affix any insignia delivered for use
in connection with a licensed motor vehicle on the inside of the windshield of
the vehicle or as may be otherwise prescribed by the License Officer or by law;
and
         (c)   Motor-less vehicles; insignia. Affix any metal or other durable
type of insignia delivered for us in connection with a wagon or other vehicle
not operated by motor power securely on the outside of the vehicle.
      (3)   Persons. Carry the license on his or her person when he or she has
no licensed business premises.
      (4)   Machines. Affix any insignia delivered for use in connection
therewith upon the outside of any coin, vending or other business machine or
device, so that it may be seen at all times.
      (5)   Inoperative licenses, special permits and insignia. Not allow any
license, special permit or insignia to remain posted, or displayed, or used,
after the period for which it was issued has expired; or when it has been
suspended or revoked, or for any other reason the inoperative license, special
permit or insignia to the License Officer.
      (6)   Unlawful possession. Not loan, sell, give or assign, to any other
person, or allow any other person to use or display, or to destroy, damage or
remove, or to have in his or her possession, except as authorized by the
License Officer or by law, any license or insignia which has been issued to the
licensee.
   (C)   New location desired. A licensee shall have the right to change the
location of the licensed business provided he or she shall:
      (1)   Approval of License Officer. Obtain written permission from the
License Officer for the change of location; and
      (2)   Payment of fee. Pay a removal fee as determined by resolution of
the city to the License Officer.
   (D)   Keep records.
      (1)   Keep all records and books necessary to the computation of his or
her license fee and to the enforcement of this chapter.
      (2)   The License Officer shall make his or her own determination as to
the financial statement for any business where the licensee has failed to keep
books and records as required herein.
(Prior Code, § 11-108)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.10  TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   (A)   When authorized. A licensee hereunder shall have the right to transfer
his or her license to another person provided he or she shall:
      (1)   Approval of License Officer. Obtain written permission from the
License Officer for the transfer;
      (2)   Method of transfer. Execute the transfer in the form and under the
conditions required by law and as prescribed by the License Officer;
      (3)   Notification. Promptly report the completed act of transfer to the
License Officer; and
      (4)   Surrender license. Promptly surrender any license certificate and
when required by the License Officer, all licensing insignia.
   (B)   New license issued. Upon the completion of a transfer of license in
compliance with division (A) above, the License Officer shall issue a new
license and insignia to the transferee for the unexpired term of the old
license.
      (1)   Effect of new license. The new license issued hereunder shall
authorize the transferee to engage in the same business at the same location or
at another place as shall be approved by the License Officer and named in the
new license.
      (2)   Transfer fee. The License Officer shall collect a transfer fee from
the transferee prior to the issuance of the new license.
(Prior Code, § 11-109)
§ 111.11  ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Inspections.
      (1)   Persons authorized. The following persons are authorized to conduct
inspections in the manner prescribed herein.
         (a)   License Officer. The License Officer shall make all
investigations reasonably necessary to the enforcement of this chapter.
         (b)   Officials having duties. The License Officer shall have the
authority to order the inspection of licensees, their businesses and premises,
by all city officials having duties to perform with reference to the licensees
or businesses.
      (2)   Authority of inspectors. All persons authorized herein to inspect
licensees and businesses shall have the authority to enter, with or without
search warrant, at all reasonable times, the following premises:
         (a)   Those for which a license is required;
         (b)   Those for which a license was issued and which, at the time of
inspection, are operating under the license; and
         (c)   Those for which the license has been revoked or suspended.
      (3)   Reports by inspectors. Persons inspecting licensees, their
business, or premises as herein authorized shall report all violations of this
chapter or of other laws or ordinances to the License Officer and shall submit
other reports as the License Officer shall order.
   (B)   Provisional order. When an inspector has reported the violation of
this chapter or of any law or ordinance, the License Officer shall issue to the
affected person a provisional order to comply.
      (1)   Nature of notice.
         (a)   The provisional order, and all other notices issued in
compliance with this chapter, shall be in writing, shall be personally served,
and shall apprise the person affected of his or her specific violations.
         (b)   In the absence of the person affected or his or her agent or
employee, a copy of the notice shall be affixed to some structure on the
premises. Depositing the notice in the United States mail shall constitute
service thereof.
      (2)   Period for compliance. The provisional order shall require
compliance within five days of personal service on the affected person.
      (3)   Hearing. Upon written application by the person affected before the
expiration of the five day period for compliance, the License Officer shall
order a hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given the affected person in
the manner prescribed herein.
   (C)   Modifying authority of License Officer. Upon written application, or
on his or her own motion, the License Officer shall have the authority, in a
proper case, to extend the time for compliance, to grant a new hearing date,
and to change, modify or rescind any recommendation or order.
   (D)   Final order. Upon the failure or refusal of the violator to comply
with the provisional order or with any order made after hearing, the License
Officer shall then declare and make the provisional order final.
      (1)   Authority of License Officer. The License Officer shall have the
authority to suspend or revoke licenses upon making and declaring a provisional
order final.
      (2)   Effect of revocation or suspension. Upon revocation or suspension
no refund of any portion of the license fee shall be made to the licensee and
he or she shall immediately cease all business at all places under the license.
   (E)   Summary action. When the conduct of any licensee, agent or employee is
so inimitable to the public health, safety and general welfare as to constitute
a nuisance and thus give rise to an emergency, the License Officer shall have
the authority to summarily order the cessation of business and the close of
premises or to suspend or revoke the license.
   (F)   Special hearing. Unless waived in writing, within three days after he
or she has acted summarily, the License Officer shall conduct a special hearing
for that action in respect to the summary order as may be therein determined.
Notice of the hearing shall be given the affected person in the manner
prescribed herein.
   (G)   Right of appeal. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the License
Officer after hearing shall have the right to appeal to the Chief Administrator
of the city by filing a written appeal with the officer within ten days
following the effective date of the action or decision complained of.
      (1)   Contents of appeal. The appeal shall set out a copy of the order or
decision appealed from and shall include a statement of the facts relied upon
to avoid the order.
      (2)   Notification of License Officer. At the time of filing any appeal a
copy thereof shall be filed by the appellant with the License Officer.
      (3)   Hearing. The Chief Administrator shall fix a time and place for
hearing the appeal and shall personally serve a written notice, as provided
herein, upon the appellant informing him or her thereof. The Chief
Administrator shall also give the notice to the License Officer and the officer
shall be entitled to appear and defend the order.
      (4)   Effect of decision. The finding of the Chief Administrator shall be
final and conclusive and shall be personally served upon the appellant as
required herein.
   (H)   Liability of violator.
      (1)   Unpaid fee constitutes debt. The amount of any unpaid fee, the
payment of which is required hereunder, shall constitute a debt due the city.
      (2)   Action by the City Attorney. The City Attorney shall, at the
direction of the License Officer, institute civil suit in the name of the city
to recover any unpaid fee.
      (3)   Civil judgment no bar. No civil judgment, or any act by the City
Attorney, the License Officer or the violator, shall bar or prevent a criminal
prosecution for each and every violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 11-110)
§ 111.12  APPROVAL OF BOND.
   Any bond, liability insurance or deposit required as a condition to the
issuance of any license shall be subject to the approval of the City Council,
and in case the Council deems the security inadequate, it may require new or
additional security.
(Prior Code, § 11-111)
§ 111.13  TERMS.
   Unless otherwise provided, all licenses shall take effect when issued and
shall terminate on December 31 in the year for which issued. Except as
otherwise provided, the license charged shall be paid on the basis of a full
year.
(Prior Code, § 11-112)
§ 111.14  FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Unless provided elsewhere in this code of ordinances, a license tax is
hereby levied in the amounts specified by resolution on the trades,
occupations, businesses and professions listed below and conducted or pursued
within this city.
   (B)   For the purposes of this chapter, the catchlines of the sections set
out herein shall be deemed substantive parts of the sections:
      (1)   Circus, carnival or show or entertainment of a theatrical troupe,
given in any room, building, tent or other than a licensed public hall or
theater, unless sponsored by a local organization;
      (2)   Any person acting as or professing to be a fortuneteller,
clairvoyant, palmist, astrologer or practitioner of hypnotism, spiritualism,
magic or life reading for a fee;
      (3)   Mobile home parks for the first ten sites and for each additional
site. If any license be transferred, the transferee shall be required to pay a
fee;
      (4)   Any person engaging in the business of a pawnbroker within the city
shall pay an initial license fee and annual renewal fees;
      (5)   Any person engaged in the business of "peddling" as defined in
Chapter 110 shall pay a license fee based upon the duration he or she shall
desire to engage in business within the city;
      (6)   Any person who shall conduct, operate, manage or sponsor, any
amusement for which a permit is required under
Chapter 110 shall pay a license fee based upon the duration he or she shall
desire to engage in the business;
      (7)   The owner or operator of any establishment maintaining video or
electronic games or pin ball machines shall pay a fee per machine or game for
each calendar year or part thereof the game or machine is maintained; and
      (8)   Where under the provision of this code of ordinances a permit shall
be required, but no fee is prescribed therefor, either under the chapter
requiring the permit or this chapter, a fee shall be assessed for the permit.
(Prior Code, § 11-200)
§ 111.15  PROVISIONS DO NOT LIMIT FEES.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit any fee imposed for the
issuance of a permit under another chapter of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 11-201)
CHAPTER 112:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   Hours and sales of alcoholic beverages
   
112.03   Consuming, possessing and the like, alcoholic beverages in public
places; disposal of containers
License
   
112.20   Purpose
   
112.21   Classification and fees
   
112.22   Action by Council
   
112.23   Area limited
   
112.24   Suspension of license
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the terms ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE, WINE, MALT
BEVERAGE, LOW-POINT BEER, SALE, PACKAGE, PACKAGE DEALER, BULK CONTAINER, OFF-
SALE, ON-SALE, RETAILER OR RETAIL DEALER, ON-SALE DEALER, MUNICIPALITY,
POPULATION, DISTILLED SPIRITS AND RETAIL LICENSE shall be construed to have the
same meaning as given them by state law.
(Prior Code, § 12-100)
§ 112.02  HOURS AND SALES OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   All hours and sales of alcoholic beverages will be regulated by the state of
South Dakota.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.03  CONSUMING, POSSESSING AND THE LIKE, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC
PLACES; DISPOSAL OF CONTAINERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage
or to mix or blend any alcoholic beverage with any other beverage, regardless
of whether the beverage is an alcoholic beverage, in any public place, except
with a valid permit issued by the city to do so, other than upon the premises
of a licensed on-sale dealer, where the alcoholic beverages were purchased from
the dealer for on-sale purposes.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess in any public place
other than upon the premises of a licensed on-sale dealer, any glass, can,
bottle or other container, containing an alcoholic beverage on which the seal
has been broken.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, cast or otherwise put in
motion, any bottle, can, glass or any other container, at any person or
vehicle, whether moving or parked or to dispose of or deposit any bottle, can,
glass or other container upon any street, alley, highway, sidewalk or park.
   (D)   For the purposes of this section, PUBLIC PLACE shall mean any place
whether within or without a building, commonly and customarily open to or used
by the general public and any street, highway, alley or sidewalk.
   (E)   Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 12-108)  Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Consumption or possession in vehicle, see §
71.58
LICENSE
§ 112.20  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the classification of on-
sale, off-sale alcoholic beverage establishments and the regulation thereof.
(Prior Code, § 12-200)
§ 112.21  CLASSIFICATION AND FEES.
   (A)   The classification and fees for on-sale, off-sale of alcoholic
beverages are established by the state of South Dakota.
   (B)   These fees may be amended by resolution of the Lead City Commission.
(Prior Code, § 12-201)
§ 112.22  ACTION BY COUNCIL.
   The city may require any applicant to appear personally, at any meeting of
the City Council, and to answer any questions which may be asked pertaining to
himself or herself or his or her place of business, which may, in any way,
pertain to the carrying on of the business applied for.
(Prior Code, § 12-203)
§ 112.23  AREA LIMITED.
   The governing body of the city shall not approve any application for “on-
sale” or “off-sale” license to sell any alcoholic beverages in the city at any
place of business unless that place of business is located in an area described
as a commercial area on the zoning use district map of the city unless a
conditional use permit is issued.
(Prior Code, § 12-204)  (Ord. 1007-12, passed 1-30-2012)
§ 112.24  SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   The city may, upon good cause shown, suspend a license issued hereunder for
a period not to exceed 180 days.
(Prior Code, § 12-205)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
      Chapter
         
130.   CIVIL DISORDER AND OBSTRUCTION
         
131.   WEAPONS; FIREARMS
         
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS AND PROPERTY; CURFEW
CHAPTER 130:  CIVIL DISORDER AND OBSTRUCTION
Section
   
130.01   Disorderly or unlawful assemblies
   
130.02   Resisting execution or process
   
130.03   Obstructing public officer, not police
   
130.04   Disorderly conduct
   
130.05   Loitering on school property unlawful
   
130.06   Unlawful parades and processions prohibited
§ 130.01  DISORDERLY OR UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLIES.
   (A)   A disorderly assembly of persons in a public place is hereby
prohibited, and the Police Department or any law enforcement officer shall have
the authority to disperse those persons and to require them to remove
themselves from the place of assembly.
   (B)   Any person participating in a disorderly assembly who fails or refuses
to disperse or vacate the place after having been commanded to do so by a law
enforcement officer shall be guilty of disorderly assembly.
   (C)   For the purposes of this section, a DISORDERLY ASSEMBLY shall mean an
assembly of two or more persons, some or all of whom are engaged in conduct
which threatens the public peace or safety, through fighting or violent or
threatening behavior, loud or profane language, unreasonable noise, obstructing
vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or by littering or breakage.
   (D)   For the purposes of this section, PUBLIC PLACE shall mean any place,
whether within or without a building, commonly and customarily open to or used
by the general public.
(Ord. 909-98, passed 3-23-1998)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.02  RESISTING EXECUTION OR PROCESS.
   No person shall resist the execution or service of any legal process.
(Ord. 909-98, passed 3-23-1998)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.03  OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC OFFICER, NOT POLICE.
   No person shall intentionally obstruct or attempt to obstruct a public
officer or employee, not a law enforcement officer or firefighter in the
performance of any official duty, or shall resist a public officer in
performance of his or her duty.
(Ord. 909-98, passed 3-23-1998)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.04  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   Any person who intentionally causes serious public inconvenience, annoyance
or alarm to any other person, or creates a risk thereof by:
   (A)   Engaging in fighting or in violent or threatening behavior;
   (B)   Making unreasonable noise;
   (C)   Disturbing any lawful assembly or meeting of persons without lawful
authority; or
   (D)   Obstructing vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(Ord. 909-98, passed 3-23-1998)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.05  LOITERING ON SCHOOL PROPERTY UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or to stroll in, about or upon
any school grounds or school buildings or other school property without lawful
business and fail to leave the same when ordered to do so by school officials
or other lawful authority known to be such.
(Ord. 909-98, passed 3-23-1998)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.06  UNLAWFUL PARADES AND PROCESSIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No parades or processions other than a funeral procession shall be
held upon the streets except with prior consent in writing of the Chief of
Police, obtained upon application filed with the Police Department setting
forth the time, route of, approximate number of persons and vehicles to
participate in, and the names and character of the group or organization
sponsoring the parade or procession.
   (B)   The consent of the Chief of Police to the holding of the parade or
procession snail be given unless it reasonably appears that the holding of the
same as set out in the application would unreasonably obstruct and impede
traffic or would be likely to disturb the peace and quiet of the city.
(Ord. 909-98, passed 3-23-1998)  Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 131:  WEAPONS; FIREARMS
Section
   
131.01   Discharge of firearms; weapons
   
131.02   Law enforcement exempt from requirements
§ 131.01  DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS; WEAPONS.
   No person shall within the city limits discharge any firearm or shoot any
bow and arrow, air gun, spring-actuated gun, air-soft weapon, pistol, rifle or
sling shot.
(Ord. 909-98, passed 3-23-1998; Ord. 1042-15, passed 9-21-2015; Ord. 1049-16,
passed 11-21-2016)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.02  LAW ENFORCEMENT EXEMPT FROM REQUIREMENTS.
   The provisions in §§
131.01 and
131.02 above shall not apply to law enforcement in the performance of their
duties with authority to do so.
(Ord. 909-98, passed 3-23-1998; Ord. 1049-16, passed 11-21-2016)
CHAPTER 132:  OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS AND PROPERTY; CURFEW
Section
General Offenses Against Persons and Property
   
132.01   Selling of fireworks prohibited
   
132.02   Discharging or possession of fireworks
   
132.03   Barbed wire
   
132.04   Air-tight containers; restricted
   
132.05   Air-tight containers; keeping declared nuisance
   
132.06   Bad checks given to city or its agents
   
132.07   Defacing parking meters
   
132.08   Purchasing from minors
   
132.09   Disorderly conduct
Curfew Provisions
   
132.35   Curfew purpose
   
132.36   Under 16; curfew hours
   
132.37   Curfew hours; 16 and over
   
132.38   Exceptions to curfew
   
132.39   Responsibility of parent or guardian
 
   
132.99   Penalty
GENERAL OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS AND PROPERTY
§ 132.01  SELLING OF FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall sell, hold for sale or offer for sale, as wholesaler or
retailer any fireworks in the city as defined in regulations adopted in
Chapter 150 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 909-98, passed 3-23-1998)  Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.02  DISCHARGING OR POSSESSION OF FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged pyrotechnics or
fireworks of any description whatsoever as defined in regulations adopted in
Chapter 150 of this code of ordinances, within the exterior boundaries of the
city unless the person has in his or her possession at the time of the
discharge a permit in writing from the Chief of the Fire Department.
(Ord. 909-98, passed 3-23-1998)  Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.03  BARBED WIRE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use barbed wire for the purpose of
enclosing, in whole or in part, any lots, parts of lots or parcels of ground
unless more than seven feet above ground.
(Ord. 909-98, passed 3-23-1998)  Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.04  AIR-TIGHT CONTAINERS; RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of
any dwelling, building or other structure or within any unoccupied or abandoned
building, dwelling or other structure under his or her control in a place
accessible to children, any abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator or
other container which has an air-tight door or lid, snap lock or other locking
device from the icebox, refrigerator or container.
(Ord. 909-98, passed 3-23-1998)  Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.05  AIR-TIGHT CONTAINERS; KEEPING DECLARED NUISANCE.
   The keeping of any discarded icebox, refrigerator or other air-tight
container is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and the same shall
be abated as provided by state law and the abatement of the nuisance shall not,
in any manner, affect any penalty which may be imposed for the violation of
this code.
(Ord. 909-98, passed 3-23-1998)  Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.06  BAD CHECKS GIVEN TO CITY OR ITS AGENTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make and deliver or draw and
deliver or utter or give to the city, or to any officer, employee, agent,
agency, board, bureau or commission thereof, in payment of any license, fee,
fine, penalty, assessment, tax, debt, obligation or other exaction, payment or
amount of money which the city of the officer, employee, agent, agency, board,
bureau or commission is lawfully authorized to receive or collect, any check or
draft upon any bank or banking association with knowledge that the maker or
drawer thereof does not have an account in or with the bank or banking
association subject to the check or draft.
   (B)   The fact that payment of the check or draft, when presented in the
usual course of business, shall be refused by the bank or banking association
for lack of sufficient funds to the credit of the drawer or maker has no
account subject to the check or draft, shall be prima facie evidence that the
same was made and delivered or drawn and delivered or uttered or given with the
knowledge herein above mentioned.
(Ord. 909-98, passed 3-23-1998)  Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.07  DEFACING PARKING METERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to open or for any person
to deface, injure, tamper with or willfully break, destroy or impair the
usefulness of any parking meter.
(Ord. 909-98, passed 3-23-1998)  Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.08  PURCHASING FROM MINORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of any pawn shop, second hand
or junk store, either by himself or herself or his or her clerk or employee, to
purchase or receive from any minor any article whatever, without the written
consent of the parent or guardian of the minor.
(Ord. 909-98, passed 3-23-1998)  Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.09  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   Any person who intentionally causes serious public inconvenience,
annoyance or alarm to any other person, or creates a risk thereof by:
      (1)   Engaging in fighting or in violent or threatening behavior;
      (2)   Making unreasonable noise;
      (3)   Disturbing any lawful assembly or meeting of persons without lawful
authority; or
      (4)   Obstructing vehicular or pedestrian traffic, is guilty of
disorderly conduct.
   (B)   Disorderly conduct is a Class 2 misdemeanor.
(Ord. 909-98, passed 3-23-1998)  Penalty, see §
132.99
CURFEW PROVISIONS
§ 132.35  CURFEW PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to regulate the presence of
juveniles on the streets and other public places in the city during late night
hours. The city has a compelling interest in the regulation due to the increase
of juvenile delinquency in the city.
   (B)   It is a compelling interest and goal of the city to protect the public
from illegal acts juveniles committed after the curfew hours and also to
protect the juveniles from improper influences and from criminal activity that
occurs after the curfew hours.
   (C)   It is also the intent of this section to help parents control their
children.
   (D)   The city does not intend a result that is absurd, impossible to
execute or unreasonable. It is intended that the curfew ordinance codified in
these sections be held inapplicable in those cases, if any, where its
application would be unconstitutional.
   (E)   Constitutional construction is intended and shall be given.
   (F)   The city does not intend to violate the constitution of the United
States of America, severability is intended throughout and within the
provisions of this subchapter codified in these sections.
   (G)   If any provisions including any exceptions, part, phrase or term, or
the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held to be invalid,
the application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby
and validity of this subchapter codified in these sections in any or other
respects shall be affected.
(Ord. 909-98, passed 3-23-1998)  Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.36  UNDER 16; CURFEW HOURS.
   It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 16 years to be upon any
of the streets or alleys or other public places of the city between the hours
of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unattended by his or her parent or parents, legal
guardian or some person over 21 years of age having care and control of the
minor.
(Ord. 909-98, passed 3-23-1998)  Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.37  CURFEW HOURS; 16 AND OVER.
   It shall be unlawful for any minor 16 or 17 to be upon any of the streets or
alleys or other public places of the city between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. unattended by his or her parent or parents, legal guardians or some
person over 21 years of age having care and control of the minor.
(Ord. 909-98, passed 3-23-1998)  Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.38  EXCEPTIONS TO CURFEW.
   This subchapter does not apply to a minor who is:
   (A)   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
   (B)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
   (C)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
   (D)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from
an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
   (E)   Involved in an emergency;
   (F)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department  about the minor's presence;
   (G)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
   (H)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
   (I)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in
accordance with state law.
Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.39  RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT OR GUARDIAN.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person
having the care and custody of a juvenile to suffer or permit or by inefficient
control to allow the juvenile to violate these sections.
   (B)   It shall not be a violation of these sections if the exceptions to the
curfew are applicable.
(Ord. 909-98, passed 3-23-1998)  Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person convicted of violating any municipal ordinances
other than a parking ordinance may be fined not more than $100 or 30 days
incarceration or both plus the cost of prosecution.
   (B)   Curfew penalties. Penalties charged for curfew violations under the
provisions of §§
132.36 through
132.39 shall be:
      (1)   For first offense: $50;
      (2)   For second offense: $75; and
      (3)   For third and subsequent offenses: $100.
(Ord. 909-98, passed 3-23-1998)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
      Chapter
         
150.   CODES ADOPTED
         
151.   TRAILER COURTS AND CAMPGROUNDS
         
152.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
         
153.   CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
         
154.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
         
155.   ZONING CODE
CHAPTER 150:  CODES ADOPTED
Section
   
150.01   International Residential Code adopted by reference; amendments
   
150.02   International Building Code adopted by reference; amendments
   
150.03   International Fire Code adopted by reference; amendments
   
150.04   International Fuel Gas Code adopted by reference; amendments
   
150.05   International Existing Building Code adopted by reference; amendments
   
150.06   [Reserved]
   
150.07   International Energy Conservation Code adopted by reference;
amendments
   
150.08   International Mechanical Code adopted by reference; amendments
   
150.09   International Property Maintenance Code adopted by reference;
amendments
   
150.10   International Urban-Wildland Interface Code adopted by reference;
amendments
   
150.11   International Private Sewage Disposal Code adopted by reference;
amendments
   
150.12   [Reserved]
   
150.13   International Code Council Performance Code for Buildings and
Facilities adopted by reference
   
150.14   [Reserved]
   
150.15   International Swimming Pool and Spa Code Adopted by reference
   
150.16   Building permit fees
   
150.17   Reference only
§ 150.01  INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Adopted by reference.  The International Residential Code, 2015
Edition, including appendix chapters is hereby adopted by reference.
   (B)   Appendix chapters.  The following appendix chapters are included:
      (1)   Appendix A: Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping.
      (2)   Appendix B: Sizing of Vent Systems Serving Appliances Equipped with
Draft Hoods, Category I Appliances, and Appliances Listed for Use with Type B
Vents.
      (3)   Appendix C: Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct-Vent
Venting Systems.
      (4)   Appendix E: Manufactured Housing Used as Dwellings.
      (5)   Appendix G: Piping Standards for Various Applications.
      (6)   Appendix H: Patio Covers.
      (7)   Appendix I: Private Sewage Disposal.
      (8)   Appendix J: Existing Buildings and Structures.
      (9)   Appendix K: Sound Transmission.
   (C)   Amendments.  The following sections are hereby revised:
      (1)   Section R101.1. Insert: City of Lead.
      (2)   Section R108.2. Insert: Chapter 150, Section 150.16 of the City of
Lead’s Code of Ordinances--Building Permit Fees.
      (3)   Table R301.2(1). Insert:
         Ground Snow Load: 40 pounds per square foot
         Wind Speed: 80 miles per hour
         Seismic Design Category: B
         Weathering: Severe
         Frost line Depth: 48 inches
         Decay: None to Slight
         Winter Design Temperature: minus 15° Fahrenheit
         Ice Shield Under-Layment Required: Yes
         Flood Hazards: Map @ Lead City Hall
         Air Freezing Index: >1000-2000
         Mean Annual Temperature: 45° Fahrenheit
      (4)   Section P2603.5.1. Insert: 30 inches, 30 inches.
      (5)   Section P3103.1. Insert: 24 inches, 6 inches.
   (D)   Exclusions. The following sections are hereby excluded:
      (1)   Section P2904. Dwelling Unit Fire Sprinkler System.
(Ord. 1002-10, passed 12-20-2010; Ord. 1047-16, passed 4-4-2016)
§ 150.02  INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Adopted by reference.  The International Building Code, 2015 Edition,
is hereby adopted by reference.
   (B)   Amendments.  The following sections are hereby revised:
      (1)   Section 101.1. Insert: City of Lead.
      (2)   Section 109.2. Insert: Chapter 150, Section 150.16 of the City of
Lead’s Code of OrdinancesBuilding Permit Fees.
      (3)   Section 1612.3. Insert: City of Lead.
      (4)   Section 1612.3. Insert: 2009.
(Ord. 1002-10, passed 12-20-2010; Ord. 1047-16, passed 4-4-2016)
§ 150.03  INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Adopted by reference.  The International Fire Code, 2015 Edition,
including appendix chapters is hereby adopted by reference.
   (B)   Appendix chapters.  The following appendix chapters are included:
      (1)   Appendix C: Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution.
      (2)   Appendix D: Fire Apparatus Access Roads.
      (3)   Appendix E: Hazard Categories.
      (4)   Appendix F: Hazard Ranking.
      (5)   Appendix G: Cryogenic Fluids-Weight and Volume Equivalents.
   (C)   Amendments.  The following sections are hereby revised:
      (1)   Section 101.1. Insert: City of Lead.
      (4)   Section 113.2. Insert: Chapter 150, Section 150.16 of the City of
Lead’s Code of OrdinancesBuilding Permit Fees.
(Ord. 1002-10, passed 12-20-2010; Ord. 1047-16, passed 4-4-2016)
§ 150.04  INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Adopted by reference.  The International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 Edition,
including appendix chapters is hereby adopted by reference.
   (B)   Appendix chapters.  The following appendix chapters are included:
      (1)   Appendix A: Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping.
      (2)   Appendix B: Sizing of Vent Systems Serving Appliances Equipped with
Draft Hoods, Category I Appliances, and Appliances Listed for Use with Type B
Vents.
      (3)   Appendix C: Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct-Vent
Venting Systems.
   (C)   Amendments.  The following sections are hereby revised:
      (1)   Section 101.1. Insert: City of Lead.
      (2)   Section 106.6.2. Insert: Chapter 150, Section 150.16 of the City of
Lead’s Code of OrdinancesBuilding Permit Fees.
      (3)   Section 108.4. Insert: Determined by city ordinance.
(Ord. 1002-10, passed 12-20-2010; Ord. 1047-16, passed 4-4-2016)
§ 150.05  INTERNATIONAL EXISTING BUILDING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE;
AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Adopted by reference.  The International Existing Building Code, 2015
Edition, is hereby adopted by reference.
   (B)   Amendments.  The following sections are hereby revised:
      (1)   Section 101.1. Insert: City of Lead.
      (2)   Section 108.2. Chapter 150, Section 150.16 of the City of Lead’s
Code of OrdinancesBuilding Permit Fees.
(Ord. 1002-10, passed 12-20-2010; Ord. 1047-16, passed 4-4-2016)
§ 150.06  [RESERVED].
§ 150.07  INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE;
AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Adopted by reference.  The International Energy Conservation Code,
2015 Edition, is hereby adopted by reference.
   (B)   Amendments.  The following sections are hereby revised:
      (1)   Section 101.1. Insert: City of Lead.
      (2)   Section 107.2. Insert: Chapter 150, Section 150.16 of the City of
Lead’s Code of OrdinancesBuilding Permit Fees.
(Ord. 1002-10, passed 12-20-2010; Ord. 1047-16, passed 4-4-2016)
§ 150.08  INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Adopted by reference.  The International Mechanical Code, 2015
Edition, including appendix chapter is hereby adopted by reference.
   (B)   Appendix chapter.  The following appendix chapter is included:
Appendix A: Combustion Air Openings and Chimney Connector Pass-Throughs.
   (C)   Amendments.  The following sections are hereby revised:
      (1)   Section 101.1. Insert: City of Lead.
      (2)   Section 106.5.2. Insert: Chapter 150, Section 150.16 of the City of
Lead’s Code of OrdinancesBuilding Permit Fees.
      (3)   Section 108.4. Insert: Determined by city ordinance.
   (D)   Elimination. The following section is hereby eliminated:
      (1)   Section 106.5.3. Paragraphs 2 and 3.
(Ord. 1002-10, passed 12-20-2010; Ord. 1047-16, passed 4-4-2016)
§ 150.09  INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE;
AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Adopted by reference.  The International Property Maintenance Code,
2015 Edition, is hereby adopted by reference.
   (B)   Amendments.  The following sections are hereby revised:
      (1)   Section 101.1. Insert: City of Lead.
      (2)   Section 304.14. Insert: Year round.
      (3)   Section 602.3. Insert: Year round.
      (4)   Section 602.4. Insert: Year round.
(Ord. 1002-10, passed 12-20-2010; Ord. 1047-16, passed 4-4-2016)
§ 150.10  INTERNATIONAL URBAN-WILDLAND INTERFACE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE;
AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Adopted by reference.  The International Urban-Wildland Interface
Code, 2015 Edition, including appendix chapters is hereby adopted by reference.
   (B)   Appendix chapters.  The following appendix chapters are included:
      (1)   Appendix A: General Requirements.
      (2)   Appendix B: Vegetation Management Plan.
      (3)   Appendix C: Fire Hazard Severity Form.
   (C)   Amendments.  The following sections are hereby revised:
      (1)   Section 101.1. Insert: City of Lead.
      (2)   Section 112.2. Insert: Chapter 150, Section 150.16 of the City of
Lead’s Code of OrdinancesBuilding Permit Fees.
(Ord. 1002-10, passed 12-20-2010; Ord. 1047-16, passed 4-4-2016)
§ 150.11  INTERNATIONAL PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE;
AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Adopted by reference.  The International Private Sewage Disposal Code,
2015 Edition, is hereby adopted by reference.
   (B)   Amendments.  The following sections are hereby revised:
      (1)   Section 101.1. Insert: City of Lead.
      (2)   Section 108.4. Insert: Determined by city ordinance.
      (3)   Section 405.2.5. Insert: Determined, as appropriate, by Lead
Officials.
      (4)   Section 405.2.6. Insert: Determined, as appropriate, by Lead
Officials.
   (C)   Elimination. The following section is hereby eliminated:
      (1)   Section 106.4.3. Paragraphs 2 and 3.
(Ord. 1002-10, passed 12-20-2010; Ord. 1047-16, passed 4-4-2016)
§ 150.12  [RESERVED].
§ 150.13  INTERNATIONAL CODE COUNCIL PERFORMANCE CODE FOR BUILDINGS AND
FACILITIES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The International Code Council Performance Code for Buildings and
Facilities, 2015 Edition, is hereby adopted by reference.
(Ord. 1002-10, passed 12-20-2010; Ord. 1047-16, passed 4-4-2016)
§ 150.14  [RESERVED].
§ 150.15  INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Adopted by reference. The  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code,
2015 Edition, is hereby adopted by reference.
   (B)   Amendments. The following sections are hereby revised:
      (1)   Section 101.1. Insert: City of Lead.
      (2)   Section 105.6.2. Insert: Chapter 150, Section 150.16 of the City of
Lead's Code of Ordinances–Building Permit Fees.
(Ord. 1047-16, passed 4-4-2016)
§ 150.16  BUILDING PERMIT FEES.
   A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid,
nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if
any, has been paid.
(Ord. 1047-16, passed 4-4-2016)
§ 150.17  REFERENCE ONLY.
   The City of Lead will use the following 2015 ICC Codes as reference only:
   (A)   The 2015 International Zoning Code; and
   (B)   The 2015 International Green Construction Code.
(Ord. 1047-16, passed 4-4-2016)
CHAPTER 151:  TRAILER COURTS AND CAMPGROUNDS
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Definitions
   
151.02   Permits
   
151.03   Inspection of trailer courts
   
151.04   Notices, hearings and orders
   
151.05   Adoption of regulations by the Health Commission
   
151.06   Fees
   
151.07   Location, space and general layout
   
151.08   Service buildings
   
151.09   Municipal water to all sites
Specific Provisions
   
151.20   Sewage disposal
   
151.21   Refuse disposal
   
151.22   Insect and rodent control
   
151.23   Electricity
   
151.24   Fuel
   
151.25   Fire protection
   
151.26   Alterations and additions
   
151.27   Registration of occupants; reporting of communicable diseases
   
151.28   Special exemption for trailer courts admitting only independent
trailer coaches
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HEALTH OFFICER.  The legally designated health authority of the city, or his
or her authorized representative.
   PERMIT.  A written permit issued by the Lead City Commission permitting the
trailer court to operate under this chapter and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
   SERVICE BUILDING.  A building housing toilet facilities for men and women,
with slop sink and laundry facilities and with separate bath or shower
accommodations.
   TRAILER COACH.  Any vehicle used, or so constructed as to permit its being
used, as a conveyance upon the public streets, or highway, and duly licensable
as such, and constructed in a manner as will permit occupancy thereof as a
dwelling or sleeping place, for one or more persons.
      (1)   DEPENDENT TRAILER COACH.  A trailer coach which does not have a
toilet and a bath or shower.
      (2)   INDEPENDENT TRAILER COACH.  A trailer coach that has a toilet and a
bath or shower.
   TRAILER COACH SPACE.  A plat of ground within a trailer court designated for
the accommodation of one trailer coach.
   TRAILER COURT.  Any plot of ground upon which two or more trailer coaches,
occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located.
(Prior Code, § 10-100)
§ 151.02  PERMITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, operate or
alter any trailer court within the limits of the city unless he or she holds a
valid permit issued annually by the Lead City Commission in the name of the
person for the specific trailer court.
   (B)   All applications for permits shall be made to the Lead City Commission
which shall issue the permit upon compliance by the applicant with provisions
of this chapter and of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto. No permit
shall be transferable. Every person holding a permit shall give notice in
writing to the Lead City Commission within 24 hours after having sold,
transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of, interest in or control of any
trailer court. The notice shall include the name and address of the person
succeeding to the ownership or control of the trailer court.
   (C)   Applications for permits shall be in writing signed by the applicant,
or accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the
application, and shall contain the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The location and legal description of the trailer court;
      (3)   A complete plan of the trailer court, showing compliance with all
applicable provisions of this chapter and regulations promulgated thereunder;
and
      (4)   Further information as may be requested by the Health Officer to
enable him to determine if the proposed trailer court will comply with legal
requirements.
   (D)   A complete plan for use in obtaining a permit to be issued by the Lead
City Commission shall show:
      (1)   The area and dimensions of the tract of land;
      (2)   The number, location and size of all trailer coach spaces;
      (3)   The location and width of roadways and walkways;
      (4)   The location of service buildings and any other proposed
structures;
      (5)   The location of water and sewer lines; and
      (6)   Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements
constructed or to be constructed within the trailer court.
   (E)   Any person whose application for a permit under this chapter has been
denied may request and shall be granted a hearing of the matter before the
Health Officer under the procedure provided by Section 10-103 of this chapter.
   (F)   Whenever upon inspection of any trailer court the Health Officer finds
that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of
this chapter or of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the Health Officer
shall give notice in writing to the person to whom the permit was issued; and
unless the conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of
time to be determined by the Health Officer, the permit will be suspended. At
the end of that period, the Health Officer shall reinspect the trailer court,
and if he or she finds that the conditions or practices have not been
corrected, he or she shall give notice in writing to the person to whom the
permit is issued that the permit has been suspended. Upon receipt of notice of
suspension, the person shall cease operation of the trailer court.
   (G)   Any person whose permit has been suspended, or who has received notice
from the Health Officer that his or her permit is to be suspended unless
existing conditions or practices at the trailer court are corrected, may
request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Health Officer
under the procedure provided by §
151.04; provided, that if no petition for the hearing is filed within ten days
following the day on which the permit was suspended, the permit shall be deemed
to have been automatically revoked.
(Prior Code, § 10-201)  Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.03  INSPECTION OF TRAILER COURTS.
   (A)   The Health Officer is hereby authorized and directed to make
inspections to determine the condition of trailer courts located within the
city in order that he or she may perform his or her duty of safeguarding the
health and safety of occupants of trailer courts and of the general public.
   (B)   The Health Officer shall have the power to enter at reasonable times
upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and
investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter or
regulations promulgated thereunder.
   (C)   The Health Officer shall have the power to inspect the register
containing a record of all trailer coaches and occupants using the court.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of trailer courts and
trailer coaches contained therein, or the person in charge thereof, to give the
Health Officer free access to the premises at reasonable times for the purpose
of inspection.
   (E)   It shall be the duty of every occupant of a trailer court to give the
owner thereof or his or her agent or employee access to any part of the trailer
court or its premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making the repairs
or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with this chapter or with
any lawful regulation adopted thereunder, or any lawful order issued pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10-202)
§ 151.04  NOTICES, HEARINGS AND ORDERS.
   (A)   Whenever the Health Officer determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this
chapter or of any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he or she shall give
notice of the alleged violation to the person or persons responsible therefor,
as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   The notice shall:
      (1)   Be put in writing;
      (2)   Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;
      (3)   Allow a reasonable time for the doing of any act it requires;
      (4)   Be served upon the owner or his or her agent, or the occupant, as
the case may require; provided, that the notice or order shall be deemed to be
properly served upon such owner or agent, or upon the occupant, if a copy
thereof is sent by registered mail to his or her last known address; or if a
copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected
by the notice, or if he or she is served with the notice by any other method
authorized or required by the laws of this state; and
      (5)   Contain an outline of remedial action which if taken will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with regulations adopted
pursuant thereto.
   (C)   Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provisions of this chapter, or any regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the
matter before the Health Officer; provided, that the person shall file in the
office of the Health Officer a written petition requesting the hearing and
setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within ten days after
the notice is served. Upon receipt of the petition, the Health Officer shall
set a time and place for the hearing, and shall give the petitioner written
notice thereof. At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to
be heard and to show why the notice should be modified or withdrawn. The
hearing shall be commenced not later than ten days after the day on which the
petition was filed; provided, that upon application of the petitioner, the
Health Officer may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time
beyond the ten-day period, if in his or her judgment the petitioner has
submitted a good and sufficient reason for the postponement.
   (D)   After the hearing, the Health Officer shall sustain, modify or
withdraw the notice depending upon his or her findings as to whether the
provisions of this chapter and of regulations adopted pursuant thereto have
been complied with. If the Health Officer sustains or modified the notice, it
shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice served pursuant to §
151.04 shall automatically become an order if written petition for hearing is
not filed in the office of the Health Officer within ten days after the notice
is served. After a hearing in the case of any notice suspending any permit
required by this chapter or by any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, when
the notice has been sustained by the Health Officer, the permit shall be deemed
to have been revoked. Any permit which has been suspended by a notice shall be
deemed to be automatically revoked if a petition for hearing is not filed in
the office of the Health Officer within ten days after the notice is served.
   (E)   The proceedings at the hearing, including the findings and decision of
the Health Officer, shall be reduced to writing and entered as a matter of
public record in the office of the Health Officer. The record shall also
include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the matter.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Health Officer may seek relief from
the Lead City Commission or in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided
by the laws of this state.
   (F)   Whenever the Health Officer finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, he or she may, without
notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of an emergency and
requiring that the action be taken as he or she deems necessary to meet the
emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter the order shall
be effective immediately. Any person to whom an order is directed shall comply
therewith immediately but, upon petition to the Health Officer, shall be
afforded a hearing as soon as possible.
   (G)   After the hearing, depending upon his or her finding whether the
provisions of this chapter and of regulations adopted thereto have been
complied with, the Health Officer shall continue the order in effect or modify
it or revoke it.
(Prior Code, § 10-203)
§ 151.05  ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS BY THE HEALTH COMMISSION.
   The Health Commission is hereby authorized to make and, after public
hearing, adopt written regulations as may be necessary for the proper
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter; provided, that the regulations
shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, the regulations
shall have the same force and effect as the provisions of this chapter, and the
penalty tor the violation of the provisions of this chapter, as hereinafter
provided.
(Prior Code, § 10-204)
§ 151.06  FEES.
   Every owner or operator of a trailer court shall pay an annual fee to the
city for the first ten trailer sites plus a fee for each additional site. The
fee shall be due by January 10 of each year as determined by resolution of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 10-205)
§ 151.07  LOCATION, SPACE AND GENERAL LAYOUT.
   (A)   The trailer court shall be located on a well-drained site, so located
that its drainage will not endanger any water supply.
   (B)   All those trailer courts shall be in areas free from marshes, swamps
or other potential breeding places for insects or rodents.
   (C)   The area of the trailer court shall be large enough to accommodate:
      (1)   The trailer coach spaces;
      (2)   Necessary streets and roadways; and
      (3)   Parking areas for motor vehicles.
   (D)   Each trailer coach space shall contain a minimum of 1,000 square feet,
shall be at least 25 feet wide, and shall abut on a driveway or other clear
area with unobstructed access to a public street. Those spaces shall be clearly
defined, and trailer coaches shall be parked in spaces so that there is a
minimum of 15 feet between trailer coaches and so that no trailer coach is less
than ten feet from the exterior boundary of the trailer court; provided,
however, that the foregoing requirement of the trailer court shall not apply to
trailer coaches now in place or presently established trailer courts as of the
effective date of this chapter, and shall not apply to placement of trailer
coaches in established trailer courts as of the effective date of this chapter
where plumbing and sewer connections, or either, have been installed in the
established trailer courts at points less than ten feet from the exterior
boundary of the court prior to the effective date of this chapter. To all
instances other than are herein excepted the provisions of this division shall
be applicable to all trailer courts and no plumbing or sewer installations
shall be made less than ten feet from the exterior boundaries of any trailer
court after the effective date thereof.
   (E)   It shall be illegal to park a trailer coach closer than ten feet from
any street or highway; or so that any part of the trailer coach obstructs any
roadway or walkway.
   (F)   The Health Commission is hereby authorized to make and, after public
hearing, adopt the written regulations as may be necessary for the proper
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter; provided, that the regulations
shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, the regulations
shall have the same force and effect as the provisions of this chapter, and the
penalty for the violation of the provisions of this chapter, as hereinafter
provided.
   (F)   It shall be illegal to allow any trailer coach in a trailer court
unless there is a trailer coach space available.
   (G)   Access roads shall be provided to each trailer coach space. All access
roads shall be continuous, connecting with streets or highways, and have a
minimum width of 20 feet.
   (H)   Areas shall be provided for the parking of motor vehicles. Those areas
shall accommodate at least the number of vehicles equal to the trailer coach
spaces provided.
   (I)   Outside drying space adjacent ro the service building or other clothes
drying facilities shall be provided. A minimum of 50 square feet per space
shall be provided in the area used for clothes drying.
(Prior Code, § 10-207)  Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.08  SERVICE BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Each trailer court shall be provided with one or more service
buildings adequately equipped with flush-type toilet fixtures.
   (B)   No service building shall contain less than two toilets for women, one
toilet for males, one lavatory and shower for each sex, one urinal for males,
one laundry tray and one slop sink.
   (C)   Dependent trailer coaches shall be parked not more than 200 feet from
the service building.
   (D)   Service buildings shall meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Be located 15 feet or more from any trailer coach space;
      (2)   Be of permanent construction and be adequately lighted;
      (3)   Be of moisture-resistant material to permit frequent washing and
cleaning;
      (4)   Have heating facilities adequate to maintain a temperature of 70°F
during cold weather and to supply a minimum of three gallons of hot water per
hour per coach space during time of peak demands;
      (5)   All rooms shall be well ventilated with all openings effectively
screened; and
      (6)   Have at least one slop sink supplied with hot and cold water in a
separate room.
(Prior Code, § 10-208)
§ 151.09  MUNICIPAL WATER TO ALL SITES.
   All courts governed under this chapter shall provide municipal water to all
sites.
(Prior Code, § 10-209)
SPECIFIC PROVISIONS
§ 151.20  SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   All plumbing in the trailer court shall comply with state and local
plumbing laws and regulations.
   (B)   Each trailer coach space shall be provided with a four-inch sewer
connection. The sewer connection shall be provided with suitable fitting so
that a water-tight connection can be made between the trailer coach drain and
the sewer connection. The individual coach connections shall be so constructed
that they can be closed when not linked with a coach. The connections shall be
trapped in a manner so as to maintain them in an odor-free condition.
   (C)   Sewer lines shall be constructed after the approval of the plumbing
inspector in accordance with the plumbing code. All sewer lines shall be
adequately vented, and shall be laid with sufficient earth cover to prevent
leakage from traffic.
   (D)   All courts governed by this chapter shall use the municipal sewage
system.
(Prior Code, § 10-210)
§ 151.21  REFUSE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the court shall be
in a manner so as not to create health hazards, rodent harborage, insect
breeding areas, accident hazards or air pollution.
   (B)   All refuse shall be stored in fly-tight, water-tight, rodent-proof
containers. One or more containers per trailer located at the trailer coach
space shall be provided.
   (C)   Racks or holders shall be provided for all refuse containers. The
container racks or holders shall be designed to prevent containers from being
tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration, and to facilitate the
cleaning of the areas around the racks or holders.
   (D)   All garbage shall be collected at least twice weekly. Rubbish shall be
collected frequently enough to prevent it from overflowing available
containers.
      (1)   If suitable collection service is not available from municipal or
private agencies, the trailer court operator shall provide this service.
      (2)   All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles
or covered containers.
   (E)   If collection service is not available the trailer court operator
shall dispose of the court refuse by transporting to an approved disposal site.
   (F)   Trash incinerators shall not be used for the disposal of garbage.
(Prior Code, § 10-211)
§ 151.22  INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL.
   (A)   Insect and rodent control measures to safeguard public health,
recommended by the Health Officer, shall be applied in the trailer court.
   (B)   Effective larvacidal solutions may be recommended by the Health
Officer for fly or mosquito breeding areas which cannot be controlled by more
permanent measures.
   (C)   Accumulations of debris which may provide harborage for rodents shall
not be permitted in the trailer court.
   (D)   When rats or other rodents are known to be in the trailer court, the
court operator shall take definite action as directed by the Health Officer to
exterminate them.
   (E)   Suitable measures shall be taken by the trailer court operator to
control other insects and noxious weeds.
(Prior Code, § 10-212)
§ 151.23  ELECTRICITY.
   (A)   An electrical outlet supplying at least 110 volts shall be provided
for each trailer coach space, and the installation shall be in compliance with
all state and local electrical codes and ordinances.
   (B)   The electrical outlets shall be weatherproof, and no service drop
shall be permitted to lie on the ground or to be suspended less than 12 feet
above the ground, for single-story trailers, and not less than 18 feet above
the ground for two-story trailers.
(Prior Code, § 10-213)
§ 151.24  FUEL.
   Bottled gas for cooking purposes shall not be used at individual trailer
coach spaces, unless the containers are properly connected by copper or other
suitable metallic tubing. Bottled gas cylinders shall be securely fastened in
place, and adequately protected from the weather. No cylinder containing
bottled gas shall be located in a trailer coach or within five feet of a door
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 10-214)
§ 151.25  FIRE PROTECTION.
   (A)   The court areas shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the
city fire prevention authority.
   (B)   Trailer court areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other
flammable materials.
   (C)   Portable fire extinguishers of a type approved by the fire prevention
authority shall be kept in service buildings and in all other locations named
by the fire prevention authority, and shall be maintained in good operating
condition.
   (D)   Where a public water system is available to the trailer court,
standard fire hydrants shall be located within 400 feet of each trailer coach.
   (E)   Fires shall only be made in stoves and equipment intended for those
purposes.
(Prior Code, § 10-215)  Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.26  ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS.
   (A)   No permanent additions of any kind shall be built onto or become a
part of any trailer coach unless a secondary or emergency exit from the trailer
is provided which does not open into the addition. Skirting of coaches is
permissible, but the skirting shall not permanently attach the coach to the
ground, provide a harborage for rodents, or create a fire hazard. Skirting
shall be constructed of one-hour fire resistant material.
   (B)   The wheels of the coach shall not be removed except temporarily for
repairs. Jacks or stabilizers may be placed under the frame of the coach to
prevent the movement on the springs while the coach is parked and occupied.
(Prior Code, § 10-216)
§ 151.27  REGISTRATION OF OCCUPANTS; REPORTING OF COMMUNICABLE DISEASES.
   (A)   Every trailer court owner or operator shall maintain a register
containing a record of all trailer coaches and occupants using the trailer
court.
   (B)   The register shall be available to any authorized person inspecting
the court, and shall be preserved for the period required by the Health
Officer.
   (C)   The register shall contain:
      (1)   The names and addresses of all trailer coach occupants stopping in
the court;
      (2)   The make, model and license number of each motor vehicle and
trailer coach;
      (3)   The state, territory or county issuing the trailer license; and
      (4)   The dates of arrival and departure of each trailer coach.
   (D)   Every owner, operator, attendant or other person operating a trailer
court shall notify immediately the Health Officer of any suspected communicable
or contagious disease within the trailer court. In the case of quarantinable
diseases so diagnosed by a physician, the owner, operator, attendant or other
person operating a trailer court shall not permit the departure of a trailer
coach or its occupants, or the removal therefrom of clothing or other articles
which have been exposed to infection, without approval of the Health Officer.
(Prior Code, § 10-217)
§ 151.28  SPECIAL EXEMPTION FOR TRAILER COURTS ADMITTING ONLY INDEPENDENT
TRAILER COACHES.
   When the trailer court in question shall admit only "independent trailer
coaches" as defined by §
151.01 above, the court shall not be required to furnish any laundry or toilet
facilities, or even a service building.
(Prior Code, § 10-220)
§ 151.99  PENALTY.
   Any person, club, firm, corporation or association who shall violate any
provision of this chapter or any provision of any regulation adopted by the
city pursuant to authority granted by this chapter, shall upon conviction be
punished by a fine of not more than $200 or 30 days incarceration or both plus
the cost of prosecution, and each day's failure of compliance with any
provision shall constitute a separate violation.
(Prior Code, § 10-218)
CHAPTER 152:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Methods
   
152.01   Statutory authorization
   
152.02   Findings of fact
   
152.03   Statement of purpose
   
152.04   Methods of reducing flood losses
   
152.05   Definitions
General Provisions
   
152.06   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
152.07   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
152.08   Establishment of development permit
   
152.09   Compliance
   
152.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
152.11   Interpretation
   
152.12   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
152.13   Severability
Administration
   
152.14   Designation of Floodplain Administrator
   
152.15   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
152.16   Permit procedures
   
152.17   Variance procedures
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
152.18   General standards
   
152.19   Specific standards
   
152.20   Standards for subdivision proposals
   
152.21   Penalties for noncompliance
STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS
§ 152.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   The Legislature of the State of South Dakota has in (statutes) SDCL §§
9-36 and 7-18-14 delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to
adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.  Therefore, the Lead City
Commission of the City of Lead, South Dakota does ordain as follows.
   (B)   The City of Lead, South Dakota elects to comply with the requirements
of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended).  The
National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid Act, provides
that areas of the city having a special flood hazard be identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency and that floodplain management measures be
applied in such flood hazard areas.  The National Flood Insurance Program was
broadened and modified with the passage of the Flood Disaster Protection Act of
1973 and other legislative measures.  It was further modified by the National
Flood Insurance Reform Act of 1994.  The National Flood Insurance Program is
administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, a component of the
U.S. Department of Homeland Security.
(Ord. 1008-12, passed 3-19-2012)
§ 152.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood loses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by
the occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous
to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed or
otherwise protected from flood damage.
(Ord. 1008-12, passed 3-19-2012)
§ 152.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas; and
   (G)   Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area.
(Ord. 1008-12, passed 3-19-2012)
§ 152.04  METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following
methods:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development, which may
increase flood damage;
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Ord. 1008-12, passed 3-19-2012)
§ 152.05  DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AREA OF FUTURE-CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD. The land area that would be
inundated by the 1% annual chance (100-year) flood based on future-conditions
hydrology.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1% or greater annual chance
of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined
channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where
velocity flow may be evident.  Such flooding is characterized by ponding or
sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.  The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.  The area may
be designated as Zone A on the FHBM.  After detailed ratemaking has been
completed in preparation for publication of the flood insurance rate map, Zone
A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE,
AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, or V1-30, VE, or V.  For purposes of these regulations,
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA is synonymous in meaning with the phrase AREA OF
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD-RELATED EROSION HAZARD.  The land within a community,
which is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion losses.  The
area may be designated as Zone E on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). 
After the detailed evaluation of the special flood-related erosion hazard area,
in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone E may be further refined.
   BASE FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE).  The water surface elevation of the 1% annual
chance flood.  The height in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached
by the waters of the base flood at pertinent points in the floodplains of
coastal and riverine areas.
   BASEMENT.  Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BREAKAWAY WALL.  A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or supporting foundation system.
   BUILDING.  See STRUCTURE.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   EROSION.  The process of the gradual wearing away of land masses.  This
peril is not per se covered under the program.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for
which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the FIRM
or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date.  EXISTING
CONSTRUCTION may also be referred to as EXISTING STRUCTURES.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   EXISTING STRUCTURES.  See EXISTING CONSTRUCTION.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufacturing homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD or FLOODING.
      (1)   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from:
         (a)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
         (b)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source;
         (c)   Mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by
flooding as defined in  division (1)(b) above and are akin to a river of liquid
and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is
carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.
      (2)   The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or
other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or
currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by
an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an
abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event
which results in flooding as defined in division (1)(a) above.
   FLOOD ELEVATION DETERMINATION.  A determination by the Administrator of the
water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a
1% or greater chance of occurrence in any given year.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  An official map of a community, on which
the Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY or FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY. An examination, evaluation
and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide
(i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source (see FLOODING).
   FLOODPROOFING.  Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage
to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY.  See REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
   FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES.  The lines marking the limits of floodways on
federal, state and local floodplain maps.
   FREEBOARD.  A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level
for purposes of floodplain management.  FREEBOARD tends to compensate for the
many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the
height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as
wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of
the watershed.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE.  A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water.  The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE.  The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.  Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic reservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LEVEE. A man-made structure usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control,
or divert the flow of water to provide protection from temporary flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM.  A flood protection system, which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure, and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR. 
      (1)   The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).
An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is
not considered a building's lowest floor;
      (2)   Provided, that such enclosure is not built to render the structure
in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this
chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.  MANUFACTURED
HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MAP.  The Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) for a community issued by the Agency.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.  For
floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which the
start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.  See AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   SPECIAL HAZARD AREA.  An area having special flood, mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow), or flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as
Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, A99, AH, VO,
V1-30, VE, V, M, or E.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION (for other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)). 
Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date.  The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.  For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. 
      (1)   For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building,
including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as
well as a manufactured home.  STRUCTURE, for insurance purposes, means:
         (a)   A building with two or more outside rigid walls and a fully
secured roof that is affixed to a permanent site;
         (b)   A manufactured home (a manufactured home, also known as a mobile
home, is a structure built on a permanent chassis, transported to its site in
one or more sections, and affixed to a permanent foundation); or
         (c)   A travel trailer without wheels built on a chassis and affixed
to a permanent foundation, that is regulated under the community's floodplain
management and building ordinances or laws.
      (2)   For the latter purpose, STRUCTURE does not mean a recreational
vehicle or a park trailer or other similar vehicle, except as described in
division (1)(c), or a gas or liquid storage tank.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would
equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement.  This term includes structures, which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed.  The term does not,
however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of an historic structure; provided the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
   VARIANCE.  A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a flood plain
management regulation.
   VIOLATION.  The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations.  A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in Code of Federal Regulations
Sections 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION.  The height, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of
various magnitudes and frequencies in the flood plains of coastal or riverine
areas.
(Ord. 1008-12, passed 3-9-2012)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.06  LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   The chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 1008-12, passed 3-9-2012)
§ 152.07  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood
Insurance Study for Lawrence County, South Dakota," dated April 17, 2012 with
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps (FIRM
and FBFM) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
(Ord. 1008-12, passed 3-9-2012)
§ 152.08  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1008-12, passed 3-9-2012)
§ 152.09  COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other
applicable regulations.
(Ord. 1008-12, passed 3-9-2012)
§ 152.10  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 1008-12, passed 3-9-2012)
§ 152.11  INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 1008-12, passed 3-9-2012)
§ 152.12  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OR LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations.  On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.  This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.  This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 1008-12, passed 3-9-2012)
§ 152.13 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, provision, or portion of this chapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court, the remainder of the chapter shall not
be affected.
(Ord. 1008-12, passed 3-9-2012)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 152.14  DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Building Official/Inspector of the city is hereby appointed the
Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this
chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance
Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
(Ord. 1008-12, passed 3-9-2012)
§ 152.15  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
   (A)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of this chapter;
   (B)   Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site,
including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from
flooding;
   (C)   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this chapter;
   (D)   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required;
   (E)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation;
   (F)   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state
coordinating agency, which is the State Office of Emergency Management, prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
   (G)   Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained;
   (H)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with §
152.07, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a
federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of  §§
152.18 through
152.21 (inclusive).
(Ord. 1008-12, passed 3-9-2012)
§ 152.16  PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   Application for a development permit shall be presented to the Floodplain
Administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited
to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and
elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures,
including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the
foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.  Additionally, the
following information is required:
   (A)   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
   (B)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure shall be flood-proofed;
   (C)   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the nonresidential flood-proofed structure shall meet the flood-proofing
criteria of §
152.19(B);
   (D)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage
will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
   (E)   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with §
152.15(A).  Approval or denial of a development permit by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the
following relevant factors:
      (1)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (2)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (3)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (4)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (5)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (6)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
      (7)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site;
      (8)   The proximity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (9)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (10)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for
that area.
(Ord. 1008-12, passed 3-9-2012)
§ 152.17  VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Appeal Board as established by the community shall hear and render
judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   The Appeal Board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
   (C)   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board
may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
   (D)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and the State Office of Emergency Management upon issuing a
variance.
   (E)   (1)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous
to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in §
152.16(B) have been fully considered.
      (2)   As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
   (F)   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
chapter (§
152.03).
   (G)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (H)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
   (I)   Prerequisites for granting variances:
      (1)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   Showing a good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (c)   Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
         (d)   Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
   (J)   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that:
      (1)   The criteria outlined in divisions (A) through (I) above are met;
and
      (2)   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety.
(Ord. 1008-12, passed 3-9-2012)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 152.18  GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required
for all new construction and substantial improvements:
   (A)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
   (B)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
   (C)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage;
   (D)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding;
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. 1008-12, passed 3-9-2012)
§ 152.19  SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has
been provided as set forth in §§
152.07, 152.15(H) or 152.20(C), the following provisions are required:
   (A)   Residential construction.  New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement), elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation.  A
registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a
certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this
chapter are satisfied.
   (B)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to least one
foot above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this division.  A record of such certification, which includes the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are flood-
proofed, shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (C)   Manufactured homes.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed
within Zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods
and practices, which minimize flood damage.  For the purposes of this
requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.  Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. 
This requirement is in addition to applicable State and local anchoring
requirements for resisting wind forces.
(Ord. 1008-12, passed 3-9-2012)
§ 152.20  STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with §§
152.02,
152.03 and
152.04.
   (B)   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet development
permit requirements of §§
152.08,
152.16 and the provisions of §§
152.18 through
152.21 (inclusive).
   (C)   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions, which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever
is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to §§
152.07 or
152.15(H).
   (D)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure
to flood hazards.
   (E)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
(Ord. 1008-12, passed 3-9-2012)
§ 152.21  PENALTIES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations.  Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor.  Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable as defined by law.  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city 
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
(Ord. 1008-12, passed 3-9-2012)
CHAPTER 153:  CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
Section
   
153.01   Permit required
   
153.02   Application
   
153.03   Standards for conditional use
   
153.04   Report to Lead City Commission
   
153.05   Public hearing
   
153.06   Expiration of conditional use permit
§ 153.01  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to engage in any land use covenant within a zoned
district which is otherwise excluded from the particular district without first
having obtained a permit therefor as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   Variances will no longer be granted to allow for any like use.
(Ord. 866-93, passed 11-15-1993)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.02  APPLICATION.
   (A)   An application for a conditional use permit shall be filed with the
City Building Inspector on a prescribed form.
   (B)   An application for approval may be filed by any person having an
interest in the property for which the conditional use permit is requested.
   (C)   The following information shall be included:
      (1)   A complete site plan showing the major details for the development,
including, location of buildings and structures, useable open space, off-street
parking areas, off-street loading areas, means of ingress/egress, screening and
existing and proposed signs; and
      (2)   A written statement indicating how the application meets the
standards for approval. The written statement shall include information
relating to the intensity of uses, amount of traffic generated, hours of
operation and other information that the Board deems necessary. The Planning
Commission shall consider all applications for conditional use permits at their
regular scheduled meetings and in accordance with the standards provided below.
(Ord. 866-93, passed 11-15-1993)
§ 153.03  STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL USE.
   (A)   The conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of
other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted,
nor diminish and impair property values within the immediate vicinity.
   (B)   The establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal
and orderly development and improvement of surrounding vacant property for the
uses predominant in the area.
   (C)   The adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary
facilities have been or are being provided.
   (D)   For any conditional use, lot and performance standards shall be the
same as similar type uses located in specific districts.
   (E)   To defray the administration costs of processing requests for
conditional use permits, a fee is set by resolution.
   (F)   Any use permitted under the terms of any conditional use permit shall
be established and conducted in conformity with the terms of the permit and of
any conditions designated in connection therewith,
(Ord. 866-93, passed 11-15-1993)
§ 153.04  REPORT TO LEAD CITY COMMISSION.
   For each application for a conditional use permit, the Planning Commission
shall report to the Lead City Commission its findings and recommendations,
including the stipulation that additional conditions will be complied with when
they are deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest.
(Ord. 866-93, passed 11-15-1993)
§ 153.05  PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   Upon receipt in proper form of the application and other requested
material, the Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing and
shall make a decision upon the proposal to grant or deny the conditional use
permit.
   (B)   Not less than seven days in advance of the hearing, notice of the time
and place of the hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the
city.
   (C)   The notice shall also be posted on the property for which the
conditional use application has been filed.
(Ord. 866-93, passed 11-15-1993)
§ 153.06  EXPIRATION OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
   (A)   If the use permitted under the terms of a conditional use permit has
not been started within six months of the date of issuance thereof, the permit
shall be cancelled by the Building Inspector.
   (B)   Written notice thereof, shall be given to the person(s) affected,
together with notice that further use or work as described in the cancelled
permit shall not proceed unless a new conditional use permit has been obtained.
(Ord. 866-93, passed 11-15-1993)
CHAPTER 154:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.01   Purpose
   
154.02   Jurisdiction
   
154.03   Application of chapter
   
154.04   Approvals necessary for acceptance of subdivision plats
   
154.05   Definitions
Subdivision Plats
   
154.15   Preliminary plat
   
154.16   Final plat
   
154.17   Filing of preliminary plats
   
154.18   Required data regarding identification and description of preliminary
plat
   
154.19   Existing conditions; required data
   
154.20   Required data regarding proposed development design features on the
preliminary plat
   
154.21   Filing of final plats
   
154.22   Contents of the final plat
   
154.23   Certifications required on final plats
   
154.24   Supplementary documents and information required
Design Standards of Subdivisions
   
154.35   Blocks
   
154.36   Streets and alleys
   
154.37   Lots
   
154.38   Easements
   
154.39   Public sites and open spaces
Basic Improvements to Subdivision; Variances
   
154.50   General requirements
   
154.51   Improvements
   
154.52   Variances
Compliance
   
154.65   Building permits
   
154.66   Sale of lots unrecorded plats
   
154.67   Misrepresentations as to construction, supervision or inspection of
improvements
 
   
154.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01  PURPOSE.
   (A)   In order to safeguard the best interests of the city and to assist the
subdivider in harmonizing his or her interests with those of the city at large,
this chapter is adopted.
   (B)   All subdivisions of land hereafter submitted for approval to the
Planning Commission shall in all respects fully comply with the regulations
hereinafter set forth in this chapter.
   (C)   It is the purpose of this chapter to make certain regulations and
requirements for the platting of land within the city, pursuant to the
authority contained in the state statutes, which regulations the Lead City
Commission deems necessary to create conditions favorable to health, safety,
convenience and prosperity.
(Prior Code, § 4-700)
§ 154.02  JURISDICTION.
   The regulations herein governing plats and the subdivision of land shall
apply within the corporate limits of the city and the unincorporated area
within three miles of its limits, provided that where a municipality lies less
than six miles from the limits of the city, these regulations shall apply to
the boundaries shown on the co-jurisdictional map.
(Prior Code, § 4-701)
§ 154.03  APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   Any plat hereafter made for each subdivision or each part thereof lying
within the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be prepared, presented for
approval and recorded as herein prescribed. The regulations contained herein
shall apply to the subdivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots (regardless of how described), tracts or other divisions of land for
the purpose of sale or building development, whether immediate or future,
including the resubdivision or replatting of land or lots.
(Prior Code, § 4-702)
§ 154.04  APPROVALS NECESSARY FOR ACCEPTANCE OF SUBDIVISION PLATS.
   Before any plat shall be recorded or be of any validity, it shall have been
approved by the Planning Commission and by the Lead City Commission as having
fulfilled the requirements of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-703)
§ 154.05  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY.  A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to
abutting property.
   BLOCK.  An area of land within a subdivision entirely bounded by streets, or
by streets and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision, or a
combination of the above with a river or lake.
   BUILDING PERMIT.  The building permit required under the Building Code of
the city.
   CITY.  The City of Lead.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.  The group of maps, charts and texts that make up the
Comprehensive Guide Plan of the city.
   DESIGN STANDARDS.  The specifications to land owners or subdividers for the
preparation of plats, both preliminary and final, indicating, among other
things, the optimum, minimum or maximum dimensions of items such as rights-of-
way, blocks and easements.
   EASEMENT.  A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land for
the purpose of construction and maintaining utilities, including, but not
limited to, sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines,
television and frequency modulation transmission lines, storm sewer or storm
drainage ways, gas lines and roadways.
   EASEMENT, SLOPE.  A grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land
for the purpose of constructing a slope or grade transition from the existing
property grade to a new street grade.
   FINAL FLAT.  A drawing or map of a subdivision, meeting all the requirements
of the city and in a form as required by the county for purposes of recording.
   INTERSECTION, STREET.  The point of crossing or meeting of two or more
streets.
   LAND USE COVENANT.  The declaration by the landowner as to the use of his or
her property.
   LEAD CITY COMMISSION.  The governing body of the city.
   LOT.  A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for
building development or for transfer of ownership.
   OWNER.  The plural as well as the singular, and, where appropriate, shall
include a natural person, partnership, firm, association, public or quasi-
public corporation, private corporation or a combination of any of them.
   PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS.  Public lands and open space in the city dedicated or
reserved for recreational purposes.
   PERCENTAGE OF GRADE.  The rise or fall of a slope in feet and tenths of a
foot for each 100 feet of horizontal distance. The center line of a street
shall be used to determine the street rise of grade.
   PEDESTRIAN WAY.  A public or private right-of-way across a block or within a
block to provide access, to be used by pedestrians and which may be used for
the installation of utility lines.
   PLANNING COMMISSION.  The Planning Commission of the city.
   PRELIMINARY PLAT.  A tentative drawing or map of a proposed subdivision
meeting requirements herein enumerated.
   PROTECTIVE COVENANTS.  Contracts made between private parties as to the
manner in which land may be used, with the view to protecting and preserving
the physical and economic integrity of any given area.
   STREET.  A public right-of-way affording primary access by pedestrians and
vehicles to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, place or however
otherwise designated.
   STREETS, COLLECTORS.  Streets that carry traffic from minor streets to the
major system of thoroughfares and highways, including the principal entrance
streets of residential districts as shown on the Comprehensive Plan.
   STREETS, CUL-DE-SAC.  Minor streets with only one outlet and having an
appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement.
   STREETS, MARGINAL ACCESS.  Minor streets which are parallel and adjacent to
thoroughfares and highways, and which provide access to abutting properties and
protection from through traffic.
   STREETS, MINOR.  Streets which are used primarily for access to abutting
properties.
   STREETS, PRIVATE.  Private rights-of-way affording access by pedestrians and
vehicles which are under individual rather than municipal control.
   STREETS, THOROUGHFARES.  Arterial streets which are used primarily for heavy
traffic, and serving as arterial traffic ways between the various districts of
the community as shown on the Comprehensive Plan.
   STREET WIDTH.  The shortest distance between lines of lots delineating the
street right-of-way.
   SUBDIVISION.  A described tract of land which is to be or has been divided
into two or more lots or parcels, regardless of how described, for the purpose
of transfer of ownership or building development, or, if a new street is
involved, any division of a parcel of land. The term includes resubdivision,
and where it is appropriate to the context, relates either to the process of
subdividing or to the land subdivided.
   TANGENT.  A straight line departing from a curve which is perpendicular to
the radius of that curve.
   TRACT.  A parcel of land intended for division or development of a
subdivision.
   U.S.G.S. DATUM.  United States Geodetic Survey Datum.
   VERTICAL CURVE.  The surface curvature on a street center line located
between lines of different percentage of grades.
(Prior Code, § 4-704)
SUBDIVISION PLATS
§ 154.15  PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   Before dividing any tract of land into two or more lots or parcels, the
following procedure shall be followed.
(Prior Code, § 4-800)
§ 154.16  FINAL PLAT.
   After the preliminary plat has been approved, and the subdivider determines
to proceed to secure approval of all or a part thereof as a final plat, the
final plat shall be submitted as follows:
   (A)   Submittal to Planning Commission:
      (1)   The final plat shall be submitted to the Community Development
Officer at least ten days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which the
same shall be considered. The Community Development Officer shall prepare a
report thereon setting out whether or not the final plat is in substantial
agreement with the preliminary plat, and if not, in which particulars it varies
therefrom, and whether or not it conforms to the requirements of state law and
city ordinances and that the final plat meets all the conditions attached to
the final approval of the preliminary plat;
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall consider the final plat at the
meeting at which it is submitted, and may consider it at special or adjourned
meetings as the Planning Commission shall determine are necessary;
      (3)   The Planning Commission shall have the authority to recommend
approval or disapproval of the final plat. If it shall determine that it cannot
approve it unless certain conditions are attached, it shall by motion set forth
the conditions for approval and forthwith send a copy of the conditions to the
subdivider. All further action on the plat shall be suspended until the
subdivider shall respond thereto. Provided there is no further action taken by
the subdivider within a period of three months from the date of the adoption of
the conditions, the plat shall be deemed to be disapproved;
      (4)   Final action by motion on the final plat shall be communicated
forthwith to the subdivider by the Secretary of the Planning Commission, and a
copy of the motion shall be sent to the Lead City Commission, together with the
plat and other data as the Planning Commission shall determine; and
      (5)   If the Planning Commission approves the final plat, the Chairperson
and the Secretary shall sign the same.
   (B)   Submittal to the Lead City Commission:
      (1)   Upon the adoption of the motion of approval or disapproval by the
Planning Commission, the final plat shall come before the Lead City Commission
for review;
      (2)   The Lead City Commission shall have the authority to hold hearings
on the final plat as it shall determine and upon notice as it shall provide;
      (3)   If the Lead City Commission is not satisfied with the final plat as
presented, it may: disapprove the same; set forth conditions and requirements
as it shall require to be fulfilled before the same is approved; or refer the
same to the Planning Commission for further action as it shall determine. Upon
the referral, the Planning Commission shall act thereon at the next meeting and
report back to the Lead City Commission no later than 45 days after the action
by the Lead City Commission;
      (4)   If the Lead City Commission shall determine to accept the plat, it
shall by resolution so determine, and the resolution shall provide for the
acceptance of all streets, alleys, easements or other public ways, parks and
other spaces dedicated to public purposes; and
      (5)   The action of the Lead City Commission finally determining the
matter shall be communicated by the City Finance Officer to the subdivider, and
if the plat be disapproved, the City Finance Officer shall set forth the
reasons given by the Lead City Commission for that determination.
(Prior Code, § 4-801)
§ 154.17  FILING OF PRELIMINARY PLATS.
   The owner or subdivider shall prepare and submit a preliminary plat,
together with any necessary supplemental information. Three copies of a
preliminary plat of any proposed subdivision shall be filed with the Community
Development Officer. Every preliminary plat shall contain the required data set
forth in this section.
(Prior Code, § 4-802)
§ 154.18  REQUIRED DATA REGARDING IDENTIFICATION AND DESCRIPTION OF PRELIMINARY
PLAT.
   (A)   Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall not duplicate the name
of any plat heretofore recorded in the county;
   (B)   Location by section, township and range or by other legal description;
   (C)   Names and addresses of the owner and a subdivider having control of
the lands included in the preliminary plat, the designer of the plat and the
surveyor;
   (D)   Graphic scale, not less than one inch to 200 feet;
   (E)   North point; and
   (F)   Date of preparation.
(Prior Code, § 4-803)
§ 154.19  EXISTING CONDITIONS; REQUIRED DATA.
   (A)   Boundary line survey, including measured distances and angles, which
shall close by latitude and departure with an error of closure not exceeding
one foot in 7,500 feet;
   (B)    Total acreage in the preliminary plat computed to one-tenth of an
acre;
   (C)   Location and names of existing or platted streets or other public
ways, parks and other public open spaces, permanent buildings and structures,
easements and section and corporate lines within the tract and to a distance of
100 feet beyond the tract;
   (D)   If the proposed subdivision is a rearrangement or a replat of any
former plat, the lot and block arrangement of the original plat along with its
original names shall be indicated by dotted or dashed lines. Also any revised
or vacated roadways of the original plat shall be so indicated;
   (E)   Location and size of existing paved streets, railroads, sewer, water
mains, gravel pits, culverts or other underground facilities within the tract
and to a distance of 100 feet beyond the tract. Also data such as grades,
invert elevations and location of catch basins, manholes and hydrants;
   (F)   Boundary lines of adjoining platted or unplatted land within 100 feet
of the tract; and
   (G)   Complete topographic map with water courses, marshes, rock outcrops
and other significant features all superimposed on at least one print of the
preliminary plat.
      (1)   United States Geodetic Survey datum shall be used for all
topographic mapping.
      (2)   High water elevation and date thereof if parts of plat are wet or
have been wet.
      (3)   In the case of a subdivision where no new street is involved, the
required topographic map may be waived it if is deemed unnecessary by the
Community Development Officer and the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 4-804)
§ 154.20  REQUIRED DATA REGARDING PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT DESIGN FEATURES ON THE
PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   Layout of proposed streets, showing right-of-way widths and proposed
names of streets. The name of any street similar to or heretofore used in the
city shall not be permitted unless the proposed street is an extension of an
already named street, in which event the name shall be used. All street names
shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Commission;
   (B)   Locations and widths of alleys, pedestrian ways and utility easements;
   (C)   Proposed center line grades of all new streets and alleys, if any, and
a complete set of profiles showing both existing and proposed grade lines;
   (D)   Location, size and approximate gradient of sewer lines;
   (E)   Layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of lots and the number or
letter of each block;
   (F)   Location and size of proposed parks, playgrounds, churches or school
sites or other special uses of land to be considered for dedication to public
use, or to be reserved by deed or covenant for the use of all property owners
in the subdivision and any conditions of the dedication or reservation; and
   (G)   Vicinity sketch at a legible scale, to show the relation of the plat
to its surroundings, and surrounding land use districts.
(Prior Code, § 4-805)
§ 154.21  FILING OF FINAL PLATS.
   The owner or subdivider shall submit a final plat together with any
necessary supplementary information. The original and four copies of the final
plat shall be submitted; one of the four copies shall be on a reproducible
medium and will be retained by the Community Development Officer.
(Prior Code, § 4-806)
§ 154.22  CONTENTS OF THE FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   The final plat prepared for recording purposes shall be prepared in
accordance with provisions of state statutes and applicable city and county
regulations.
   (B)   The name of subdivision shall not duplicate or too closely approximate
the name of any existing subdivision.
   (C)   The location by section, township, range or mineral survey number,
county and state shall include descriptive boundaries of the subdivision, based
on an accurate traverse, giving angular and linear dimensions which must be
mathematically close. The allowable error of closure on any portion of a final
plat shall be one foot in 7,500 feet.
   (D)   The location of monuments shall be shown and described on the final
plat. Locations of the monuments shall be shown in reference to existing
official monuments or the nearest established street lines, including true
angles and distances to the reference points or monuments. Permanent markers
shall be placed at each corner of every block or portion of a block, at points
of curvature and points of tangency on street lines, and at each angle point on
the boundary of the subdivision. A permanent marker shall be deemed to be a
steel rod or pipe, one-half-inch or larger in diameter, extending at least
three feet below the finished grade. In situations where conditions prohibit
the placing of markers in the locations prescribed above, offset markers shall
be shown on the final plat, together with accurate interior angles, bearings
and distances.
   (E)   Permanent monuments shall be placed at all quarter section points
within the subdivision or on its perimeter.
   (F)   Locations of lots, streets, public highways, alleys, parks and other
features with accurate dimensions in feet and decimals of feet, with the length
of radii and/or arcs of all cures, and with all other information necessary to
reproduce the plat on the ground. Dimensions shall be shown from all angle
points and points of curve to lot line.
   (G)   Boundary lines and description of boundary lines of any areas other
than streets and alleys which are to be dedicated or reserved for public use
shall be included.
   (H)   Lots shall be numbered clearly. If blocks are to be numbered or
lettered, these shall be shown clearly in the center of the block.
   (I)   The name and address of developer and surveyor making the plat shall
be included.
   (J)   Scale of plat (the scale to be shown graphically and in feet per
inch), date and north point shall be included.
   (K)   A statement dedicating all easements shall be included as follows:
Easements for installation and maintenance of utilities and drainage facilities
are reserved over, under and along the strips marked "utility easements".
   (L)   Statement dedicating all streets, alleys and other public areas not
previously dedicated shall be included as follows: streets, alleys and other
public areas shown on this plat and not heretofore dedicated to public use are
hereby so dedicated.
(Prior Code, § 4-807)
§ 154.23  CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED ON FINAL PLATS.
   (A)   Notarized certification by owner, and by any mortgage holder of
record, of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of streets and other
public areas.
   (B)   Notarized certification by a registered land surveyor to the effect
that the plat represents a survey made by him or her and that monuments and
markers shown therein exist as located and that all dimensions and geodetic
details are correct.
   (C)   Certification showing that all taxes and special assessments due on
the property have been paid in full.
   (D)   Space for certificates of approval to be filled with the signatures of
the Chairperson of the Planning Commission, the Mayor, City Finance Officer and
Community Development Officer.
      (1)   The form of approval by the Planning Commission is as follows:
Approved by the Planning Commission of the City of Lead this ______ day of
__________, 19___.
Signed: _____________________
      Chairman
Attest: ______________________
      Secretary
      (2)   The form of approval by the Lead City Commission is as follows:
Approved by the City of Lead, South Dakota, this _______ day of ___________,
19____.
Signed: ________________________
      Mayor
Attest: ________________________
      City Finance Officer
      (3)   The form of approval by the Community Development Officer is as
follows:
Approved by the Community Development Officer, City of Lead, South Dakota, this
______ day of _______________ , 19____.
Signed: ____________________________
      (4)   The form for approval by county authorities is as required by
statute.
(Prior Code, § 4-808)
§ 154.24  SUPPLEMENTARY DOCUMENTS AND INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   A complete set of street profiles showing grade lines as constructed.
   (B)   Copies of any private restrictions affecting the subdivision or any
part thereof.
(Prior Code, § 4-809)
DESIGN STANDARDS OF SUBDIVISIONS
§ 154.35  BLOCKS.
   (A)   Block length.
      (1)   In general, intersecting streets, determining block length, shall
be provided at intervals as to serve cross-traffic adequately and to meet
existing streets.
      (2)   Where no existing plats control, the blocks in residential
subdivisions shall normally not exceed 1,000 feet in length, except where
topography or other conditions justify a departure from this maximum.
      (3)   In blocks longer than 800 feet, pedestrian ways and/or easements
through the block may be required.
      (4)   The width and location of the pedestrian ways shall be subject to
the approval of the Community Development Officer and the Planning Commission.
      (5)   Blocks for business or industrial uses should normally not exceed
600 feet in length.
   (B)   Block width. The width of the block shall normally be sufficient to
allow two tiers of lots of appropriate depth. Blocks intended for business or
industrial use shall be of a width as to be considered most suitable for their
respective use, including adequate space for off-street parking and deliveries.
(Prior Code, § 4-900)
§ 154.36  STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   The arrangement of thoroughfares and collector streets shall conform
as nearly as possible to the City Comprehensive Plan.
      (1)   Except for cul-de-sacs, streets normally shall connect with streets
already dedicated in adjoining or adjacent subdivisions, or provide for future
connections to adjoining unsubdivided tracts, or shall be a reasonable
projection of streets in the nearest subdivided tracts.
      (2)   The arrangement of thoroughfares and collector streets shall be
considered in their relation to the reasonable circulation of traffic, to
topographic conditions, to run-off storm water, to public convenience and
safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed use of the area to be
served.
   (B)   Minor streets should be so planned as to discourage their use by non-
local traffic. Dead-end streets are prohibited, but cul-de-sacs will be
permitted where topography or other conditions justify their use. Cul-de-sacs
shall normally not be longer than 500 feet, including a terminal turn-around
which shall be provided at the closed end, with a right-of-way radius of not
less than 70 feet.
   (C)   Where the plat to be submitted includes only part of the tract owned
or intended for development by the subdivider, a tentative plan of a proposed
future street system for the unsubdivided portion shall be prepared and
submitted by the subdivider.
   (D)   When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal building lots or
parcels, the lots or parcels shall be so arranged as to permit the logical
location and openings of future streets and appropriate resubdivision, with
provision for adequate utility connection for the resubdivision.
   (E)   Under normal conditions, streets shall be laid out so as to intersect
as nearly as possible at right angles, except where topography or other
conditions justify variations. The minimum angle of intersection of streets
shall be 80 degrees. Street intersection jogs with an offset of less than 125
feet shall be avoided.
   (F)   Wherever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to the
right-of-way of a limited access, U.S. or state highway or thoroughfare,
provision may be made for a marginal access street approximately parallel and
adjacent to the boundary of the right-of-way, or for a street at a distance
suitable for the appropriate use of land between the street and right-of-way.
The distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance
required for approach connections to future grade separations, grade crossing
or for lot depths.
   (G)   Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts,
except that this requirement may be waived where other definite and assured
provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading and
parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed.
      (1)   Except where justified by special conditions, such as the
continuation of an existing alley in the same block, alleys will not be
approved in residential districts.
      (2)   Alleys, where provided, shall not be less than 16 feet wide for
residential alleys and not less than 25 feet for commercial and industrial
alleys.
      (3)   Dead-end alleys shall not be permitted, except that this
requirement may be waived where an adequate turn-around is provided.
   (H)   Dedication of half streets will not be approved, except where it is
essential to the reasonable development of the subdivisions and in conformity
with the other requirements of these regulations, where it is found that it
will be practical to require the dedication of the other half when the
adjoining property is subdivided, or where it becomes necessary to acquire the
remaining half by condemnation so it may be improved in the public interest.
   (I)   For all public ways hereafter dedicated and accepted, the minimum
right-of-way widths for streets and thoroughfares shall be as shown in the
Comprehensive Plan for the city, and where not shown therein, the minimum
rights of way width for streets, thoroughfares, alleys or pedestrian ways
included in any subdivision shall not be less than the minimum dimensions for
each classification as follows:
 
Thoroughfare                66 feet
Collector street            60 feet
Minor street                60 feet
Marginal access street      50 feet
Residential alley           16 feet
Industrial commercial alley 25 feet
Pedestrian way              10 feet
Where existing or anticipated traffic on thoroughfares warrants greater widths
of right-of-way, these shall be required.
 
      (1)   Street grades: the grades in all streets, thoroughfares, collector
streets, minor streets and alleys in any subdivision shall not be greater than
the maximum grades for each classification as follows:
 
Thoroughfare     4%
Collector street 5%
Minor street     8%
Alley            8%
Any grades greater than the aforementioned shall be subject to review by the
Community Development Officer.
In addition, there shall be a minimum grade on all streets and thoroughfares
of not less than five-tenths of 1%.
 
      (2)   Street alignment: the horizontal and vertical alignment standards
on all streets shall be as follows:
         (a)   Horizontal; radii of center line:
 
Thoroughfare     500 feet minimum
Collector street 400 feet minimum
Minor street     150 feet minimum
There shall be a tangent between all reversed curves of a length in relation
to the radii of the curves so as to provide for a smooth flow of traffic.
 
         (b)   Vertical; all changes in street grades shall be connected by
vertical parabolic curves of a length as follows:
 
Thoroughfare                     30 times the algebraic difference in the
                                 percentage of grade of the two adjacent slopes
Collector street or minor street 20 times the algebraic difference in the
                                 percentage of grade of the two adjacent slopes
 
      (3)   All proposed streets shall be offered for dedication as public
streets. No private streets shall be permitted, except as set forth in other
ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 4-901)
§ 154.37  LOTS.
   (A)   There shall be no minimum lot size, and no minimum lot width; however
no structure or group of structures shall be erected within ten feet of any
other structure or group of structures not within the same lot, or be erected
within five feet of a public street or any property line.
   (B)   For structures within the same lot, occupancies requiring greater
separation distances, and for variances, the standards set forth in the
currently adopted U.B.C. Chapter 5 and Table 5-A shall be used as minimums. For
the purpose of this section, existing retaining walls may be repaired, or
replaced with a new wall of similar dimensions, and need not meet the setback
requirement to property lines unless, in doing so, a traffic or pedestrian
safety hazard is created at the street, and need not meet the setback
requirements to other structures as long as any replacement wall is constructed
of noncombustible material.
   (C)   New retaining walls over four feet high measured from the bottom of
the footing to the top of the wall, are considered structures and must meet the
setback requirement to other structures and property lines.
(Prior Code, § 4-902)  (Ord. 906-98, passed 2-9-1998)
§ 154.38  EASEMENTS.
   (A)   An easement for utilities, at least six feet wide, shall be provided
along each side of a rear line of lots and along any other lot line as may be
deemed necessary to form a continuous right-of-way at least 12 feet in width.
   (B)   If necessary for the extension of main water or sewer lines or similar
utilities, easements of greater width may be required along lot lines or across
lots.
   (C)   Utility easements shall connect with easements established in
adjoining properties. These easements, when approved, shall not thereafter be
changed without the approval of the Lead City Commission by resolution, upon
the recommendation of the Planning Commission.
   (D)   Additional easements for pole guys should be provided at the outside
of turns. Where possible, lot lines shall be arranged to bisect the exterior
angle so that pole guys will fall along side lot lines.
   (E)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, a drainage way, a
channel or a stream, provision must be made for adequate storm water drainage.
A storm water easement, drainage right-of-way or park dedication (at the
discretion of the Planning Commission) conforming substantially with the lines
of the water courses must be provided. Any further width or construction, or
both, as will be adequate for the storm water drainage of the area shall also
be provided. The width of the easements shall be determined by the Community
Development Officer.
(Prior Code, § 4-903)
§ 154.39  PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES.
   (A)   In subdividing land or resubdividing an existing plat, due
consideration shall be given by the subdivider to the dedication or reservation
of suitable sites for schools, parks, playgrounds, conservation areas or other
public or semipublic recreational areas or open spaces.
   (B)   Areas so dedicated or reserved shall conform as nearly as possible to
the Comprehensive Plan.
   (C)   All areas to be reserved for or dedicated to public use shall be
indicated on the preliminary plat in order that it may be determined when and
in what manner those areas will be dedicated to or acquired by the appropriate
agency.
(Prior Code, § 4-904)
BASIC IMPROVEMENTS TO SUBDIVISION; VARIANCES
§ 154.50  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Approval.
      (1)   Before a final plat may be approved by the Lead City Commission,
the owner shall execute and submit to the Lead City Commission an agreement,
(which shall be binding on his or her or their, heirs, personal representatives
and assigns) that he or she shall cause no private construction on the land
except with approval of the Community Development Officer, until all
improvements required under this chapter have been petitioned for, arranged for
or have been constructed.
      (2)   No final plat shall be approved by the Lead City Commission without
first receiving a report from the Community Development Officer certifying that
the improvements described herein, together with the agreement and documents
required herein, will meet the minimum requirements of all applicable
ordinances.
      (3)   A certified copy of the plat restrictions shall be filed with the
Clerk and Register of Deeds which shall include a provision that, in all
instruments of sale or conveyance given before all street improvements have
been made the grantee shall agree to and approve the improvements and the
assessment of their cost.
   (B)   City financing. Upon recommendation of the Community Development
Officer and with the approval of the Lead City Commission, any or all of the
required improvements may be financed and assessed by the city pursuant to
state statutes. Length of assessment period and rate of interest shall be as
determined by the Lead City Commission.
   (C)   Financing by developer.
      (1)   If deemed advisable and to be in the best interests of the city,
the Lead City Commission may require the developer to finance and pay for any
or all improvements.
      (2)   Prior to the making of the required improvements, the owner or
subdivider shall deposit with the City Finance Officer an amount equal to the
Community Development Officer's estimated cost of any or all the improvements
which are to be financed by the developer, either in cash or an indemnity bond,
with sureties to the satisfaction of the city, conditioned upon the payment of
all construction costs incurred by the city in making of the improvements and
all expense incurred by the city for engineering and legal fees and other
expense in connection with the making of the improvements.
      (3)   All improvements shall be contracted through the city.
(Prior Code, § 4-1000)
§ 154.51  IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The following improvements shall be constructed as provided for in
this section.
   (B)   Programming of improvements shall be approved by the Community
Development Officer as follows.
      (1)   City obligations. The city will construct, furnish and install at
city expense the following improvements according to city specifications.
Furnishing of these improvements shall be commensurate with available city
funds for such work and according to programs and priorities as established by
the Lead City Commission. If the developer would desire any of these
improvements sooner than the city would be able to furnish them, then the costs
of the following improvements shall be paid for by the developer:
         (a)   Storm sewer. Storm sewer mains will be constructed by the city
as funds are available. Connection shall be made at the boundary of the
subdivision, if available, or to some other approved discharge outlet. The
developer shall secure or provide the necessary easements or discharge permits.
This requirement shall not prevent the city from acquiring necessary easements
by eminent domain. Any costs for the easements shall be borne by the developer.
         (b)   Street lighting. Street lighting shall be constructed by the
city, preferably after curb and gutter have been installed. If additional or
other type of lighting is desired by the developer, he or she shall pay the
increased cost thereof.
         (c)   Signs. Street name signs and traffic control signs shall be
installed by the city.
      (2)   Obligation of developer. The developer shall pay the proportionate
amount of the following improvements on or for his or her subdivision or
development. Financing shall be according to this section.
         (a)   Site grading. Necessary site grading shall be accomplished by
the subdivider.
         (b)   Street grading. Street grading for the full width of right-of-
way shall be accomplished by the subdivider. If no site grading is to be
accomplished, the street grading will be included with subsequent street
improvements. Street grading shall precede any underground work. Where street
grading is not to be immediately followed by street paving, the developer may
be required to provide permanent grade markers at the right-of-way line of all
streets of a standard approved by the Community Development Officer.
         (c)   Street improvements. Street improvements, including base, curb
and gutter, boulevard sodding, inlets and leads, and paving shall be
constructed according to standard city specifications or as approved by the
Community Development Officer. All required underground work shall have
preceded any permanent street improvements. Any improvements on a county road
shall be approved by the Community Development Officer.
         (d)   Temporary construction. Temporary construction may be required,
at the discretion of the Community Development Officer for just cause on any
street, streets or portion thereof. Reconstruction or alteration in any way of
existing streets affected by the plat or improvements there shall be subject to
the approval of the Community Development Officer. All costs therein incurred,
for either temporary access or reconstruction, shall be borne by the owner or
subdivider. Half streets, if accepted, shall be improved as directed by the
Community Development Officer.
         (e)   Sanitary sewer. Where city sewer is, or will be available at the
boundary of the subdivision, the sewer shall be constructed according to city
specifications. The cost of any required pumping stations deemed necessary by
the Community Development Officer shall be assessed against the benefitting
property. Where it is neither practical nor economical for the city to extend
city sewer, private sewage disposal facilities shall be constructed according
to city and state specifications. Consideration shall be given to future
availability of city sewer in the installations. The information shall be
recorded on the plat and in each deed so affected.
         (f)   Water main. Where municipal water supply is, or will be,
available at the boundary of the subdivision, the water mains shall be
constructed according to city specifications. Main sizing shall be by the
Community Development Officer. All required hydrants and valves are to be
included in the construction. Where it is neither practical nor economical for
the city or its supplier to extend the municipal water supply, other private
water supplies shall be constructed according to city and state specifications.
         (g)   Trees. Boulevard trees, if desired, shall be installed by the
owner or developer in accordance with Park Department standards.
(Prior Code, § 4-1001)
§ 154.52  VARIANCES.
   (A)   General conditions.
      (1)   The Planning Commission may recommend a variance from the
provisions of this chapter when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from
strict compliance.
      (2)   In granting any variance, the Planning Commission shall prescribe
only conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable for the public
interest.
      (3)   In making its findings, as required herein below, the Planning
Commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land
and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside
or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of the proposed
subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity.
      (4)   (a)   No variance shall be granted unless the Planning Commission
finds:
            1.   That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting
the property, such that the strict application of the provisions of this
chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his or her land;
            2.   That the variance is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner;
            3.   That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which the
property is situated.
         (b)   Variances shall not be granted to allow a use otherwise excluded
from the particular district in which requested. See
Chapter 153 for provisions on conditional use permits.
(Prior Code, § 4-1100)
   (B)   Applications required.
      (1)   Applications for any variance shall be submitted in writing by the
subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for consideration by
the Planning Commission, stating fully and clearly all facts relied upon by the
petitioner and shall be supplemented with maps, plans or other additional data
which may aid the Planning Commission in the analysis of the proposed project.
The plans for the development shall include covenants, restrictions or other
legal provisions necessary to guarantee the full achievement of the plan.
      (2)   All fees charged for variances will be set by resolution of the
Lead City Commission.
(Prior Code, § 4-1101)
   (C)   Time limit; variances. Anyone being granted a variance, shall have 90
days within which to obtain a building permit. If circumstances beyond the
applicant's control should prohibit compliance, the applicant may appear before
Planning and Zoning and request an extension. If the building permit is not
obtained within the time limit, the variance shall be revoked.
(Ord. 855-93, passed 3-29-1992)
(Ord. 866-93, passed 11-15-1993; Ord. 893-97, passed 5-5-1997)
COMPLIANCE
§ 154.65  BUILDING PERMITS.
   No building permit shall be issued by the city with respect to the land or
to any lot in a subdivision, as defined herein, until the plat thereof shall
have been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds.
(Prior Code, § 4-1200)
§ 154.66  SALE OF LOTS UNRECORDED PLATS.
   It shall be unlawful to sell, trade or otherwise convey or offer to sell,
trade or otherwise convey any lot or parcel of land as a part of, or in
conformity with any plan, plat or replat of any subdivision under the
jurisdiction of this chapter unless the plan, plat or replat shall have first
been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of the county.
(Prior Code, § 4-1201)  Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.67  MISREPRESENTATIONS AS TO CONSTRUCTION, SUPERVISION OR INSPECTION OF
IMPROVEMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning an addition
or subdivision of land within the city to represent that any improvement upon
any of the streets, alleys or avenues of the addition or subdivision or any
sewer in the addition or subdivision has been constructed according to the
plans and specifications approved by the Lead City Commission or has been
supervised or inspected by the city, when the improvements have not been so
constructed, supervised or inspected.
(Prior Code, § 4-1202)  Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever, being the owner or agent of the owner of the land located
within platting jurisdiction of any municipality as described in SDCL § 11-6-
26, knowingly or with intent to defraud, transfers or sells or agrees to sell
or negotiates to sell the land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use
of a subdivision of the land before the plat has been approved by the Lead City
Commission and recorded in the office of the Register of Deed, shall forfeit
and pay a penalty of not more than $100 for each lot so transferred or sold or
agreed or negotiated to be sold; and the description by metes and bounds in the
instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or
transferring shall not exempt the transaction from the penalties. The
municipality may enjoin the transfer or sale or agreement by action for
injunction or may recover the penalty by civil action.
   (B)   When any map, plan, plat or replat is tendered for filing in the
office of the Register of Deeds, it shall be the duty of any like officer to
determine whether the proposed map, plan, plat or replat is or is not subject
to the provisions of this chapter and whether the endorsements required by this
chapter appear thereon, and no Register of Deeds or Deputy shall accept for
record any like map, plan, plat or replat unless and until the same shall have
been approved by the Lead City Commission of the municipality as required by
SDCL § 11-6-26.
(Prior Code, § 4-1203)
CHAPTER 155:  ZONING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Purpose
   
155.002   Intent
   
155.003   Definitions
Districts Established
   
155.020   Districts designated
Land Use Covenants
   
155.030   Required
   
155.031   Conforming covenants
   
155.032   Nonconforming covenants
   
155.033   Filing required
   
155.034   Nonconforming uses; pre-existing
   
155.035   Term
   
155.036   Expiration; automatic renewal
   
155.037   Hardship; new covenant
   
155.038   Condemnation
District Regulations
   
155.050   Lot standards
   
155.051   Sanitation standards
   
155.052   Natural surroundings and topography
   
155.053   Commercial and industrial performance standards
   
155.054   Park or Forest District
   
155.055   Residential District
   
155.056   Commercial Districts
   
155.057   Industrial District
   
155.058   Special Use District
Sign Regulations
   
155.070   Purpose
   
155.071   Definitions
   
155.072   Jurisdiction
   
155.073   Permit required
   
155.074   General regulations
   
155.075   Residential districts
   
155.076   Commercial districts
   
155.077   Designated historic districts
   
155.078   Exemptions
   
155.079   Maintenance
   
155.080   Enforcement
Wayfinding
   
155.090   Definitions
   
155.091   Eligible destinations
   
155.092   Destination criteria
   
155.093   Sign construction
   
155.094   Sign location
   
155.095   Sign appearance
   
155.096   Duplication of federal and state destination signage prohibited
   
155.097   Additional requirements 
Manufactured Housing
   
155.100   Permitted; exceptions
   
155.101   Requirements
   
155.102   Permits
   
155.103   Variances
Administration
   
155.200   Submittals
   
155.201   Zoning change request; notice of
   
155.202   Hearing; recommendation by Planning and Zoning Commission
   
155.203   Decision by Lead City Commission
   
155.204   Appeals
   
155.205   Fee
 
   
155.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001  PURPOSE.
   To promote the general welfare of the population through sound policies of
land development and land management and to preserve natural beauty and
ecological balance.  To this end, this chapter will prevent overcrowding of the
land with population and structures and will provide for adequate sanitation, 
transportation and other community facilities.
(Prior Code, § 4-100)
§ 155.002  INTENT.
   To place the power and responsibility for the use of land in the hands of
the proper owner  contingent upon the compatibility of surrounding uses and the
general land use plan.
(Prior Code, § 4-101)
§ 155.003  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.  The word
"shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive.  The words "used" or
"occupied" include the words intended, designed or arranged to be used cr
occupied.  The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel".
   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE.  A use or structure on the same lot with, and of
a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or
structure.
   BUILDING.  Includes the word "structure" and is a structure which is
entirely separated from any other structure by space or by walls  in which
there are no communicating doors or windows or similar openings.
   DWELLING, MOBILE HOME.  A detached residential dwelling unit designed  for
transportation  after fabrication on streets or highways on its own wheels or
on flatbed or other trailers,  and arriving  at the site where it is to be
occupied as a dwelling complete and ready for occupancy except for minor  and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on jacks or other
temporary or permanent  foundations, corrections to utilities, and the like.
When placed on a permanent foundation, it shall be considered a dwelling.  A
travel trailer is not to be considered as a mobile home.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY.  A residential building designed for or occupied
by  three or more families, with the number of families in residence not
exceeding the number of dwelling units provided.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY.  A detached residential dwelling unit  other than a
mobile home, designed for and occupied by one family only.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.  A detached residential building containing two
dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than two families.
   DWELLING UNIT.  One room, or rooms, connected together and constituting a
separate independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy; rental or
lease on a weekly,  monthly or longer basis; physically separated from any
other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same structure; and
containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities.
   FAMILY.  One or more individuals living, sleeping, cooking and eating on the
premises as a single housekeeping unit; but it shall not include a group of
more than six individuals not related by blood or marriage.
   FEED LOT.  A parcel of land whereon there is contained an operation for
feeding or raising animals in excess of ten head per acre and in excess of 500
head per parcel of land.
   FILLING STATION.  Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease,
batteries, tires and automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at
retail. This definition does not include auto salvage operations.
   GARAGE-PRIVATE.  A detached or attached accessory building or a carport,
which is used primarily for storing passenger vehicles, trailers, or one
straight truck not to exceed 26,000 GVW and truck tractors and is at least 180
square feet or more of the floor area.
   JUNK YARD.  An area of land, with or without a building, used for or
occupied by a deposit, and/or a collect ion; or an area of land used for the
storage, outside of a  completely enclosed building,  of used and/or discarded
materials such as waste paper, rags, scrap metal, used building materials,
house furnishings, machinery, vehicles, or parts thereof, with or without  the
dismantling, processing,  salvage, sale or other use or disposition of the
same.
   LAND USE COVENANT.  The declaration by the  land owner as to the use of his
or her property.
   LOT.  A plot or parcel of ground under one ownership.
   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A factory-built structure that is manufactured or
constructed under the authority of 42 USC § 5401 and is to be used as a place
for human habitation, but which is not constructed or equipped with a permanent
hitch or other device allowing it to be moved to a permanent site, and which
does not have permanently attached to its body or frame, any wheels or axles. 
A mobile home is not a MANUFACTURED HOME.
   MOBILE HOME.  A transportable, factory-built home, designed to be used as a
year-round residential dwelling and built prior to enactment of the Federal
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which
became effective June  15, 1976.
   MOBILE HOME/MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.  A parcel of land which is designed,
maintained, intended or used for the purpose of supplying standard mobile home/
manufactured home lots.  No parcel of land shall contain less than one acre
with no less than four home spaces available at the time of the first
occupancy.
   MODULAR HOME.  Factory-built housing certified by the Building Inspector as
meeting the standards established by the currently adopted Uniform Building
Code. Once certified, such housing will for zoning and building code
enforcement, be treated as a single family dwelling in those areas which do not
specifically exclude them.
   UTILITY/STORAGE/GARDEN SHED.  A detached accessory building which is used
primarily for private storage and has 179 square feet or less of floor area.
(Prior Code, § 4-200)  (Ord. 860-93, passed 8-2-1993)
DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
§ 155.020  DISTRICTS DESIGNATED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the city of is hereby divided into the
following districts:
   (A)   Park or Forest District (Open Space). The intent of this district is
to provide the city with an area to b e preserve a for its natural beauty,
resources and open character.
   (B)   Residential District.  A district to provide for residential
neighborhoods of varying population density including parks for mobile homes.
   (C)   Commercial District.  This district is for all commercial uses
including services and wholesale and retail trade.
   (D)   Industrial District.  Areas for manufacturing uses, warehousing and
open storage, mining and refining processes.
   (E)   Special Use District. This district is for all public and semi-public
land uses and for all private land uses which are not permitted under the four
specific districts.
(Prior Code, § 4-300)
LAND USE COVENANTS
§ 155.030  REQUIRED.
   Restrictions on the use and extent of development of property is the
responsibility of the individual land owner through the use of a land use
covenant.  The covenant must be established for each parcel of land within the
framework of the district regulations established in this chapter and must
conform as nearly as possible to the Land Development Plan.
(Prior Code, § 4-400)
§ 155.031  CONFORMING COVENANTS.
   Land use covenants may be established and filed with the deed as a matter of
record without contest when the covenants shall conform to the following:
   (A)   The Land Development Plan, established by the Planning Commission.
   (B)   The restriction of population density and/or lot coverage as
established by this chapter.
   (C)   In the case of developed property, to the existing, surrounding land
use.
   (D)   Determination as  to compliance to divisions (A) through (C) of this
section shall be made by the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 4-401)
§ 155.032  NONCONFORMING COVENANTS.
   Land use covenants which do not conform to the above requirements shall have
the approval of the surrounding land owners and shall be approved by the
Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 4-402)
§ 155.033  FILING REQUIRED.
   The landowner shall have 180 days from the date of adoption of this chapter
to file his or her land use covenant. If within this period, the landowner does
not file his or her covenant, the Planning Commission may declare an automatic
five-year covenant, on the property in accordance with the Land Development
Plan. If a parcel of land is not in accord with the Land Development Plan, the
Planning Commission may file a covenant on the property, also for a five-year
period.
(Prior Code, § 4-403)
§ 155.034  NONCONFORMING USES; PRE-EXISTING.
   All uses (which do not conform to the above requirements) and were
established before the adoption of this chapter shall be granted one 5-year
covenant.  Upon expiration of the five-year covenant, the landowner will have
180 days to file a new covenant in accord with §§
155.031 and
155.032 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-404)
§ 155.035  TERM.
   The lane use covenants established by the property owner shall govern for a
period of not less than five years nor more than 99 years, except in the case
of special use covenants.
(Prior Code, § 4-405)
§ 155.036  EXPIRATION; AUTOMATIC RENEWAL.
   Upon its normal expiration , the land use covenant will be automatically
reinstated for a period of five years unless, within a period of 180 days after
its expiration, the property owner establishes a new land use covenant.
(Prior Code, § 4-406)
§ 155.037  HARDSHIP; NEW COVENANT.
   A new land use covenant may be initiated by the property owner when the
covenant has reached its normal expiration date or prior to the date when, in
the opinion of the Planning Commission, such a covenant represents a hardship
to the adjacent property owners.
(Prior Code, § 4-407)
§ 155.038  CONDEMNATION.
   When a public body uses condemnation procedures to gain land for public
projects, the land use covenant governing such property shall so be considered
condemned ; and a new land use covenant will be set up by the new landowner.
(Prior Code, § 4-408)
DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 155.050  LOT STANDARDS.
   There shall be no minimum lot size, and no minimum lot width; however no
structure or group of structures shall be erected within ten feet of any other
structure or group of structures not within the same lot, or be erected within
five feet of a public street or any property. For structures within the same
lot, occupancies requiring greater separation distances, and for variances, the
standards set forth in the currently adopted UBC. Chapter 5 and Table 5-A shall
be used as minimums. For the purpose of this section, existing retaining walls
may be repaired, or replaced with a new wall of similar dimensions, and need
not meet the setback requirement to property lines unless, in doing so, a
traffic or pedestrian safety hazard is created at the street, and need not meet
the setback requirements to other structures as long as any replacement wall is
constructed of noncombustible material. New retaining walls over four feet
high, measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, are
considered structures and must meet the setback requirement to other structures
and property lines.
(Prior Code, § 4-500)  (Ord. 906-98, passed 2-9-1998)
§ 155.051  SANITATION STANDARDS.
   Every principal structure shall be connected to a municipal or sanitary
district sanitary sewer system. On all new construction, no surface water shall
be directly connected to the sanitary sewer system.
(Prior Code, § 4-501)
§ 155.052  NATURAL SURROUNDINGS AND TOPOGRAPHY.
   Every development shall be designed to conform and relate to natural
contours with the least  amount of disturbance of natural drainage, natural
growth or other features of  topography  such as  rock outcroppings, streams,
lakes,  trees, and the like.
(Prior Code, § 4-502)
§ 155.053  COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   All business and industrial use areas shall be established and maintained
in  such manner as to be neat and orderly in appearance from streets and
adjoining property by control of the following:
   (A)   All open areas shall be landscaped or kept in a properly maintained
natural state.
   (B)   Establishments bordering any residential or public use area shall
provide buffer planting screens for sound and vision.
   (C)   Exterior illumination shall be directed away from adjoining property.
   (D)   Noise, odor, glare, and vibration shall not be discernible to an
objectional degree beyond the property lines.
   (E)   Smoke, dust, fumes or gases shall not be emitted at any point in
concentrations of amounts  that are noxious, toxic or corrosive.
(Prior Code, § 4-503)
§ 155.054  PARK OR FOREST DISTRICT.
   Land use covenants within this District may allow:
   (A)   Transportation and utility easements and rights-of-way;
   (B)   Public parks and/or playgrounds;
   (C)   Historical monuments or structures;
   (D)   Utility substations; and
   (E)   Tree or crop growing areas and grating lands.
(Prior Code, § 4-504)
§ 155.055  RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   Land use covenants within this District may allow:
   (A)   All types of residential usage except that mobile homes shall be
located only in mobile home parks.
   (B)   Residential usage may include normal home occupations and offices of
recognized professions provided:
      (1)   They are conducted by the occupant.
      (2)   There is no display of merchandise.
      (3)   Advertising shall conform to the sign regulations of this chapter.
   (C)   Residential development will be governed population density, lot
coverage and off-street parking requirements as herein cited:
      (1)   Population density.
         (a)   Single-family residence:  eight dwelling units per gross acre.
         (b)   Two-family residence:  ten dwelling units per gross acre.
         (c)   Multi-family residence:  50 dwelling units per gross acre.
         (d)   Mobile homes:  ten dwelling units per gross acre.
      (2)   Lot coverage.
         (a)   Single-family residence:  may cover 30% of the lot area.
         (b)   Two-family residence:  may cover 35% of the lot area.
         (c)   Multi-family residence:
 
Stories Percent Coverage of Ground Floor
1          35
2          30
3          26
4          24
5          23
6          22
7          21
8 and over 20
 
         (d)   Mobile homes:  may cover 30% of the lot area.
      (3)   Off-street parking.
         (a)   Single-family residence:  two parking spaces per residence.
         (b)   Two-family residence: two parking spaces per residence or living
unit.
         (c)   Multi-family residence:  two parking spaces per residence or
living unit.
         (d)   An off-street parking place, other than a garage, will be
defined as an area nine feet in width and 22 feet in length.
         (e)   The apportionment of parking spaces within a garage structure
will dictated by the Building Official.
         (f)   Exterior parking places must remain dedicated to parking and
cannot be used for other purposes such as, but not limited to, storage, refuse
containers and debris.
         (g)   For uses not specifically mentioned in this chapter, off-street
parking requirements shall be interpreted by the Planning and Zoning Commission
and the governing body.
      (4)   To handle the placement of mobile homes within the city, the mobile
home park may be established.
         (a)   1.   The mobile home park shall contain not less than 4,000
square feet of lot area for each space provided on the site.  The space ratio
is to include access roads, auto parking/accessory building space and
recreational area.
            2.   Each lot shall be provided with its own curb stop valve and
individual meter for water and its own sewer connection.
         (b)   When applying for a building permit, there shall be provided a
plot plan prepared by a registered engineer or architect complete in detail
showing the following:
            1.   Areas set aside for clothes washing and drying, storage and
off-street parking;
            2.   Common recreation space shall be provided at the rate of 200
square feet of space for each trailer site, but in no case shall the common
recreation space be less than 5,000 square feet. This requirement may be
waived, however, if the court abuts a public park;
            3.   Fencing and screen planting on the premises;
            4.   Provisions for trash and garbage removal;
            5.   Utility service connections;
            6.   Provision for the lighting of roadways, driveways and
pedestrian walks;
            7.   Water availability approved by the County or State Health
Department;
            8.   Sewage facilities which must not be individual septic tanks
are drain fields. Systems must be approved by the county or State Health
Department;
            9.   A typical lot plan including gravel-based narking site plus
200 square foot paved patio for each space;
            10.   A storage locker compound providing 100 cubic feet of storage
for each unit; and
            11.   If a park accommodates units not containing bath facilities,
such facilities must be provided by the park.
(Prior Code, § 4-505)  (Ord. 881-96, passed 2-12-1996; Ord. 986-08, passed 6-
23-2008)
§ 155.056  COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
   Land use covenants within this District may allow:
   (A)   Retail establishments.
   (B)   Wholesale establishments.
   (C)   Service establishments.
   (D)   Commercial development will be governed by the off-street parking
requirements as herein cited:
      (1)   Commercial (within core area):  none.
      (2)   Commercial (outside core area): three square feet for each square
foot of building.
(Prior Code, § 4-506)
§ 155.057  INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   Land use covenants within this District may allow:
   (A)   Manufacturing uses.
   (B)   Warehousing.
   (C)   Open storage.
   (D)   Mining and refining processes.
   (E)   Industrial development will be governed by the off-street parking
requirements as herein cited:  all industrial enterprises will provide three
square feet of parking space for each one square foot of office area and one
square foot of parking space for every two square feet of remaining building.
(Prior Code, § 4-507)
§ 155.058  SPECIAL USE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Land use covenants within this District shall have approval of the
Planning Commission and surrounding property owners. Covenant duration and
renewability shall be dependent upon the permanency of the land use and shall
be at the discretion of the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Public and semi-public uses allowed include, but are not limited to,
the following:
      (1)   Cemeteries.
      (2)   Public and semipublic buildings and institutions.
      (3)   Parks and playgrounds.
      (4)   Sanitary landfills.
      (5)   Sewerage treatment facilities.
      (6)   Water treatment and storage facilities.
   (C)   Private uses allowed include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Crematory.
      (2)   Explosive manufacture or storage.
      (3)   Incineration or reduction of garbage, dead animals, fat or refuse.
      (4)   Soap manufacture.
      (5)   Tanning of leather, rawhide or skins.
      (6)   In general, those uses which have been declared a nuisance in any
court of record, or which may be noxious or offensive by reason of odor, dust,
gas, smoke, or noise.
   (D)   The following off-street parking requirements apply to the Special Use
District:
      (1)   Churches:  one per four seats.
      (2)   Elementary and junior high schools:  one per each class room and
administrative office.
      (3)   Senior high school:  one per five students based on the design
capacity of the building, plus one per each classroom and administrative
office.
      (4)   Vocational or trade school:  one per three students plus two per
each three employees.
      (5)   Dormitory, sorority or fraternity:  one per three permanent
residents.
      (6)   Government office building:  one per each 200 square feet of gross
floor area.
      (7)   Homes for the aged, sanitariums, convalescent or nursing homes: 
one per four patient beds plus one per each staff doctor plus one per each two
employees.
      (8)   Hospitals:  one per three patient beds plus one per each two
employees on the major shift.
      (9)   Public assembly facilities such as: lodges, private clubs,
auditoriums, arenas, stadiums, community centers:  one per four fixed seats,
plus one per each 100 square feet or floor or ground area used but not
containing fixed seats.
(Prior Code, § 4-508)
SIGN REGULATIONS
§ 155.070  PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to make provision to allow individual
establishments to identify the nature of their enterprise, the products
provided, the services provided, and their name. Further specific purposes of
this subchapter are:
   (A)   To provide a reasonable balance between the need of the business
owners to identify the enterprise, and the need of the public to be protected
against the visual discord resulting from the unrestricted proliferation of
signs.
   (B)   To protect the public from hazardous conditions by requiring signs to
conform with Building, Electrical and Life Safety Codes, and by prohibiting
signs that obscure the vision of motorists or compete or conflict with traffic
or warning signs.
   (C)   To provide for good visual communication to the public, whether they
are traveling by foot or vehicle, so that the public may easily know of the
location of individual establishment.
   (D)   To recognize that the required sue of the sign that provides adequate
identification in pedestrian-oriented business areas is less than that required
for signs in automobile-oriented areas.
(Ord. 948-03, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 155.071  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY.  Subordinate or incidental to, and on the same lot or on a
contiguous lot in the same ownership, as the building or use being identified
or advertised.
   AWNING.  A moveable, protruding, covered fabric shelter supported entirely
from the exterior wall of a building that may be retractable or collapsed, and
wholly or partially covering a pedestrian way with advertising on it or
directional or informational.
   BANNER.  A piece of cloth, canvas, plastic or paper bearing a design, motto,
slogan or advertisement; may be further defined as an event banner or a
seasonal banner.
   BILLBOARD.  A free-standing off-premises sign, not exceeding 300 square feet
per space, located off the premises upon which the commodity or service is
located.
   BUILDING.  Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy.
   BUSINESS.  All activities in which a person engages or in which such person
causes another to be engaged with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage,
whether direct or indirect.
   CANOPY.  A permanently-roofed shelter covering a sidewalk, driveway, or
similar area, which may be wholly supported by a building or may be wholly or
partially supported by columns, poles, or braces extended from the ground.
   DIRECTIONAL INFORMATION.  A free-standing or wall-mounted sign conveying
information essential to the normal business activity of the premises upon
which it is located.
   EVENT.  A happening, occurrence, contest or item.
   EVENT BANNER.  A banner that is displayed with the intent to advertise a
specific event.
   FRONTAGE.  The horizontal, linear dimension of that side of the building or
lot.
   GRAFFITI.  An inscription, slogan, drawing, and the like crudely scratched
or scribbled on a wall or other public surface.
   GROUND, FREE-STANDING.   Sign detached from a building and supported by a
bracing or pole structure
   HEIGHT OF A SIGN.  The vertical distance measured from the elevation of the
nearest sidewalk or, if there is no sidewalk within 25 feet from the lowest
point of the finished grade on the lot on which the sign is located and within
25 feet of the sign, to the uppermost point of the sign or the sign structure.
   MAINTENANCE.  The replacing, repairing or repainting of a portion of a sign
structure, periodic changing of bulletin board panels, or renaming of copy that
has been made unuseable by ordinary ware and tear, by nature or by accident.
   MURAL.  A decorative or figurative painting or decoration, usually oversized
applied directly to a wall or ceiling.
   NEON.  An electrically charged gas contained within and enclosed transparent
tube.
   PORTABLE.  A sign capable of being moved from location to location without
structural or support modifications at least perpendicular to the building.
   PROJECTING.  A sign attached to a building, extending in whole or part eight
inches from the building to which it is attached.
   ROOF.  The cover of any building, including the eaves and similar
projections.
   SANDWICH BOARD.  A ground supported sign having at least two faces and
placed on the premises outside the building.
   SEASON.  A specific time, as defined as the divisions of the year (spring,
summer, autumn, winter) or specific times something is popular or the time of a
festival or holiday, not to exceed 90 continuous days.
   SEASONAL BANNER.  A banner that is displayed with the intent to advertise a
seasonal activity.
   SIGN.  Any writing, pictorial representation, decoration, form, emblem,
trademark, banner, or any other figure of similar character that:
      (1)   Is a structure or any part thereof;
      (2)   Is written, printed, projected, painted, constructed, or otherwise
placed or displayed upon or designed into a building, board, plated, canopy,
awning, or vehicle or upon any material, object or device whatsoever; and
      (3)   By reason or its form, color, wording, symbol, design,
illumination, or motion, attracts or is design to attract attention to the
subject thereof or is used as a means of identification advertisement or
announcement.
   SIGNAGE AREA.  Area of the building designed for a sign by the architect.
   TEMPORARY.  A sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of time. A
sign displayed for no more than 30 days.
   WALL SIGN.  A sign attached to and erected parallel to the outside wall of a
building, mounted flush to the wall and which displays only one face.
   WINDOW.  The transparent or translucent portion of an opening in an exterior
wall of a structure.
(Ord. 948-03, passed 4-21-2003; Ord. 1030-14, passed 11-17-2014)
§ 155.072  JURISDICTION.
   This chapter shall apply to all land within the corporate limits of the
city.
(Ord. 948-03, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 155.073  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Before any sign can be erected or altered in any way, a valid permit must be
issued by the Building Inspector.
   (A)   Each application for a sign permit shall be submitted on a form
supplied by the City Building Inspector and accompanied by a fee as set by
resolution by the Lead City Commission.
   (B)   (1)   Applications shall be submitted to the Building Inspector for
review by the Historic Preservation Commission for recommendation to the Lead
City Commission.
      (2)   Temporary signs shall be regulated by the City Building Inspector.
   (C)    All banners will require approval by the City Building Inspector and
be subject to removal as determined by the City Building Inspector.
(Ord. 948-03, passed 4-21-2003; Ord. 1030-14, passed 11-17-2014)
§ 155.074  GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All signs shall be structurally safe and securely anchored and
properly maintained. The owner of any sign and the owner of the premises upon
which it is located shall be responsible for maintenance and for the removal of
such sign if and when it is abandoned, no longer functional unsafe, or
unmaintained.
   (B)   No sign shall constitute a nuisance to either an adjacent property
owner or the general public. (To be reviewed by Building Inspector with
recommendation to the Lead City Commission).
   (C)   No sign shall conflict with the clear and obvious appearance or public
devices controlling traffic or emergency vehicles.
   (D)   Ground signs on public property shall be first approved by the
Historic Preservation Commission. Ground signs on vacant lots will go against
the lots allowable square foot per signage and shall not exceed two square feet
per frontage foot of the lot.
   (E)   Temporary signs or banners on or over public property shall be
permitted by the Building Inspector.
   (F)   Upon either the written or verbal permission of the Building
Inspector, or one of his or her agents, professionally made temporary signs or
banners may be placed on or over private property, and may be displayed for a
period not to exceed 30 days.  If the temporary signs or banners are deemed
offensive by the Building Inspector, upon notification by the Building
Inspector, the temporary sign or banner must be removed immediately with the
Building Inspector making recommendation to the Lead City Commission for final
decision as to whether or not it is offensive.
   (G)   Signs projecting over a street, alley or other public place shall
project not more than ten feet and be no closer than two feet to a plumb line
from curb line. Clearance below such signs shall be a minimum of eight feet six
inches.
   (H)   Signs along any state highway shall conform to the legally executed
agreement between the city and the State Department of Transportation where
applicable.
   (I)   Commercial signs in Residential Districts shall be issued by the
Planning and Zoning Commission under the variance procedure.
   (J)   Graffiti signs shall not be permitted.
   (K)   Non-conforming signs upon 30 days written notice by the Building
Inspector shall be removed. Refusal may be subject to fine.
   (L)   Advertising wall and protruding signs shall be restricted to the
business occupying the premises upon which the sign is located with the
exception of historical signs being renovated.
   (M)   In the event that a business closes for a period exceeding 60 days,
upon written notification by the Building Inspector, all signs and their
support systems advertising such business shall be removed. An extension may be
granted by the Building Inspector.
   (N)   Billboard(s) shall not exceed 300 square feet in area and shall not be
permitted within 100 feet of another billboard. The governing body of the city
reserves the exclusive right in its sole discretion to deny a permit based upon
the particular facts and circumstances of each individual case including but
not limited to size of the billboard and/or lot, content of the billboard, and
location of the billboard.
   (O)   All signs along any state or federal highway shall comply with all
city, state and federal regulations.
   (P)   Roof signs may be permitted on the basis that the prepared sign does
not extend above the peak of the roof line unless it is parallel with the peak
of the roof sign must also be parallel to peak to extend above.
   (Q)   Any exterior, portable, freestanding or unattached signs, such as, but
not limited to, a sidewalk sign or sandwich board sign shall not be allowed
unless placed a minimum of three feet from the street or if granted a variance
granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission with recommendation to the Lead
City Commission.
   (R)   Paper signs larger than 11 inches by 17 inches will not be allowed,
signs smaller than 11 inches by 17 inches are allowed without permit.
   (S)   Signs and/or banners may not be affixed to a vehicle that is used or
will be used as a permanent or semi-permanent display.
(Ord. 948-03, passed 4-21-2003; Ord. 967-04, passed 12-13-2004; Ord. 1030-14,
passed 11-17-2014)  Penalty, §
155.999
§ 155.075  RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Home occupation identification signs not to exceed one per principal
structure or one square foot in area, placed against a wall of the primary
structure and not lighted.
   (B)   One temporary sign, unlighted and not exceeding six square feet, wall-
mounted or ground type, such as real estate signs are allowed without permit.
Real estate signs shall be maintained in good repair and removed upon the sale
of the affected property.
(Ord. 948-03, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 155.076  COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   General regulations.  Signs in Commercial Districts shall be permitted
by the following formula:
      (1)   Wall signs shall be allowed two square feet per building frontage
foot.
      (2)   Projecting signs shall be allowed two square feet per street
frontage foot.
      (3)   Total signage shall not exceed two square feet per street frontage
foot.
   (B)   Free-standing signs located within 25 feet of a street curb line and
determined to constitute a potential traffic safety hazard shall have a minimum
vertical clearance of ten feet above the crown of the adjacent roadway.
   (C)   Signs attached to awnings, canopies, or marques shall maintain a
minimum of seven feet clearance above grade.
   (D)   The following regulations shah apply to hotels, motels and enclosed
and strip malls.
      (1)   Motels, hotels.  Wall-mounted and free-standing signs shall not
exceed two and one-half square feet per face for every unit.
      (2)   Cabins, camps, campgrounds.  Wall-mounted and free-standing signs
shall not exceed five square feet per face per cabin unit or defined camping
space.
      (3)   Strip malls.  Wall-mounted signs shall not exceed two square feet
per business frontage foot. Free-standing signs shall not exceed two square
feet per face for each business space frontage foot. Total square feet shall
not exceed five square feet per business frontage foot.
      (4)   Enclosed malls. 
         (a)   Outside wall-mounted signs shall be permitted based on a formula
of one square foot for every 100 square feet of business space.
         (b)   Free-standing signs, limited to two per enclosed mall, shall not
exceed 300 square feet per face.
(Ord. 948-03, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 155.077  DESIGNATED HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
   (A)   General regulations.  Signs in designated Historic Districts are of
special interest to the city and its Planning and Historic Preservation
Commissions. To protect the integrity of these special districts, particular
scrutiny will be given to signs proposed for these areas.
   (B)   Performance standards.
      (1)   Sign size shall be appropriate to the architectural signable area
of the structure upon which it is placed.
      (2)   Materials of sign construction shall be appropriate to the historic
character of the District, including color and texture.
      (3)   Unlighted fabric awning and canopy signs are encouraged. Plastic
awning and canopy signs shall not be permitted.
      (4)   Signs, awnings and canopy signs shall be professionally
constructed. Homemade signs and awnings shall be closely reviewed . LHPC may
request to see homemade signs before approval.
      (5)   Neon signs shall not be permitted.
      (6)   Permanent, cloth, and paper signs and/or banners shall not be
permitted.
(Ord. 948-03, passed 4-21-2003; Ord. 1030-14, passed 11-17-2014)  Penalty, see
§
155.999
§ 155.078  EXEMPTIONS.
   The following signs shall not require a sign permit. These exemptions shall
not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from the responsibility of
its erection and maintenance, and its compliance with the provision of this
code or any other law or ordinance regulating the same.
   (A)   The changing of the advertising copy or message on a painted or
printed sign, theater marquess and similar signs specifically designated for
the use of replaceable copy of previously approved sign.
   (B)   Painting, repainting or cleaning of an advertising structure, or the
changing of the advertising copy or message thereon, shall not be considered an
erection or alteration which requires a sign permit, unless a structural change
is made on previously approved sign.
   (C)   Real estate signs advertising, residential or commercial property for
sale so long as the placement of such signs are in conformance with
requirements of these regulations.
   (D)   Signs of any type displayed on the interior of a business.
   (E)   Wall-mounted or free-standing informational or directional sign not
exceeding two square feet.
   (F)   Manufacturers' product signs, common to the industry, being promoted
or advertised as long as they conform with other sections of the regulations.
   (G)   Historic signs, including those painted on the exterior of a
structure.
   (H)   Paper signs 11 inches by 17 inches or smaller.
(Ord. 948-03, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 155.079  MAINTENANCE.
   Every sign shall be maintained in good structural condition at all times.
All signs shall be kept neatly painted, including all metal parts and supports
thereof that are not galvanized or of rust-resistant materials. The Building
Inspector shall have the authority to inspect and to order the painting,
repair, alteration of a sign that constitutes a hazard to safety, health or
public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or
obsolescence. The cost of such painting, repair, alteration, or removal shall
be at the expense of the property owner or person entitled to possession of the
property or sign.
(Ord. 948-03, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 155.080  ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, maintain or
use any sign that is in violation of these regulations.
(Ord. 948-03, passed 4-21-2003)  Penalty, see §
155.999
WAYFINDING
§ 155.090  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MUTCD.  The Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways, published by the Federal Highway Administration.
   WAYFINDING PLAN.  This shall include the Wayfinding and/or Directional
Signage Plans approved by the Lead City Commission, and any amendments,
subsequent versions and/or additional plans approved by the Lead City
Commission.
   WAYFINDING SIGN.  An off-premise guide sign that is part of a city
coordinated and continuous system of signs meant to direct vehicular and
pedestrian traffic to key cultural, civic, visitor and recreational
attractions.
(Ord. 1027-14, passed 6-2-2014)
§ 155.091  ELIGIBLE DESTINATIONS.
   Destinations that meet one or more of the following criteria shall be
eligible for participation in the City of Lead's Wayfinding Plan:
   (A)   Public places owned or operated by the federal, state or local
governments or their agencies;
   (B)   Public or privately owned historic, cultural, scientific, educational
or religious sites;
   (C)   Areas of natural scenic beauty or naturally suited for outdoor
recreation or interest;
   (D)   Public or private destinations that serve to promote tourism.
(Ord. 1027-14, passed 6-2-2014)
§ 155.092  DESTINATION CRITERIA.
   City wayfinding signs shall not be used as a directional program for city-
based, privately-owned businesses, organizations and locations.  Destinations
must meet the criteria in §
155.091,  Eligible Destinations, and must contribute to the draw of transient
visitors to the area.
(Ord. 1027-14, passed 6-2-2014)
§ 155.093  SIGN CONSTRUCTION.
   Construction and maintenance of city wayfinding signs shall be at the sole
discretion and authority of the city and all city wayfinding signs shall comply
with the Wayfinding Plan.
(Ord. 1027-14, passed 6-2-2014)
§ 155.094  SIGN LOCATION.
   City wayfinding signs shall be placed within the approved right-of-way or in
other city-approved areas.
(Ord. 1027-14, passed 6-2-2014)
§ 155.095  SIGN APPEARANCE.
   City wayfinding signs shall comply with the provisions of the MUTCD with
respect to shape, appearance and standard requirements applicable to such
signs.
(Ord. 1027-14, passed 6-2-2014)
§ 155.096  DUPLICATION OF FEDERAL AND STATE DESTINATION SIGNAGE PROHIBITED.
   City wayfinding signs shall not be installed in a manner that interferes
with or duplicates route or destination sign programs of the federal or State
of South Dakota.
(Ord. 1027-14, passed 6-2-2014)
§ 155.097  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All city wayfinding signs must comply with the requirements and restrictions
enumerated in the agreement entered between the City of Lead and the South
Dakota Department of Transportation.
(Ord. 1027-14, passed 6-2-2014)
MANUFACTURED HOUSING
MANUFACTURED HOUSING
§ 155.100  PERMITTED; EXCEPTIONS.
   Manufactured housing will be allowed in any area of the city except those
areas prohibited by established covenants.
(Ord. 860-93, passed 8-2-1993)
§ 155.101  REQUIREMENTS.
   Each manufactured house must meet the following requirements:
   (A)   A manufactured home will be allowed in any area of the city with the
written permission of at least 75% of the area home owners within a 150-foot
radius of proposed site.
   (B)   Each manufactured home will be no less than 24 feet wide at the
narrowest point and shall contain at least 700 square feet of floor area.
   (C)   The manufactured home shall be placed on a permanent foundation, that
meets the currently adopted Uniform Building Code. Foundation will have a
minimum of a four-foot crawl space in all areas consisting of a minimum of 16-
inch by eight-inch concrete footing with either concrete block or concrete
walls. Tongue must be removed.
   (D)   Each manufactured home will have a gabled roof and will have a minimum
of six-inch eave. No metal or wood-shaked roof covering will be allowed.
   (E)   The manufactured home must be constructed after 1976.
   (F)   The exterior of the manufactured home shall consist of either wood,
masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, metal lap, or a material similar in
appearance.
(Ord. 860-93, passed 8-2-1993)
§ 155.102  PERMITS.
   Before work is commenced, a building permit and/or excavation permit will be
obtained. Failure to obtain the permit may result in the issuance of a stop
order by the Building Inspector or his or her appointed agent.
(Ord. 860-93, passed 8-2-1993)
§ 155.103  VARIANCES.
   A variance will be required to allow for public input prior to a building
permit being issued. All requirements in §
155.101 must be met including drawings of the foundation and floor plan before
a variance hearing will be held.
(Ord. 860-93, passed 8-2-1993)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 155.200  SUBMITTALS.
   The petitioner for a zoning district boundary amendment or modification will
be required to submit a professional survey and/or plat to the Building
Department delineating the area(s) of the zoning request. These submittals will
be required to be given to the Building Department at least ten days in advance
of the public hearing. The submittals will be of such nature that the affected
lots and properties are distinguishable, the zoning and re-zoning boundaries
are clearly identified and the accepted mapping protocols are included. Two
paper copies and an electronic copy of the submittal will be required. The
electronic copy will be of such nature that will allow accurate interfacing
with the city's mapping program.
(Ord. 985-08, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 155.201  ZONING CHANGE REQUEST; NOTICE OF.
   Any petitioner, public or private, for an amendment or modification to a
zoning district boundary (such as, change of zoning) shall give all adjoining
property owners and all other property owners within 200 feet of the
petitioners’ property boundary, notice of the time and place of the public
hearing by registered/certified mail at least seven days in advance of the
hearing. Notice of the hearing shall also be posted on the road frontage of the
property for which the amendment application has been filed.
(Ord. 985-08, passed 5-19-2008; Am. Ord. 1052-17, passed 6-5-2017)
§ 155.202  HEARING; RECOMMENDATION BY PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   The public hearing shall take place at a meeting of the Planning and Zoning
Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall render a recommendation
for/against the zoning request. The Planning and Zoning Commission may table
the request for a period not exceeding 15 working days and then shall render a
recommendation for/against the zoning request. This recommendation shall be
presented to the Lead City Commission at the Lead City Commission's next
scheduled meeting.
(Ord. 985-08, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 155.203  DECISION BY LEAD CITY COMMISSION.
   Within ten working days of the receipt of the Planning and Zoning
Commission's recommendation, the Lead City Commission shall take action to
approve or deny the issuance of the change of zoning. This decision shall be
based upon, but not limited to the consideration of the following:
   (A)   Adjacent land use.
   (B)   Type of development, if appropriate.
   (C)   Access from city, county and state roads.
   (D)   Location appropriate for requested zone.
   (E)   Flood plain.
   (F)   The effect of the proposed change of zoning upon:
      (1)   Housing, existing and potential.
      (2)   Public services.
      (3)   Water and sewer services.
      (4)   Public roads.
      (5)   Parks and recreation.
      (6)   Open space areas
   (G)   Proposed development plan with time schedule, if appropriate.
   (H)   The cumulative effect of the proposed change when considered with
existing zoning.
(Ord. 985-08, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 155.204  APPEALS.
   (A)   Filing. Any person withstanding, aggrieved or affected by any decision
of the Lead City Commission shall be permitted to appeal to the Lead City
Commission by written request. An appeal shall only be considered if filed
within ten working days after the cause arises or the appeal shall not be
considered. If such an appeal is not made, the decision of the Lead City
Commission shall be considered final.
   (B)   Stays of proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings from further
action unless there is immediate danger to public health and safety.
(Ord. 985-08, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 155.205  FEE.
   The fee for a zoning request must be submitted with the application. The
Lead City Commission will set the fee for zoning changes by resolution.
(Ord. 985-08, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 155.999  PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
other penalty is provided shall be subject to the provisions of §
10.99
   (B)   Any person, firm, association or corporation who refuses to comply
with the enforcement of any of the provisions of §§
155.070 through
155.080 shall, upon conviction, be subject to a Class II misdemeanor punishable
by a $200 fine and or 30 days imprisonment.
(Ord. 948-03, passed 4-21-2003)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
[RESERVED]
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to South Dakota Codified Laws
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO SOUTH DAKOTA CODIFIED LAWS
 
SDCL Section Code Section
7-18-14   152.01
9-1-1     10.02,
          10.04
9-12-15   33.03
9-13-13   10.04
9-19-1    10.04
9-19-3    10.99
9-36      152.01
Ch. 9-38  33.01
9-38-90.1 33.01
Ch. 9-45  94.088
Ch. 9-46  94.019,
          94.088
10-4-5    34.02
10-23-1.1 93.40
          34.06,
10-45     34.36,
          34.39,
          34.99
          34.05,
10-46     34.06,
          34.99
          34.21 -
10-46A    34.23,
          34.99
10-46A-11 34.20
10-46E    34.04
          34.01,
          34.03,
10-52     34.20,
          34.22,
          34.38
10-52-8   34.37
10-52A-2  34.35,
          34.36
11-6-26   154.99
21-10-6   93.40
22-6-2    91.999
22-6-2(2) 10.99
26-16     110.137
32-3-1(1) 70.53
32-17-4   70.59
32-17-5   70.65
32-17-6   70.65
32-34-10  72.07
40-1-2.4  91.020
40-1-20   91.050
40-1-21   91.050
40-1-24   91.051
Ch. 11-6  33.02
Ch. 14-1  33.03
          
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
 
Prior Code Section 2010 Code Section
1-200         10.04
1-300         10.15
2-100         30.01
2-200         31.01
2-201         31.02
2-202         31.03
2-203         31.04
2-204         31.05
2-205         31.06
2-206         31.07
2-207         31.08
2-208         31.09
2-209         31.10
2-210         31.11
2-211         31.12
2-212         31.13
2-213         31.14
2-214         31.15
2-215         31.16
2-216         31.17
2-217         31.18
2-218         31.19
2-300         32.01
2-301         32.02
2-302         32.03
2-303         32.04
2-305         32.06
2-310         32.07
2-320         32.08
2-340         32.09
2-350         32.10
2-400         30.02
2-401         30.02
2-402         30.02
2-800         30.05
2-801         30.03
2-900         33.01
2-901         33.02
2-903         33.03
4-100         155.001
4-101         155.002
4-200         155.003
4-300         155.020
4-400         155.030
4-401         155.031
4-402         155.032
4-403         155.033
4-404         155.034
4-405         155.035
4-406         155.036
4-407         155.037
4-408         155.038
4-500         155.050
4-501         155.051
4-502         155.052
4-503         155.053
4-504         155.054
4-505         155.055
4-506         155.056
4-507         155.057
4-508         155.058
4-700         154.01
4-701         154.02
4-702         154.03
4-703         154.04
4-704         154.05
4-800         154.15
4-801         154.16
4-802         154.17
4-803         154.18
4-804         154.19
4-805         154.20
4-806         154.21
4-807         154.22
4-808         154.23
4-809         154.24
4-900         154.35
4-901         154.36
4-902         154.37
4-903         154.38
4-904         154.39
4-1000        154.50
4-1001        154.51
4-1100        154.52
4-1101        154.52
4-1200        154.65
4-1201        154.66
4-1202        154.67
4-1203        154.99
5-100         90.01
5-101         90.02
5-102         90.03
5-103         90.04
5-104         90.05
5-105         90.06
5-106         90.07
5-107         90.08
5-108         90.09
5-109         90.10
5-110         90.11
5-111         90.12
5-112         90.13
8-100         110.001
8-101         110.001
8-200         110.015
8-201         110.016
8-202         110.017
8-203         110.018
8-204         110.019
8-205         110.020
8-206         110.021
8-207         110.022
8-208         110.023
8-210         110.024
8-211         110.025
8-300         110.002
8-400         110.035
8-401         110.036
8-402         110.037
8-403         110.038
8-404         110.039
8-405         110.040
8-406         110.041
8-502         110.055
8-600         110.070
8-601         110.071
8-602         110.072
8-603         110.073
8-604         110.074
8-605         110.075
8-700         110.085
8-701         110.086
8-702         110.087
8-703         110.088
8-704         110.089
8-800         110.100
8-801         110.101
8-802         110.102
8-803         110.103
8-804         110.104
8-805         110.105
8-806         110.106
8-900         110.120
8-901         110.121
8-902         110.122
8-903         110.123
8-905         110.124
8-1000        110.135
8-1001        110.136
8-1002        110.137
8-1004        110.138
9-100         92.01
9-101         92.02
9-102         92.03
9-103         92.04
9-104         92.05
9-105         92.06
9-106         92.07
9-107         92.08
9-108         92.09
9-110         92.10
9-111         92.11
10-100        151.01
10-201        151.02
10-202        151.03
10-203        151.04
10-204        151.05
10-205        151.06
10-207        151.07
10-208        151.08
10-209        151.09
10-210        151.20
10-211        151.21
10-212        151.22
10-213        151.23
10-214        151.24
10-215        151.25
10-216        151.26
10-217        151.27
10-218        151.99
10-220        151.28
11-100        111.01
11-101        111.02
11-102        111.03
11-103        111.04
11-104        111.05
11-105        111.06
11-106        111.07
11-107        111.08
11-108        111.09
11-109        111.10
11-110        111.11
11-111        111.12
11-112        111.13
11-200        111.14
11-201        111.15
12-100        112.01
12-108        112.03
12-200        112.20
12-201        112.21
12-203        112.22
12-204        112.23
12-205        112.24
14-100        52.01
14-101        52.02
14-102        52.03
14-103        52.04
14-104        52.05
14-106        52.06
14-107        52.07
14-200        52.08
14-201        52.09
14-202        52.10
14-203        52.11
14-204        52.12
14-205        52.13
14-206        52.14
14-207        52.15
14-208        52.16
16-100        50.01
16-101        50.02
16-102        50.03
16-200        50.15
16-201        50.16
16-202        50.17
16-203        50.18
16-204        50.19
16-205        50.20
16-300        50.35
16-301        50.36
16-302        50.37
16-303        50.38
16-400        50.50
16-401        50.51
16-402        50.52
16-403        50.53
16-404        50.54
17-100        93.01
17-101        93.02
17-102        93.03
17-103        93.04
17-104        93.05
17-105        93.06
17-106        93.07
18-100        94.001
18-200        94.002
18-201        94.002
18-300        94.015
18-301        94.016
18-302        94.017
18-303        94.018
18-304        94.019
18-305        94.020
18-400        94.030
18-401        94.031
18-403        94.032
18-500        94.045
18-501        94.046
18-502        94.047
18-503        94.048
18-504        94.049
18-505        94.050
18-506        94.051
18-507        94.052
18-600        94.065
18-602        94.066
18-603        94.067
18-604        94.068
18-605        94.069
18-607        94.070
18-700        94.085
18-701        94.086
18-702        94.087
18-703        94.088
18-800        94.100
18-801        94.101
18-802        94.102
18-803        94.103
18-804        94.104
19-100        70.01
19-200        70.10
19-201        70.11
19-202        70.12
19-203        70.13
19-204        70.14
19-205        70.15
19-206        70.16
19-207        70.17
19-208        70.18
19-209        70.19
19-210        70.20
19-300        70.30
19-301        70.31
19-302        70.32
19-303        70.33
19-304        70.34
19-400        76.01
19-401        76.02
19-402        76.03
19-402A       76.04
19-403        76.05
19-405        76.06
19-406        76.07
19-407        76.08
19-408        76.09
19-409        76.10
19-500        75.01
19-501        75.02
19-502        75.03
19-503        75.04
19-505        75.05
19-506        75.06
19-507        75.07
19-508        75.08
19-509        75.09
19-510        75.10
19-511        75.11
19-512        75.12
19-513        75.13
19-514        75.14
19-515        75.15
19-600        71.01
19-601        71.02
19-602        71.03
19-603        71.04
19-604        71.05
19-605        71.06
19-606        71.07
19-607        71.08
19-608        71.09
19-609        71.10
19-610        71.01
19-611        71.12
19-612        71.13
19-613        71.14
19-614        71.15
19-615        71.16
19-616        71.17
19-617        71.18
19-618        71.19
19-619        71.20
19-620        71.21
19-621        71.22
19-622        71.23
19-623        71.24
19-624        71.25
19-624A       71.26
19-624B       71.26
19-624C       71.26
19-625        71.27
19-626        71.28
19-627        71.29
19-628        71.30
19-629        71.31
19-630        71.32
19-631        71.33
19-632        71.34
19-633        71.35
19-634        71.36
19-635        71.37
19-636        71.38
19-637        71.39
19-638        71.40
19-639        71.41
19-640        71.42
19-641        71.43
19-642        71.44
19-643        71.45
19-644        71.46
19-645        71.47
19-646        71.48
19-647        71.49
19-648        71.50
19-649        71.51
19-650        71.52
19-651        71.53
19-652        71.54
19-652A       71.55
19-652B, C, D 71.56
19-653        71.57
19-654        71.58
19-655        71.59
19-656        71.60
19-700        72.01
19-701        72.02
19-702        72.03
19-703        72.04
19-704        72.05
19-705        72.06
19-706        72.07
19-707        72.08
19-800        70.50
19-801        70.51
19-802        70.52
19-803        70.53
19-804        70.54
19-805        70.55
19-806        70.56
19-807        70.57
19-808        70.58
19-809        70.59
19-810        70.60
19-811        70.61
19-812        70.62
19-813        70.63
19-814        70.64
19-815        70.65
19-816        70.66
19-817        70.67
19-818        70.68
19-819        70.69
19-900        73.01
19-901        73.02
19-902        73.03
19-903        73.04
19-904        73.05
19-905        73.06
19-906        73.07
19-907        73.08
19-1000       74.01
19-1001       74.02
19-1002       74.03
19-1003       74.04
19-1004       74.05
19-1005       74.06
19-1006       74.07
19-1007       74.08
19-1100       77.01
19-1101       77.02
19-1102       77.03
19-1103       77.04
19-1104       77.05
19-1105       77.06
19-1106       77.07
19-1107       77.08
19-1108       77.09
19-1109       77.10
19-1110       77.11
19-1111       77.12
19-1112       77.13
19-1113       77.14
19-1114       77.15
19-1115       77.16
19-1116       77.17
19-1117       77.18
19-1118       77.19
19-1119       77.20
19-1120       77.21
19-1121       77.22
19-1122       77.23
19-1123       77.24
19-1124       77.25
19-1125       77.26
19-1126       77.27
19-1200       78.01
19-1201       78.02
19-1202       78.03
19-1203       78.04
19-1204       78.05
19-1206       78.07
19-1207       78.08
19-1208       78.09
19-1209       78.99
19-1300       79.01
19-1301       79.02
19-1302       79.03
19-1303       79.04
19-1304       79.05
20-100        34.01
20-101        34.02
20-102        34.03
20-103        34.04
20-104        34.05
20-105        34.06
20-106        34.99
20-107        34.07
20-200        34.20
20-201        34.21
20-202        34.22
20-204        34.23
20-205        34.99
21-100        51.001
21-120        51.002
21-200        51.015
21-201        51.016
21-202        51.017
21-203        51.018
21-204        51.019
21-205        51.020
21-206        51.021
21-207        51.022
21-208        51.023
21-209        51.024
21-210        51.025
21-211        51.026
21-212        51.027
21-213        51.028
21-214        51.029
21-215        51.030
21-216        51.031
21-217        51.032
21-218        51.033
21-219        51.034
21-220        51.035
21-221        51.036
21-222        51.037
21-223        51.038
21-224        51.039
21-225        51.040
21-226        51.041
21-300        51.055
21-301        51.056
21-302        51.057
21-303        51.058
21-304        51.059
21-305        51.060
21-306        51.061
21-307        51.062
21-308        51.063
21-309        51.064
21-310        51.065
21-311        51.066
21-312        51.067
21-400        51.004
21-500        51.080
21-501        51.081
21-502        51.082
21-503        51.083
21-504        51.084
21-505        51.085
21-506        51.086
21-507        51.087
21-600        51.005
              
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
746-83  5-2-1983   90.25 -
                   90.33
                   110.150 -
747-83  5-2-1983   110.155,
                   110.088
776-86  8-11-1986  31.01
                   90.30,
                   90.33,
                   90.34,
825-90  10-9-1990  33.01,
                   34.35 -
                   34.39,
                   34.99
834-91  3-11-1991  52.01
                   154.52,
                   153.01 -
                   153.06,
                   154.52,
855-93  3-29-1992  90.45 -
                   90.49,
                   155.003,
                   155.100 -
                   155.103
850-92  11-16-1992 52.11,
                   52.17
881-96  2-12-1996  155.055
883-96  3-11-1996  31.12
903-97  12-15-1997 94.071
893-97  5-5-1997   154.52
896-97  6-23-1997  90.33
898-97  1-12-1998  94.069
906-98  2-9-1998   154.37,
                   155.050
                   130.01 -
                   130.06,
                   131.01,
                   131.02,
909-98  3-23-1998  132.01 -
                   132.09,
                   132.35 -
                   132.37,
                   132.39,
                   132.99
                   91.001 -
                   91.008,
                   91.020 -
                   91.025,
914-98  9-21-1998  91.035 -
                   91.050,
                   91.065 -
                   91.067,
                   91.999
921-99  5-10-1999  94.115 -
                   94.124
924-99  11-17-1999 110.151
                   94.030 -
930-00  10-30-2000 94.033,
                   94.100 -
                   94.104
934-01  7-16-2001  33.04
936-01  9-4-2001   51.084
942-02  9-9-2002   91.003
                   91.080 -
946-03  2-3-2003   91.083,
                   91.999
947-03  3-17-2003  33.02
                   155.070 -
948-03  4-21-2003  155.080,
                   155.999
956-04  3-29-2004  31.02
957-04  6-14-2004  30.01
961-04  10-25-2004 32.11
962-04  10-25-2004 32.12
963-04  10-25-2004 32.13
964-04  10-25-2004 30.05
967-04  12-13-2004 155.074
969-05  3-14-2005  91.999
970-05  3-14-2005  93.99
971-06  5-22-2006  94.135 -
                   94.143
972-06  5-22-2006  51.003
973-06  7-24-2006  93.99
975-06  11-27-2006 74.07
981-07  12-3-2007  30.04
                   110.015,
984-08  5-19-2008  110.020,
                   110.023
985-08  5-19-2008  155.200 -
                   155.205
986-08  6-23-2008  155.055
                   74.07,
                   78.02,
990-09  2-2-2009   78.03,
                   78.04,
                   78.08
991-09  1-26-2009  93.35 -
                   93.40
                   94.031,
996-09  11-2-2009  94.034 -
                   94.036,
                   94.999
997-09  12-7-2009  31.02
993-09  6-1-2009   94.100,
                   94.102
                   150.01 -
                   150.05,
1002-10 12-20-2010 150.07 -
                   150.11,
                   150.13
1007-12 1-30-2012  112.23
1008-12 3-19-2012  152.01 -
                   152.21
                   32.02,
1009-12 7-2-2012   32.03,
                   32.06; Repeal 32.05
1010-12 12-3-2012  79.06
1017-13 5-20-2013  71.26
                   110.101,
                   110.104,
1025-14 1-21-2014  110.122,
                   110.137,
                   110.150,
                   110.154
1027-14 6-2-2014   155.090 -
                   155.097
1028-14 8-18-2014  70.01,
                   79.03
                   155.071,
1030-14 11-17-2014 155.073,
                   155.074,
                   155.077
1033-15 4-6-2015   32.02,
                   32.11
1034-15 6-15-2015  33.04
                   78.08,
1036-15 7-20-2015  93.03,
                   93.05,
                   93.07
                   91.001,
                   91.003,
                   91.004,
                   91.005,
                   91.006,
                   91.008,
                   91.020,
                   91.024,
1037-15 8-3-2015   91.036,
                   91.040,
                   91.044,
                   91.047,
                   91.049,
                   91.050,
                   91.065,
                   91.066,
                   91.067,
                   91.999
1038-15 8-3-2015   10.99
1040-15 9-8-2015   33.04,
                   33.05
1042-15 9-21-2015  131.01
1044-16 2-16-2016  94.033,
                   94.102
                   91.001,
                   91.021,
                   91.025,
                   91.036,
                   91.037,
1045-16 2-1-2016   91.039,
                   91.043,
                   91.045,
                   91.047,
                   91.048,
                   91.067
                   150.01 -
                   150.05,
                   150.07 -
1047-1  4-4-2016   150.11,
                   150.13,
                   150.15 -
                   150.17
                   31.02,
1048-16 9-19-2016  31.06,
                   31.13
1049-16 11-21-2016 131.01,
                   131.02
1052-17 6-5-2017   155.201
                   91.001,
1053-17 6-5-2017   91.007,
                   91.009
1057-17 1-2-2018   34.50 -
                   34.54
1059-18 5-21-2018  91.001
                   93.20 -
1062-18 10-1-2018  93.30,
                   93.99
                  
 
