2019 MOBRIDGE CITY ORDINANCES
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EFFECTIVE 2019
TITLE 1 – ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
Chapter 1-1 Personnel and Expenditure Policies
Chapter 1-2 Mayor and City Council
Chapter 1-3 Fire Department
Chapter 1-4 Police Department
Chapter 1-5 Financial Regulations
Chapter 1-6 Plan Commission
TITLE 2 – BOUNDARIES, WARD AND VOTING PRECINCTS
Chapter 2-1 Boundaries
Chapter 2-2 Wards
Chapter 2-3 Voting Precincts
TITLE 3 – BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 3-1 Building Code
Chapter 3-2 Design - Build Procurement
Chapter 3-3 Uniform Building Code
TITLE 4 – FIRE REGULATIONS
Chapter 4-1 General
Chapter 4-2 Fire Department Charges
TITLE 5 – HEALTH CODE
Chapter 5-1 Establishment of Health Officer
Chapter 5-2 Contagious Diseases
Chapter 5-3 Dumping Grounds
Chapter 5-4 Garbage
Chapter 5-5 Nuisances
Chapter 5-6 Rodent Eradication
Chapter 5-7 Restaurants
Chapter 5-8 Slaughter Houses and Meat Markets
Chapter 5-9 Cats
TITLE 6 – LICENSES
Chapter 6-1 General Provisions
Chapter 6-2 Auctioneers, Auctions
Chapter 6-3 Dance Halls
Chapter 6-4 Dogs
Chapter 6-5 Junk Dealers
Chapter 6-6 Pawn Brokers and Second Hand Dealers
Chapter 6-7 Peddlers, Hawkers
Chapter 6-8 Mobile Home Parks
Chapter 6-9 Bicycles
Chapter 6-10 Taxicabs
Chapter 6-11 Reserved
Chapter 6-12 Tattooing & Body Piercing Establishments
Chapter 6-13 Fireworks
Chapter 6-14 Building Movers
TITLE 7 – OFFENSES
Chapter 7-1 Alcoholic beverages
Chapter 7-2 Offenses Against Public Welfare
Chapter 7-3 Offenses As To Public Places
Chapter 7-4 Offenses As to Property
Chapter 7-5 Gambling
Chapter 7-6 Animals
Chapter 7-7 Minors
TITLE 8 – CONTRACTOR CODE
Chapter 8-1 Licenses and Permits
Chapter 8-2 Plumbing Code
Chapter 8-3 Electrical Code
Chapter 8-4 General Contractor Code
TITLE 9 – STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND PUBLIC PLACES
Chapter 9-1 Names, Numbering, Curb Lines and Grades
Chapter 9-2 Snow Removal On Sidewalks
Chapter 9-3 Use of Streets
Chapter 9-4 Moving Buildings On Streets
Chapter 9-5 Excavation In Public Places
Chapter 9-6 Sidewalks
Chapter 9-7 Public Library
Chapter 9-8 Parks and Recreation
Chapter 9-9 Cemeteries
Chapter 9-10 Public Airport
Chapter 9-11 Widths
Chapter 9-12 Motor Vehicles
Chapter 9-13 Trees
TITLE 10 – TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter 10-1 Definitions-General Provisions
Chapter 10-2 Operation Of Vehicles
Chapter 10-3 Parking Lots
Chapter 10-4 Parking-Stopping
Chapter 10-5 Signs and Signals
Chapter 10-6 Pedestrians
Chapter 10-7 Miscellaneous Provisions
Chapter 10-8 Snowmobiles
Chapter 10-9 Speed
Chapter 10-10 Condition of Vehicles
TITLE 11 – WATER AND SEWERS
Chapter 11-1 Water
Chapter 11-2 Water Rates
Chapter 11-3 Sewer and Water Connections-Special Fees
Chapter 11-4 Sewers
TITLE 12 – FRANCHISES AND EASEMENTS
Chapter 12-1 MDU
Chapter 12-2 Cable Communications
TITLE 13- GENERAL PENALTY REPEALING CLAUSE
Chapter 13-1 General Penalty
Chapter 13-2 Repealing Clause
TITLE 14 - TAXATION
Chapter 14-3 Municipal Sales and Service Tax and Use Tax
Chapter 14-4 Gross Receipts Tax
1
TITLE 1 – ADMINISTRATIVE
Chapter 1-1 – Personnel and Expenditure Policies
Chapter 1-2 - Mayor and City Council
Chapter 1-3 - Fire Department
Chapter 1-4 - Police Department
Chapter 1-5 - Financial Regulations
Chapter 1-6 - Plan Commission
Chapter 1-1 – PERSONNEL AND EXPENDITURE POLICIES
1-1-1 Municipal Personnel Policies
REPEALED effective January 3, 2006. (2005ORD832)
1-1-1.1: Personnel Manual
A. Definition: All persons performing services for the city and who are not independent contractors shall be deemed employees.
1-1-2 Department Heads and Employees :
The Following Department Heads and employees shall be appointed by the Mayor.
Department Heads
*Auditorium Superintendent
*Library Department Head
*Water and Sewer Superintendent
*Street Superintendent
*Chief of Police
*City Administrator
Additional Full-Employees
*Auditorium and Park Split-Time Assistant
*Deputy Finance Officer
*Patrolman (Uncertified, less than one year)
*Patrolman (Certified, less than one year)
*Patrolman (Certified, more than one year)
*Police Captain
*Police Sergeant
*Radio/911 Dispatcher (Uncertified)
*Radio/911 Dispatcher (Certified)
*Radio/911 Relief dispatcher (Uncertified)
*Radio/911 Relief Dispatcher (Certified)
*Street Department Personnel
*Properties Manager
*Water Plant Manager and Waste Water Plant Manager
*Waste Water and Water Plant Personnel
*Assistant Water Superintendent
2
Permanent Part- Time Employees
*Children’s Librarian
*Library Aide
Permanent Part- Time Employees
*Library Relief Worker
*Library Custodians
*Lifeguard (No Experience)
*Lifeguard (One Year or More Experience)
*Park employee
*Swimming Pool Manager
*Swimming Pool Support Staff
*Laborer
Other Appointed Employees
*Fire Department Chief
*Fire Department Secretary
*Zoning Officer/Animal Control Officer/Code Enforcement Officer
Elected Officials
*Mayor
*Council Members
1-1-3 APPOINTED OFFICIAL
The City Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the Council. The City Finance Officer shall be the department head of the city finances. The Finance Officer shall qualify within thirty days after their appointment and, before entering upon the discharge of their duties, by taking and subscribing an oath of office in the form required by the constitution of this state and by furnishing an undertaking to the City of Mobridge to be approved by the City Council in such sums as said City Council shall prescribe by ordinance or resolution where the amount of such undertaking is not fixed by state law. Said bond shall be conditioned for the faithful discharging of the duties of their respective officers and to account for, pay over and deliver all money coming into their hands by virtue of their office, according to law. All such undertakings or bonds, after being approved, shall be filed with the City Finance Officer.
1-1-4 Age Qualifications
REPEALED effective January 3, 2006. (2005ORD832)
1-1-5 Appropriations
All annual appropriations shall be set ordinance and kept on file for public review in the office of the City Finance Officer.
1-1-6 Equal Opportunity Statement
REPEALED effective January 3, 2006. (2005ORD832)
3
CHAPTER 1-2 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
1-2-1 Mayoral Duties
The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council but shall have no vote except in case of a tie or when the zoning board is impaneled. He or she shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the laws and ordinances, and shall take care that such laws and ordinances are faithfully executed. He or she shall give the Council information relative to the affairs of the City, and shall recommend for their consideration such measures as he or she may deem expedient. He or she shall have the power to sign or veto any ordinance or resolution passed by the Council, and the power to veto any part or item of an ordinance or resolution appropriating money.
1-2-2 Meetings
Regular meetings of the governing body shall be held in the City Hall on the second Wednesday of each month at the hour of 5:30 P.M. This schedule may be subject to change in the case of a conflicting holiday. Special meetings may be called at any time by the Mayor to consider such matters as may be mentioned in the call for the meeting.
1-2-3 Notice of Special Meetings
The Finance Officer shall issue written notice of each special meeting to Council Members and further comply with State Law, stating by what authority the meeting is called, the time and place of holding such meeting, and the matters to be considered, with 24 hour notice, unless such meeting is an emergency. In either case, the news media shall be informed of said meeting giving them time to attend the proceedings.
1-2-4 President and Vice President
At the first regular meeting after the annual election in each year and after the qualifications of the newly elected councilmen, the Council shall elect from among its own members a president and vice president who shall hold their respective offices for the municipal year.
The President of the Council, in the absence of the Mayor, shall be the presiding officer of the Council, and during the absence of the Mayor from the City or his or her temporary disability, shall be acting Mayor and possess all of the powers of the Mayor.
In the absence or disability of the Mayor and President of the Council, the Vice President shall perform the duties of the Mayor and President of the Council. In the event of the death of the mayor, the President of the Council shall act as mayor and receive the pay of the mayor. He/she shall retain the duty of mayor until the council officially appoints him/her, selects a new mayor, or a city election is held for the office of mayor.
4
1-2-5 Supervision of Departments
The Mayor, with the approval of the Council, at the first meeting in May of each year, shall appoint two members of the Council to act in a supervisory capacity in the departments of airport, auditorium, park, police, pool, sewer, street, water, and three mile board and further, one member of the Council shall be appointed as a representative in the area of fire, library board, NECOG, the planning commission, USDA – Rural Development and any other departments of the City Council persons assigned to the departments and the mayor shall conduct annual department head reviews. Appointed employees shall be reviewed annually by the mayor and two appointed council persons. All other employees shall be reviewed annually by their department head and council persons in charge, and such Council person, so appointed, shall have supervision over the department to which he or she is named as supervisor, and shall from time to time and as requested by the Council, report as the condition and matters in said department.
1-2-6 CITY ADMINISTRATOR
A. Office Established
The office of City Administrator is hereby established.
B. Appointment of City Administrator
The City Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City of Mobridge with a majority vote of the City Council members, and said appointment is for an indefinite term.
C. Removal of City Administrator
The City Administrator may be removed at any time by the Mayor, with the consent of a majority vote of the council.
D. Powers and Duties
The City Administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the City and shall be responsible to the Mayor and Council for the proper administration of the City. The Administrator shall have the power and shall be required to:
1. Recommend the appointment and removal of department heads and upon recommendation of a department head, the employment, discharge, or discipline of any other employee in accordance with City policies, to the Mayor and Council;
2. Prepare and submit the annual budget in conjunction with the City Finance Officer, prior to August 1 to the Mayor and Council, together with an explanation of important features, and be responsible for its administration in conjunction with the City Finance Officer after adoption;
3. Prepare and submit an annual report on the finances and administrative activities of the City as of the end of the fiscal year in conjunction with the City Finance Officer, to the Mayor and Council;
4. Provide current and accurate information on the financial condition and future fiscal needs of the City with appropriate recommendations to the Mayor and Council;
5
5. Oversee the various departments of the City and work in conjunction with the department heads to ensure that the policies of the Council are being properly implemented and administered;
6. Recommend necessary measures for the continuation and improvement of administrative services to the Mayor and Council;
7. Recommend the consolidation and expansion of offices, positions, or departments as may be deemed necessary for the improvement of City services to the Mayor and Council;
8. Attend all meetings of the Council and other City Commissions and boards, unless excused by the Mayor, and take part in the discussion of all matters presented. The administrator shall be entitled to notice of all such meetings;
9. Supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies, and equipment for which funds are provided in the budget. No purchase shall be made, contract let, or obligation incurred for any items or service which exceeds the current budget appropriation. No contract in excess of the amount established by state law shall be let except by the Council nor shall any purchase in excess of City policy be made without consent of the Council. The Administrator may issue such rules governing purchasing procedures within the administrative organization, as the Council shall provide;
10. Oversee the due enforcement of all laws and ordinances;
11. Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the government of the City, and in regard to service maintained by public utilities in the City, and see that all franchises, permits, and privileges granted by the City are faithfully observed;
12. Keep appraised of rules and regulations of the utility operations of the City and work with Department heads to insure all utility operations are in compliance with state and federal rules and regulations;
13. Promote the City and its enterprises and represent the Council in addressing public concerns and in embracing the economic development activities in the City;
14. Perform such duties as may be required by the Mayor and Council, not inconsistent herewith; and
15. Recommend to the governing body a standard schedule of pay for each office and position in the City service.
E. Compensation
The administrator shall receive such compensation, as the council shall determine.
6
F. Saving Clause
If any provision of this ordinance is held invalid, said decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions. (2004ORD803)
CHAPTER 1-3 FIRE DEPARTMENT
1-3-1 General
The volunteer fire department for the City of Mobridge shall consist of not less than 15 members nor more than 30; and the officers of the Department shall consist of a Chief, Assistant Chief, and Secretary-Treasurer. (2007ORD851)
1-3-2 Members Appointed
The officers and member fire persons shall be elected by a majority vote of the members of the fire department each year at their annual meeting. A list of the officers and members elected at such meeting shall be presented to the City Council for their approval and acceptance.
1-3-3 Duties
The Chief of the Department shall be responsible for the discipline, good order and proper conduct of the whole fire department and shall have police authority and control over all persons who may be present at any fire in said city as well as over all personnel whether regular or volunteer.
He or she shall be responsible for the enforcement of all laws and regulations pertaining to the Department and for the care and condition of all department equipment. He/she shall have the right and duty to inquire into and investigate the cause of all fires which may occur in the City immediately after such fire and write and keep on file the findings of the investigation. He or she shall cooperate with the State Fire Marshall whenever requested to do so. Annual reports shall be made available upon request. He or she shall keep a correct roll of all members of the Department, the date of admission and discharge and rate of pay. He or she shall certify all pay rolls and all bills against the City incurred for the Department. He or she shall keep a record of all members in attendance at fires and report the same together with the time actually employed at each fire.
He or she shall approve all bills of the Department presented to the City Council for payment and shall from time to time recommended to the City Council measures for the good and efficiency of the Department; and shall from time to time recommend to the City Council such new equipment as may be needed.
1-3-4 Assistant Chief, Secretary
In case of absence or inability of the Chief, the Assistant Chief shall have the same power and authority as the Chief of the Department.
The Secretary-Treasurer shall check all members called to answer alarms. He or she shall receive all money from the City that will be paid to the Department from time to time,
7
present all bills to the Council with a list of firemen called to the fire and other expenses that may be incurred.
1-3-5 Assign Duties
The Chief shall, immediately after the appointment by the City Council, assign the members of the Department to their respective positions and duties, and make such rules and regulations for the government of the Department, not in conflict with this ordinance, as shall be necessary.
1-3-6 Care of Property
Each member of the Department shall see that the apparatus or property of the City placed in his or her charge is properly taken care of and shall, unless otherwise directed proceed as soon as possible with such apparatus to every fire that shall occur in the City, and shall proceed under such directions as may be given by the Chief of the Department, or his or her assistant if the Chief be absent, and do all that may be necessary toward extinguishing the fire and preserving property.
1-3-7 Permission to go Beyond City Limits
The Mayor, or in his or her absence, the Acting Mayor, may only in an emergency permit the Department with the apparatus to go more than one mile beyond City limits.
1-3-8 Powers as Chief
The Chief of the Department may prescribe limits in the vicinity of the fire, within which no person except those residing therein, members of the fire department, police force, members of the Council and those admitted by the Chief of the Department or his or her subordinates, shall be permitted to come, and said Chief, or officer having charge in his or her place at any fire, when in his judgment, it is necessary, may call upon any persons present to assist the fire persons in their duties. Any person neglecting or refusing to obey such call by said Chief or officer shall, upon conviction, be fined an amount if money set by the Council.
1-3-9 Chief May Remove Buildings
The Chief of the Department during the progress of any fire, whenever in his or her judgment it becomes necessary to check or control the same, shall have power to order any fence, building or erection of any kind to be cut down and removed. He or she shall also have power to tear down any portion of any building that may be standing after a fire which, in his or her judgment, may be dangerous to persons or property.
1-3-10 Discipline
Each member of the fire department is subject to the provisions set forth in the City of Mobridge’s employee manual. They are expected to carry out the duties assigned them in the course of fighting a fire, or during training. Willfully disobeying orders, or violating the code of discipline as set forth in the city employee manual shall be sufficient grounds for dismissal from the department.
8
1-3-11 Interfering with the Department
Any person who shall willfully hinder or interfere with any City officer or fire person in the performance of his or her duty at, going to, or returning from any fire, or while attending to his or her duty as a member of the Department, or willfully or negligently drive any vehicle over, across, along or upon any hose, or shall willfully cut, deface, destroy or injure any telegraph or telephone wire, poles or signal box or any of the property or fixtures belonging to or connected with the department or the alarm, telegraph or telephone or any other person who shall, without authority, ride upon or attempt to ride upon any of the fire trucks, in going or returning from any fire shall, upon conviction, be fined an amount of $100.00 per offense.
1-3-12 Compensation
The fire chief and fire secretary-treasurer shall receive monthly compensation as set by the annual salary appropriations ordinance. All firemen, when answering to a fire or disaster call shall be compensated at the Rate of $4.00 for the first hour and $3.00 for each hour thereafter. False alarms, meetings and practice sessions shall be paid at the one-hour rate.
1-3-13 Duties of the Police Department
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or other officer in charge of the police to report immediately, at the alarm of the fire to the place where the fire may be and there report themselves and remain for the preservation of the peace and the removal of idle and suspected persons and the preservation and protection of property at and in the vicinity of the fire.
CHAPTER 1- 4 POLICE DEPARTMENT
1-4-1 General
The Police Department of the City of Mobridge shall consist of the Chief of Police and such number of police officers as from time to time the Council shall appoint; provided, however, the Mayor may appoint extra police personnel in case of emergency.
1-4-2 Term of Office
The Chief shall be appointed for one year beginning with the first council meeting in May. He/She is subject to review, and may be removed sooner at the discretion of the mayor and council. He/She shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by resolution.
1-4-3 Chief of Police
The Chief of Police shall see that the ordinances are strictly enforced. He or she shall report to the Mayor or the City Council any violation of the City ordinances, or anything occurring within the City, which is in his or her opinion detrimental to the health or safety or good order of the City. He or she shall at all times be subject to the order of the Mayor and Council and perform such additional duties as the City Council may prescribe. He or she shall
9
give bond for the faithful performance of his or her duties in such amount as the City Council shall direct. He or she shall perform other duties compatible with his or her office as may be provided by law or ordinance.
1-4-4 Police Officers
Each police officer when on duty shall wear the insignia of his or her office on his or her outer garments in conspicuous place, except when occasion may require that it be not exposed; and must be quiet, civil and orderly in his or her conduct and deportment, and refrain from the use of intoxicating liquors, insubordination and dereliction of duty; and it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to make complaint to the Mayor or the City Council of any violation of this section immediately upon obtaining knowledge thereof. He or she shall give bond in such sum as the City Council shall direct for the faithful performance of his or her duties.
1-4-5 Compensation
Each police officer shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by resolution. Each member of the Police Department shall participate in the South Dakota Municipal Police Retirement System. The procedures and requirements of the System can be found in the office of the Chief of Police.
1-4-6 Reserve Police Force
The City of Mobridge may operate within the Police Department a reserve and/or auxiliary police force, the members of which shall be appointed by the Mayor upon the recommendation for the Chief.
Members of the reserve and/or auxiliary police force shall serve on a voluntary basis without pay and within the police power limits of the City.
The Chief of Police shall be commanding officer of the reserve and/or auxiliary police force and shall have control for the assignment, training, stationing and direction in work of the member thereof. Members of the reserve and/or auxiliary police force shall have all police powers, but shall perform only such duties as are assigned by the Chief.
The Chief shall, with the approval of the Mayor, prescribe rules and regulations for the conduct and control of the reserve and/or auxiliary police force.
CHAPTER 1- 5 FINANCIAL REGULATIONS
1-5-1 Annual Reports by Boards
Each of the boards appointed and acting for the City in the administration of the City, shall make an annual report of the receipts, disbursements and activities to the Council as soon as practicable after the close of the fiscal year. The report shall be filed with the City Finance Officer.
10
1-5-1 (a) BUDGET REQUESTS AND ANNUAL REPORTS BY NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
Prior to September 1 each year, all non-profit organizations who desire funding from the City during the following fiscal year shall provide to the City Finance Officer the following:
1. A budget request in a form as approved by the Finance Officer, and
2. An annual report on form 990, or in the alternative a copy of the organization’s checking, savings, investment statements and a listing of the organization’s assets for the preceding 12 months and any additional financial documents requested by the Finance Officer as is necessary for the Finance Officer to be able to determine the receipts, expenditures and assets of the non-profit organization.
Upon receipt of the same and at the City’s annual budget meetings, the City Finance Officer shall provide the City Council with the non-profit organization’s budget request plus either the annual report of the organization or a summary of the financial status of the organization.
No non-profit Organization shall receive operating funds from the City during the following fiscal year unless it shall have first complied with the forgoing.
1-5-2 Contracts by Member for the Council
No officer or member of the Council shall enter into any contract, make any purchase or create any indebtedness against the City in excess of $500.00 without first having submitted the matter of incurring such indebtedness or making such contract to the Council or having received authority of such Council thereof.
1-5-3 Sale of Personal Property
Whenever the city deems it for the best interests of the City, that personal property belonging to the City be sold, which said property has been abandoned or is about to be abandoned for public use, said property shall be sold to the highest bidder upon such terms as may be determined by the Council.
If the property is appraised at a value of more than $500.00, notice of sale shall be given by publication once a week for two successive weeks in the official newspaper of the city, which said notice shall contain a description of the personal property to be sold and the time and place where bids will be received by the Council for said sale; and the Council may at such time sell said personal property to the highest bidder therefore or may in its discretion reject any and/or all bids.
1-5-4 Claims
All claims against the City of Mobridge shall be in writing and upon forms approved by the City Finance Officer and in such form as required by statute of the State of South Dakota. Prior to passage or approval by the Council, claims shall bear the approval of the council persons or person in charge of the department for which such services or supplies are furnished.
11
1-5-5 Funds
The City Finance Officer shall keep full, true and just accounts of all financial affairs of the City and shall keep such accounts and furnish in such form and in such manner from time to time as is required by the State of South Dakota.
1-5-6 Supplies
The City Finance Officer or Department Supervisor shall purchase all supplies, shall have charge thereof and shall make all supplies therefrom; provided no purchase involving an expenditure of more than $750.00 shall be made without the consent of the Mayor or proper council persons of the City Council being first obtained. Emergency repairs of more than $750.00 are to be made with the consent of two council persons or, the Mayor and one council person. All materials and supplies shall, when received, be checked over by the officer or agent receiving the same, and a bill thereof, showing the name of the creditor and each article with the price thereof shall immediately be filed with the City Finance Officer, and shall bear the endorsement of such officer or agent showing in what respect, if any, the material or articles failed to correspond with the material or article ordered.
CHAPTER 1- 6 PLAN COMMISSION
1-6-1 General
The City of Mobridge shall continue to have a City Plan Commission for the City and for the land within three miles of its corporate limits and not located within any other municipality.
1-6-2 Membership of Plan Commission
The City Plan Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council. The members of this Plan Commission shall be resident electors of the City and qualified by knowledge or experience to act in matters pertaining to the development and administration of a City Plan.
1-6-3 Terms of Members
The term of each member of the Plan Commission shall be for two years, except that when such Plan Commission is first appointed, two members shall be appointed to serve a one-year term and three members shall be appointed for a term of two years. Thereafter appointment of each member shall be for two years so that there will be an overlapping of tenures.
12
1-6-4 Vacancies
Any vacancy in a membership on the Plan Commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as for appointment.
1-6-5 Removal for Cause
The Mayor, with the confirmation of the City Council, shall after public hearing, have authority to remove any member of the Plan Commission for cause which cause shall be stated in writing and made a part of the record of such hearing.
1-6-6 Organization
Upon appointment the Plan Commission shall be called together by the Mayor and shall organize by electing a Chairman from among its members for a term of one year with eligibility for re-election, and may fill such other of its offices as it may create in a manner prescribed by the rules of such Plan Commission.
1-6-7 Meeting, Rules, and Records
The Plan Commission shall hold meetings whenever the need arises. Subject to the approval of the City Council, it shall adopt such rules for transaction of its business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations which shall be a public record. Each member of the commission shall receive $15.00 per meeting.
1-6-8 Annual Report
The Planning Commission shall upon the request of the mayor, make a report to the City Council of its proceedings with a statement of its receipts and disbursements and the progress of its work during the proceeding year.
1-6-9 Assistance
Subject to approval of the City Council, the Plan Commission may employ such technical, electrical, clerical and other assistance as may be deemed essential to carry on the work of the Plan Commission. Persons employed shall not be under the Civil Service except as otherwise determined by the City Council. In case of employment of a full-time planning engineer by the City, his or her work shall be performed in cooperation with and under the direction of the Plan Commission. The compensation of all such employees shall be fixed by resolution of the Council.
1-6-10 Contracts
All contracts and agreements relating to the work of the Plan Commission and for services or materials required by it shall be made by the City Council in its discretion.
1-6-11 Master Plan
It shall be a function and duty of the Plan Commission to make and adopt a master plan for the physical development of the municipality, including any areas outside the
13
boundary and within its planning jurisdiction which, in the Plan Commission’s judgment bear relations to the planning of the municipality. The master plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive and explanatory matter, may include among other things, the general location, character and extent of streets, bridges, viaducts, parks, parkways, waterways and water front developments, playgrounds, airports and other ways, grounds, places and spaces; the general location of public schools or buildings and other property; a zoning plan for the regulation of the height, area, bulk, location and use of private and public structures and premises, and of population density as may be provided by law; the general location and extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned, for water, light, power, heat, sanitation, transportation, communication and other purposes; the acceptance, widening, removal, extension, relocation, narrowing, vacation, abandonment or change of use of any of the foregoing public ways, grounds, places, spaces, building, properties, utilities or terminals; the general location, character, layout of the replanning of blighted districts and slum area. The Plan Commission may from time to time amend, extend or add to the plan or carry any part of subject matter into greater detail.
1-6-12 General Purposes of the Plan
In the preparation of the master plan, the Plan Commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of the existing conditions and probable future growth of the municipality and its environs. The plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinate, adjusted and harmonious development of the municipality which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity or the general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development.
1-6-13 Adoption of Master Plan
The Plan Commission may adopt the master plan as a whole by a single resolution, or, as the work of making the whole master plan progresses, may from time to time adopt a part or parts thereof, any such part to correspond generally with one or more of the functional subdivisions of the subject matter of the plan. Before adoption of the master plan or part thereof, the Commission shall hold at least one public hearing, notice of the time and place of which shall be given at least fifteen days in advance of publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the community. The adoption of the plan or any part, amendment or additions, shall be by resolution carried by the affirmative votes of not less than a majority of all the members of the Commission. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps, descriptive matter and other matters intended by the Commission to form the whole or part of the plan, and the action taken shall be recorded on the adopted plan or part thereof, by the identifying signature of the Chairman and the secretary of the Commission, and a copy of the plan or part thereof shall be certified to the City Council.
1-6-14 Miscellaneous Powers of the Commission
The Plan Commission shall have all powers heretofore granted to the zoning commission of the municipality. The Plan Commission may make reports and recommendations relating to the plan and development of the municipality to public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational professional and other organizations and citizens. It may recommend to the executive or legislative officials of the municipality progress for public improvements and the financing thereof. All public officials shall, upon request furnish to the Plan Commission, within a reasonable time, such available information
14
as it may require for its work. The Plan Commission, its members and employees, in the performance of its functions, may enter upon any land, make examinations and surveys and place and maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon. In general, the Plan Commission shall have all such powers as
may be necessary to enable it to fulfill and perform its functions, promote municipal planning or carry out the purpose of this Ordinance.
1-6-15 Legal Status of the Master Plan
Whenever any such Plan Commission shall have adopted the master plan of the municipality or any part thereof, then and henceforth, no street, park or other public way, ground, place or space, no public building or structure, no public utility whether publicly or privately owned, if covered by the master plan or any adopted part thereof shall be constructed or authorized in the municipality or within its platting jurisdiction as defined in Section 1-6-18 until and unless the location and extent thereof shall have been submitted to and approved by the Plan Commission, provided that in case of disapproval, the Plan Commission shall communicate its reasons to the City Council, and the City Council, by vote of not less than two thirds of its entire membership, shall have the power to overrule such disapproval and, upon such overruling, the City Council or the appropriate board or officer shall have the power to proceed; provided, however, that the public way, ground, place, building, structure or utility be one the authorization or financing of which does not, under law or charter provision, governing the same fall within the province of the City Council or other body or official of the municipality, then the submission to the Plan Commission shall be by the Board or official having such jurisdiction, and the Plan Commission’s disapproval may be overruled by said board by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership or by said official. The vote of not less than two-thirds of the entire membership or by acceptance, widening, removal, extension, relocation, narrowing, vacation, abandonment, change of use, acquisition of land for any street or other public way, ground, place, property, or structure shall be subject to similar submission and approval, and failure to approve may be similarly overruled. The failure of the Plan Commission to act within sixty-five days from and after the date of official submission to it shall be deemed approval, unless a longer period is granted by the City Council or other submitting official.
1-6-16 Building or Set-back Lines
From and after the time when the Plan Commission shall have adopted a master plan which included at least a major street plan or shall have progressed in its master planning to the stage of making and adoption of a major street plan, the Plan Commission may recommend and the City Council is hereby authorized and empowered by ordinance to establish, regulate and limit, and to change and amend, building or setback lines on some streets and to prohibit any new building being located within such building or setback lines. The City Council may also provide for a board of adjustment, or may authorize an existing zoning board of adjustment, to modify or vary the regulations in specific cases in order that unwarranted hardship, which constitutes an unreasonable deprivation of use as distinguished from the mere granting of a privilege, may be avoided. The regulations authorized by this section shall not be adopted. The regulations authorized by this section shall not be adopted, change or amended until a public hearing has been held thereon.
15
1-6-17 Platting Jurisdiction
From and after the time when the Plan Commission shall have adopted a master plan which included a major street plan or shall have progressed in its master planning to the state of the making and adoption of a major street plan, and shall file a certified copy of such major street plan in the office of the Register of Deeds of the County in which the municipality is located, no part of subdivision of land lying within the municipality, or of land within three miles of its corporate limits and not located in any other municipality, shall be filed or recorded until it shall be submitted to and a report and recommendations thereon made by said Plan Commission to the City Council and the City Council has approved the plat; provided, however, that in the case of such extra municipal land lying within three miles of any other city or cities having a Plan Commission, the jurisdiction of the Mobridge Plan Commission shall terminate at a boundary line equidistant from the respective corporate limits of the City of Mobridge and such other city or cities. Such plats shall after report and recommendations of the Plan Commission is made and files, be approved or disapproved by the City Council.
1-6-18 Subdivision Regulating
In exercising the duties granted to it by this charter, the Plan Commission shall
recommend and the City Council shall by Ordinance adopt regulations governing the subdivisions of land within its jurisdiction as defined in Section 1-6-17. Such regulation may provide for the harmonious development of the municipalities and its environs; for the coordination of the master plan of the municipality; for adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light and air; and for a distribution of population and traffic which will tend to create conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience of prosperity. Such regulations may include requirements as to of which and the manner in which the streets of the subdivision shall be graded and improved and water, sewer and other facilities shall be installed as a condition precedent to the approval of the play. The regulations may provide for the tentative approval of the plat previous to such improvements and installations; but any such tentative approval shall not be entered on the plat. Such regulations may provide that in lieu of the completion of such work and installations previous to the final approval of a plat, the City Council may accept a bond, in an amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to it, providing for and securing to the municipality the actual construction and installation of such improvements and utilities within a period specified by the City Council and expressed in the bond; and the municipality is put in an assured position to do said work and make said installations at the cost of the owners of the property within the subdivision. Before adoption of its subdivision regulations or any amendment thereof, a public hearing thereon shall be held by the City Council.
1-6-19 Approval of Plats
The plats shall be approved or disapproved within sixty days after the submission thereof; otherwise such plat have been deemed to have been approved and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the City Council on demand; provided, however, that the applicant for the approval may waive this requirement and consent to the extension of such period. The ground of disapproval may waive this requirement and consent to the extension of such period. The ground of disapproval of any plat shall be stated upon the records of the City Council. Any plat submitted for approval shall contain the name and address of a person to whom notice of hearing may be sent; and no plat shall be acted upon by the City Council without offering a hearing thereon, notice of time and place of which shall be sent by mail to said address not less than five days before the date fixed thereof.
16
1-6-20 Improvements in Unapproved Streets
From and after the time when the plating jurisdiction of the municipality shall have attached by virtue of the adoption of a major street plan as provided in Section 1-6-18, the municipality or other public authority shall not accept, lay out, open, improve, grade or light any street or lay or authorize the laying of water mains, sewers, connections or other facilities or utilities in any street within the municipality unless such street shall have been accepted or opened, as or shall otherwise received the legal status of, a public street prior to the adoption of a master plan, or unless such street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a subdivision plat made and adopter by said Plan Commission; provided however, that the City Council, or in the case of a street outside of the municipality, the governing body of such territory, may locate and construct or may accept any other street if the ordinance or other measure for such location and construction or for such acceptance be first submitted to said Plan Commission for its approval; and if disapproved by the Plan Commission, be passed not less than two-third’s of the entire membership of the City Council or said governing body; and a street approved by the Plan Commission upon such submission, or constructed or accepted by said two-thirds vote after disapproval by the Plan Commission, shall have the status of an approved street as fully as though it had been originally shown on a subdivision plat approves by the Planning Commission.
1-6-21 New Buildings on Approved Streets
From and after the time when the platting jurisdiction of the municipality shall have attached by reason of the adoption of a major street plan as provided in Section 1-6-17, no building permit shall be issued for or no building shall be erected as provided in Section 1-6-17 unless the street giving access to the lot upon which said building is proposed to be placed shall be accepted or open as, or shall have otherwise received the legal status of, a public street prior to that time, unless such street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by said City Council or on a street plat made and adopted by said Plan Commission or with a street located and accepted by the City Council, or in case of territory outside the municipal corporation, by the governing body thereof, after submission to said Plan Commission and, in case of said Plan Commission’s disapproval, by the favorable vote required in Section 1-6-20, and building erected in violation of this section shall be deemed an unlawful structure, and the municipality or other governing body may bring action to enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated or removed.
TITLE 2- BOUNDARIES, WARDS AND VOTING PRECINCTS
Chapter 2-1 - Boundaries
Chapter 2-2 - Wards
Chapter 2-3 - Voting Precincts
CHAPTER 2-1 BOUNDARIES
17
2-1-1 Boundaries
The corporate limits of the city of Mobridge are hereby declared to be those which are legally established by law and Ordinance of the City of Mobridge or which may hereinafter be legally established by Ordinance or resolution of the governing body, and as shown on the map hereby incorporated in this Ordinance by reference and adopted as the official map showing the boundaries and limits of the City.
CHAPTER 2-2 WARDS
2-2-1 Wards The City of Mobridge is divided into three Wards as follows, to-wit:
First Ward: All that territory within the corporate limits and lying north of the center line of Ninth Street East from the center line of Fourth Avenue East thence west to the center line of First Avenue West, thence north to the center line of Tenth Street East, thence west to the to the City limits and all that territory within the corporate limits and lying west of the center line of Fourth Avenue East commencing at Ninth Street East thence north to the City Limits, shall be and constitute the First Ward of said City.
Second Ward: All that territory within the corporate limits lying south and west of the center line of Ninth Street East commencing at the Center Line of Main Street, thence west to the center line of First Avenue West, thence north to the center line of Tenth Street West, thence East to the City Limits and all that territory within the corporate limits lying west of the Center line of Main Street commencing at Ninth Street thence South to the City Limits shall be and constitute the Second Ward of said City.
Third Ward: All that territory lying within the corporate limits lying south and east of the center line of Fourth Avenue East commencing at the North City Limits thence South to the Center Line of Ninth Street East thence West to the Center Line of Main Street thence South to the City Limits shall be and constitute the Third Ward of said City.
CHAPTER 2-3 VOTING PRECINCTS
2-3-1 Voting Precincts
The City of Mobridge in all regular and special municipal elections is hereby divided into three election precincts which shall encompass the same boundaries as the boundaries of each of the three Wards as defined in Chapter 2-2.
County Precincts No. 17, 18, 19, 20 shall be included in the boundaries of the First Ward of City of Mobridge.
County Precinct No. 14, 15, 16 shall be included in the boundaries of the Second Ward of City of Mobridge.
County Precincts No. 6, 9, 10, 17, 18 shall be included in the boundaries of the Third Ward of City of Mobridge.
That in the resolution for each annual municipal election or any special election the governing body shall fix and determine the polling place, or places in each municipal precinct,
18
the location of which shall be stated in the notice of election; and in such resolution shall fix the number of judges and clerks of election for each voting precinct who shall be appointed by the governing body. Providing, however, that not less than two judges and one clerk nor more than three judges and two clerks shall be appointed for each voting precinct.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its approval, adoption and publication as provided by law.
TITLE 3 – BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 3-1 - BUILDING CODE
CHAPTER 3-2 - DESIGN - BUILD PROCUREMENT
CHAPTER 3-3 - UNIFORM BUILDING CODE
CHAPTER 3-1 BUILDING CODE
3-1-1 General
The provisions of the adopted building code of Mobridge as amended shall be controlling in the construction of all buildings and other structures within the corporate limits of the City. The building permit fee shall be $10.00 for structures that will cost $1.00 to $1,000.00 to complete; and for any structure costing more than $1,000.00, the additional cost will be $1.00 per $1,000.00 of structure or improvement cost.
That all other provisions of said Section 303 (a) of the Uniform Building Code and amendments shall remain in full force and effect, including the provision that where work for which a permit is required by this Code is started and proceeded with prior to obtaining said permit, the fee specified by the resolution shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this Code and the execution of the work, nor from any other penalties prescribed herein.
The City Council shall have power to grant exceptions and variances from the Uniform Building Code, Uniform Fire Code and Life Safety Code as adopted when the application for permit is for alteration, remodeling, repairing, or building additions to existing structures or when strict compliance will work an extreme hardship on the applicant. Power to approve an exception or variance shall be upon public hearing prior to approval. Public notice of said hearing shall be given to at least one publication in the official city newspaper not less than one week prior to said hearing and by mailing a copy of said notice to the record owners of all property, lying within 300 feet if within the city limits, or one-half mile if within the three-mile jurisdiction, not less than one week prior to the hearing. Such notice shall state the variance requested, and the date, time and place the hearing will be held.
Wherever the word “Municipality” is used in the building code, it shall be held to mean the City of Mobridge.
Wherever the term “Corporation Counsel” is used in the building code, it shall be held to mean the Attorney for the City of Mobridge.
19
Nothing in this chapter or in the code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding now pending any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, nor any cause or causes of action accrued or existing under any act or ordinance repealed hereby. Nor shall any right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter or of the code hereby adopted shall not invalidate other sections or provisions thereof.
Any Ordinance or parts thereof in force at the time that this Ordinance shall take effect and inconsistent herewith, are hereby repealed.
3-1-2 Zoning Officer
The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the City Council. He or she shall be an official or employee of the City, who shall assume the duties of building official in addition to his or her other duties. His or her appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service. He or she shall be subject to provisions set forth in the city employee manual.
During temporary absence or disability of the Building and Zoning Official, the appointing authority shall designate an acting Building and Zoning Official.
3-1-3 Duties of a Zoning Officer
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to enforce all laws relating to the zoning construction, alteration, removal, and demolition of all buildings and structures, including but not limited to fences and sidewalks.
3-1-4 Application for Permits
Application for all permits required by the building code shall be first submitted to the Zoning Officer, who shall endorse thereon his or her approval or disapproval thereof which shall be final subject to rights of appeal in the manner as set forth in the Zoning Ordinances of the City of Mobridge.
3-1-5 Right of Entry
The Zoning Officer, in the discharge of his or her official duties, and upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable time.
3-1-6 Fire Limits Construction Established
The fire limits of the City embrace all of the area within the business, light industrial and heavy industrial districts as defined by the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Mobridge, South Dakota, No. 486, as amended, and as may be further amended from time to time.
20
3-2 DESIGN-BUILD PROCUREMENT
3-2-1 Purpose
Pursuant to SDCL Title 5-18A, the following procedures are established for the solicitation and award of design-build contracts.
3-2-2 Definitions
For purposes of this procedure the definitions in SDCL Title 5, and the following definitions apply:
(1) “City” means the City of Mobridge
(2) “Firm” means any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association, joint venture or other legal entity permitted by law to practice engineering, architecture and construction contracting in the City of Mobridge.
(3) “Project” means the project described in the public announcement. (1999 ORD 756)
3-2-3 Minimum Qualification Requirements for Firms Providing Design-Building Services
The design-builder shall be duly registered with the South Dakota Secretary of State and the Department of Revenue and, where required by state or federal law, shall be able to provide design or construction services by duly licensed or registered individuals.
3-2-4 Utilization of Design-Build
The determination to utilize design-build shall follow specifications set forth in SDCL 5-18A.
3-2-5 Public Announcement Procedures
Except in Emergency situations, the City shall publish an announcement in the city’s official newspaper in accordance with SDCL 5-18A-14, setting forth a general description of the project requiring design-build services and defining the time frame and procedures for interested qualified firms to apply for consideration. The public announcement shall further state whether design-builders will be prequalified for the project.
3-2-6 Technical Review Committee
There shall be a Technical Review Committee comprised of the Mayor, Zoning Officer, Water and Waste Water Superintendent and the Chairperson of the Major Organizational Unit sponsoring the project.
The Technical Review committee shall determine the most qualified proposers as provided in Section 3-2-7 and rate and score Qualitative Proposals as provided in Section 3-2-9.
21
3-2-7 Prequalification of Design-Builders
(1) The City may prequalify design-builders.
(2) The City may issue a Request for Qualifications (“RFQ”) by advertisement in accordance with SDCL 5-18A-14. The RFQ shall contain a general description of the project; a description of the areas of qualification requirement for performance of the work, such as experience, management resources and financial capability; the basis upon which the most qualified offerors will be determined; and any other requirements for the submittal of statements of qualifications. Firms desiring to submit proposals on the design-builder project shall submit a statement of qualifications setting forth the qualifications of the entities involved in the firm and providing any other information required by the RFQ.
(3) The Technical Review Committee shall determine the relative ability of each firm to perform the services required for each project. Determination of ability shall be based upon experience with comparable projects; financial and bonding capacity; managerial resources; the abilities of the professional personnel; past performance for the City; capacity to meet time and budget requirements; knowledge of local or regional conditions; recent, current and project workload of the firms; and the ability of the design and construction teams to complete the work in a timely and satisfactory manner.
(4) The Technical Review Committee shall select not more than five firms deemed to be most highly qualified to perform the required services, after considering the factors in (2) and (3) above. An RFQ shall be issued to those firms selected.
3-2-8 Performance Criteria Package and Request for Proposals
(1) A performance criteria package shall be prepared by the City, using a registered
architect or engineer either on staff of the City or selected in accordance with procedures employed for selecting design firms. When a project is exempted from the provisions of SDCL 36-18A, the criteria developer need not be registered. The design criteria package may include, but not be limited to, site survey; material quality standards; programmatic space needs; conceptual design criteria; design and construction schedules; site development requirements; stipulation of responsibilities for permits and connections to utilities, storm water and roads; stipulation of responsibility for meeting environmental regulations and growth management requirements; soil borings and geotechnical information, performance specifications; and a statement of required compliance with codes and general technical specifications.
(2) The purpose of the performance criteria package is to furnish sufficient
information for firms to prepare qualitative proposals and price proposals. The firm to
whom the design-build contract is awarded shall develop a detailed project design based
on the criteria in the performance criteria package and for construction of the facility in
compliance with the performance criteria package.
(3) The Request for Proposals (“RFP”) shall consist of: the performance criteria
package, instructions to bidders, bid proposal forms, provisions for contracts, general and
special conditions, and basis for evaluation of proposals.
22
3-2-9 Competitive Selection of Design-Build Services
(1) A Qualitative and a Price Proposal shall be submitted by each firm submitting proposals. In the case of prequalification such proposals shall only be accepted from prequalified firms. Price proposals shall include one lump sum cost for all design, and construction of the proposed project, preliminary design documents and other data requested in response to the RFP.
Proposals shall be segmented into two packages:
(a) Qualitative Proposal. A qualitative proposal shall Include preliminary design drawings, outline specifications, technical reports, calculations, permit requirements,
management plan, schedule and other data requested in response to the RFP.
(b) Price Proposal. The price proposal shall be submitted in a separate sealed package. The package shall indicate clearly that it is the price proposal and shall identify clearly the firm’s name, project description, or any other information
required by submission of proposals. The price proposal shall be secured until the time provided in Section 10, paragraph (1).
(2) The Technical Review Committee shall review the design concepts, preliminary designs and technical data proposed by each firm and shall establish a rating for each firm’s proposal based upon criteria to be established by the Technical Review Committee for the project.
(3) The Technical Review Committee then will total and submit the qualitative scores for each firm to the Finance Officer. The maximum qualitative score is 1.0.
3-2-10 Selection and Award for Design-Build Services
(1) The Finance Officer shall set a date for publicly opening the price proposals, and shall notify all firms submitting price proposals at least seven days prior to the opening date. The notification shall include the date, time and place of the opening of price proposals and date for award of the project.
(2) The Finance Officer shall publicly open the sealed price proposals and divide each firm's proposed price by the qualitative score given by the Technical Review Committee to obtain an "adjusted price." The firm whose adjusted price is lowest.
(3) In lieu of requiring Qualitative and Price Proposals, the City may establish a fixed dollar budget for the design-build project in the RFP, and require only Qualitative Proposals, price being fixed for all proposers. In this approach, award is made to the proposal receiving the highest qualitative score.
(4) Unless all proposals are rejected, the Finance Officer will recommend approval of an award to the firm with the lowest adjusted price. The City shall give written notice to the design-builder who submitted the accepted proposal. All other design-builders shall be informed in writing that their proposals were not accepted. The City reserves the right to reject all proposals.
23
(5) The City shall enter into a contract with the firm selected. At the time of the award, the City may negotiate minor changes for the purpose of clarifying the design criteria and work to be done, provided that the negotiated changes do not affect the ranking of the proposals based on their adjusted scores
3-2-11 Intentionally left blank.
3-2-12 Confidential Information
The City will make reasonable efforts to maintain the secrecy and confidentiality of any proposal and all information contained in any proposal may not disclose any of any proposal and all information contained in a proposal to the design/Builder's competitors. To the extent permitted by the provisions of SDCL Chapter 1-25, the City will not disclose confidential and proprietary information contained in any proposal to the public until such time as the City takes final action to accept a proposal.
3-2-13 Emergency Purchases
A design/build contract may be awarded in an emergency without advertising pursuant to SDCL 5-18A.
CHAPTER 3-3 UNIFORM BUILDING CODE; UNIFORM BUILDING CODE STANDARDS; and UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
CHAPTER 3-3 UNIFORM BUILDING CODE
3-3-1 GENERAL
Section 1. That a certain document, which is on file in the office of the City Finance Office of the City of Mobridge being marked and designated as the International Building Code, 2012 edition, (see International Building Code Section 101.2.1, 2012 edition), as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City of Mobridge, in the State of South Dakota for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Building Code on file in the office of the City of Mobridge are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Sections 2 and 3 of this ordinance.
Section 2. The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: City of Mobridge, South Dakota
Section 3412.2. Insert: June 18, 2013
24
Section 3. The following sections are hereby deleted:
Section 1612
All other provisions of the International Building Code, 2012 edition which are in conflict with other ordinances currently in effect or hereafter adopted by the City of Mobridge are specifically deleted.
Section 4. That if any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this legislation is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. The City of Mobridge hereby declares that it would have passed this law, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
Section 5. That nothing in this legislation or in the Building Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights, acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in Section 3 of this law; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this legislation.
Section 6. That the Finance Officer of the City of Mobridge is hereby ordered and directed to cause this legislation to be published according to law.
Section 7. That this law and the rules, regulations provisions, requirements, orders and matters established and adopted hereby shall take effect and be in full force and effect from and after the date of its final passage and adoption.
Section 8: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this code within the City of Mobridge and within one a one mile radius of the corporate limits of the City of Mobridge.
TITLE 4- FIRE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 4-1 – GENERAL
CHAPTER 4-2 – FIRE DEPARTMENT CHARGES
CHAPTER 4-1 GENERAL
4-1-1 Enforcement
The official adopted Fire Code of the City shall be enforced by the Chief of the Fire Department.
25
4-1-2 Establishment of Limits of Districts in which Storage of
Flammable Liquids in Outside Above ground Tanks and Bulk Storage
Of Liquefied Petroleum Cases is to be Restricted
The limits referred to in Section 804a of the Code in which storage of flammable liquids in outside above ground tanks in prohibited, and the limits referred to in Section 1104 of the Code, in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby established as follows: the fire limits as established by Section 3-1-6 of this Ordinance.
4-1-3 Modifications
The Chief of the Fire Department shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the Code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee or his or her duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the Code, provided that the spirit of the Code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modifications when granted or allowed and the decision of the Chief of the Fire Department thereon shall be entered upon when granted or allowed and the decision of the Chief of the Fire Department thereon shall be entered upon the records of the Department and a signed copy shall be furnished by the applicant.
4-1-4 Appeals
Wherever the Chief of the Fire Department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a license or permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the Code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the Chief of the Fire Department to the City Council within thirty days from the date of the decision of the appeal.
4-1-5 Controlled Burns
No person, business, or entity shall burn any material or have a controlled burn within the city limits of Mobridge, or its surrounding three-mile jurisdiction, without first having completed a permit and obtaining the consent of the fire chief. This section does not apply to grills, barbecue grills, licensed outdoor incinerators, stoves or fireplaces. If a permit is denied, the applicant can appear before the city council at a public hearing which shall be advertised for two consecutive weeks, and shall take place at a regularly schedule council meeting, where the council will either approve or deny the application. (2006ORD835)
4-1-6 Failure to Secure Permit
Failure to secure a permit shall be subject to the general penalties provision listed in the general penalties chapter.
4-1-7 Obstruction of a Fire Hydrant
It shall be unlawful for anyone to obstruct a fire hydrant and the volunteer firemen of the City of Mobridge are authorized to remove the obstruction at owner's expense.
No person shall obstruct the use of any fire hydrant or leave, or place any material in front thereof or within three feet from either side thereof. Any and all material found as an obstruction as aforesaid may be forthwith removed by any member of the fire department,
26
water department or police department at the risk or the cost and expense of the owner or claimant of the property. (2006 ORD 836)
CHAPTER 4-2 FIRE DEPARTMENT CHARGES
4-2-1: Purpose
The within ordinance is adopted for the purpose of providing financial assistance to the city in the operation of a fire department from those receiving direct benefits from the fire protection service. It is the further purpose of the within ordinance to provide for full funding of the fire department operation which remains, in part, an at-large governmental expense based upon the general benefits derived by all property owners within the city from the existence of a city fire department and its availability to extinguish fires within the city and perform other emergency services. (2005ORD811)
4-2-2: Charges
The City shall set by resolution, the charges due and payable to the city from a recipient of any of the following enumerated services from the city fire department:
Grass fire; Rubbish fire; Automobile fire; Truck fire; House fire; Fire in a commercial, industrial or manufacturing establishment; Fire in a multiple-family building; hotel or motel fire; aircraft fire; train fire; Emergency rescue service; Resuscitator service; and Other services not specifically enumerated. (2005ORD811)
4-2-3: Time for Payment for Run
All of the foregoing charges shall be due and payable within 30 days from the date the service is rendered and any default of payment shall be collectible through legal proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction as a matured debt. (2005ORD811)
4-2-4: Exemptions
The following properties and services shall be exempt from the foregoing charges:
A. False alarms, if there are three or less from one location during the year.
B. Fire involving city buildings, grounds and/or property.
C. Fire service performed outside the jurisdiction of the city under a mutual aid contract. (2005ORD811)
4-2-5: Collection of Charges
The city may proceed in court by suit to collect any monies remaining unpaid and shall have any and all other remedies provided by law for the collection of said charges. (2005ORD811)
27
4-2-6: Non-Exclusive Charge
The foregoing rates and charges shall not be exclusive of the charges that may be made by the city for the costs and expenses of maintaining a fire department, but shall only be supplemental thereto. Charges may additionally be collected by the city through general taxation after a vote of the electorate approving the same or by a special assessment established under South Dakota law pertinent thereto.
General fund appropriations may also be made to cover such additional costs and expenses. (2005ORD811)
4-2-7: Multiple Property Protection
When a particular service rendered by the city fire department directly benefits more than one person or property, the owner of each property so benefited and each person so benefited where property protection is not involved shall be liable for the payment of the full charge for such service hereinbefore outlined. The interpretation and application of the within section is hereby delegated to the city fire chief subject only to appeal, within the time limits for payment, to the city council and shall be administered so that charges shall only be collected from the recipients of the service. (2005ORD811)
TITLE 5 - HEALTH CODE
CHAPTER 5-1 - ESTABLISHMENT OF HEALTH OFFICER
CHAPTER 5-2 - CONTAGIOUS DISEASES
CHAPTER 5-3 - DUMPING GROUNDS
CHAPTER 5-4 - GARBAGE
CHAPTER 5-5 - NUISANCES
CHAPTER 5-6 - RODENT ERADICATION
CHAPTER 5-7 - RESTAURANTS
CHAPTER 5-8 - SLAUGHTER HOUSES AND MEAT MARKETS
CHAPTER 5-9 - CATS
CHAPTER 5-1 - ESTABLISHMENT OF HEALTH OFFICER
5-1-1 Appointment
There shall be appointed at the time of the appointment of other municipal officers, a Health Officer who shall be an actively practicing physician employed in the City of Mobridge.
5-1-2 Powers
The Health Officer, in conjunction with the police officers of the City, shall exercise a general supervision over the health of the City and shall have general and direct supervision of the enforcement of the provisions of this title.
28
CHAPTER 5-2 CONTAGIOUS DISEASES
5-2-1 Power
The Health Officer, or Chief of Police, shall have the power and authority to enter any premises in the City in search of contagious diseases or nuisances. He/She shall have the power and authority to quarantine any premises, and to remove any persons suffering from, suspected of suffering from, or who has been exposed to said disease or nuisance. Said officer may place a sign denying general public access and/of denying affected persons to leave the premises per SDCL 34-22-12 and ARSD 44:20.
Every physician practicing within the city limits of Mobridge shall report Class I diseases or nuisance immediately to the Health Officer. The Health Officer shall notify the State Health Lab within 24 hours with the name, age, sex, and address of such case, the name of the disease, and the source of contamination, if known. Upon termination of said disease, the Health Officer shall also give the state notification. Class ll diseases need to be reported within three days, using the same criteria. An updated list of classes of diseases shall be on file at local medical facilities.
5-2-2 Penalty
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter; or who refuses or neglects to obey any of the rules, orders or sanitary regulations of the Health Officer, or who omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any order or special regulation of the Health Officer, or who resists such officer, shall be subject to the penalty as provided in the Chapter of General Penalties of this Ordinance.
CHAPTER 5-3 DUMPING GROUNDS
5-3-1 Site of Landfill
The governing body has contracted with Walworth County to provide a place or places known as garbage collection sites or sanitary landfill for the deposit of all garbage, rubbish, metal debris, tires, appliances, ashes, grass cuttings, tree materials, and other waste and discarded materials collected or accumulated in the City. Such material shall be taken to and placed within the landfill in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the Walworth County Commissioners.
5-3-2 Rubble Site
A rubble site shall be setup by the City for the acceptance of trees and tree branches, subject to regulations as set by the Council in regard to fees and ties of operation.
5-3-3 Refuse Hauling
Every domestic family unit and multiple dwelling shall have their normal quantity of refuse hauled by the garbage contractor. Businesses may contract with the city contractor or shall make other provisions to, in a timely manner, have their refuse hauled. Refuse derived from dismantling or remodeling homes or other building, new construction, including curb and
29
sidewalks, fire damages, barn wastes, excavated earth or sand from contractors’ projects or individual construction, shall be disposed of by the person, persons, firm or contractor responsible for such refuse. Refuse shall not include dead carcasses, carrion, entrails and bones of slaughtered animals, filth from any privy box or from a cesspool.
Properly cut tree debris, scrap lumber and metal debris, tires, appliances, mattresses, and other furniture may be collected by the City when authorized and directed by the governing body during designated clean-up periods. Some material may be subject to a fee to City Hall prior to collection. Citizen haulers shall be permitted to haul tree branches, tree trunks and other waste and rubbish to the collection site or sanitary landfill which they shall deposit at a designated location as directed by the County Sanitary Landfill Supervisor, except that car bodies, machinery and large pieces of scrap metal shall not be deposited or permitted at the garbage collection site or sanitary landfill area at any time unless authorized by the Walworth County Council. All applicable fees are the responsibility of the citizen hauler.
5-3-4 Refuse Deposit
No garbage, rubbish or waste material collected in the city shall be deposited at any location except such area or sites that are so designated or contracted for by the governing body.
5-3-5 Regulation Enforcement
The operation and enforcement of this Ordinance shall be vested in the City Council, Chief of Police and Health Officer. The City Council and Health Officer shall have the right to promulgate rules and regulations for the carrying out of the intents and purposes of this Ordinance, subject to the approval of the governing body. Any such rules and regulations so adopted shall be filed with City Finance Officer, who shall keep the same available for public inspection and published once prior to the effective date thereof.
5-3-6 Violations
Any person, persons, firms or corporations violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance or violating any rule or regulation promulgated by the City Council and Zoning Officer and approved by the governing body and duly published shall upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished pursuant to the penalties set forth under the General Penalties ordinance
Each day that a violation of the Ordinance, or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder, shall be considered a separate offense, punishable upon conviction as stated.
Chapter 5-4, Garbage and Ashes, of the Revised Ordinances of the City of Mobridge, South Dakota, 1998 Ordinance in Revision No. 746 is REPEALED.
5-4A GARBAGE
5-4A-1 DEFINITIONS.
A. The term “refuse” or “solid waste” as used in this chapter shall be interpreted to mean kitchen waste, an accumulation of animal and vegetable matter which attends the
30
preparation, cooking, and eating of food; cans, bottles, paper, other waste materials ordinarily originating in a household, but excluding yard waste, tree limbs, industrial byproducts, building materials, metal objects more than 12 inches in length, ashes, dirt, rock, sand, brick, tile or concrete, asphalt, sewage and body wastes, and any object that will not fit into the waste container hereinafter defined.
B. The term “owner” shall mean the actual owner of the building or real estate, either individual, partnership, or corporation, the agent of the owner in charge of such property, or the person to whom any rental or such property is paid.
C. The term “occupant” shall mean the individual, the partnership, or the corporation that has the use of the building or real estate, either residence or commercial, or a part or a portion thereof, whether the actual owner, tenant, or sub-tenant. In the case of vacant buildings, residence or commercial, or any vacant portion of the building or real estate, the owner, agent or custodian shall have responsibility or an “occupant” of said property. In the case of a multiple family building or residence, each family shall have the responsibility of the “occupant” of said building.
D. The term “business building” shall mean any structure, public or private, that is adapted for occupancy, for transaction of business, for rendering professional services, for amusement, the display, sale or storage of foods, wares, or merchandise, or for the performance of work or labor, including – but not being limited in its application to hotels, office buildings, public buildings, stores, theaters, markets, restaurants, grain elevators, warehouses, work shops, factories, and all out-buildings, sheds, barns, and other structures and premises used for business purposes.
E. The term “residence building” shall mean any structure that is used for the housing and living quarters.
F. The term “yard waste” shall mean organic materials that can be composted and shall be limited to yard and garden materials such as grass, leaves, weeds, and flower and vegetable garden waste. (2003)
5-4A-2 COLLECTION-RESIDENTIAL SERVICE.
A. General
All garbage, rubbish, rubble, and refuse created, produced, or accumulated in or about a dwelling house, residence building or place of human habitation in the City limits of the City of Mobridge shall be removed from the premises at least once each week. The city may require a greater number of collections per week.
The city shall contract for lowest bid to a solid waste hauler for a period of three (3) years. The city shall set the billing rate by resolution and bill all residents on their utility statements. No billing will be done by the private hauler for residential service. (2005ORD810) (2003ORD798)
31
B. Property Owner’s Responsibility
The owner or person in control of any private property, residence building or business building shall at all times maintain the premises free of commercial waste, household waste, garbage, infectious waste, industrial waste, rubble or yard waste except that used for composting. (2003)
C. Customer Containers and Location
1. No person or occupant shall deposit any refuse for collection by a licensed garbage collector or hauler, except in a suitable watertight metal or plastic container, with a tightly fitted cover or in a garbage dumpster/tote which may be provided. All paper, pasteboard boxes, building material waste, and similar rubbish and waste shall be deposited for collection in a box or bin provided with a lid which shall be kept closed.
2. The owner or manager of any dwelling who rents, leases, or lets dwelling unit(s) for human habitation shall provide in a location accessible to all dwelling units at least one 30-gallon receptacle for each dwelling unit, or receptacles with a capacity sufficient to prevent the overflow of garbage and rubbish from occurring, and receptacles for recycling, into which garbage, rubbish, and recyclable materials from the dwelling units may be emptied between days of collection. The owner or manger of the units shall subscribe to and pay or provide for garbage removal and recyclable service as required by ordinance.
3. Garbage containers shall be kept on the premises adjacent to an alley bordering on the premises so they are accessible from the alley adjoining the premises. Where no alley is available, they may be placed on the boulevard, driveway or parkway adjoining the premises on the day of garbage collection. If alleys become impassable, the City may order that residents place the containers in the boulevard, driveway or parkway adjacent to the premises on the day of garbage collection until such time as the alleys again become passable. (2003)
5-4A-3 COLLECTION-COMMERCIAL/BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS.
All commercial establishments, including but not limited to hotels, motels, food or beverage service establishments, and retail, wholesale, service, industrial and warehousing establishments, shall arrange for disposal of refuse generated by or accruing to such establishment by a licensed commercial garbage collector or hauler. This will not include churches or apartment buildings. (2003)
5-4A-4 COMMERCIAL GARBAGE COLLECTORS OR HAULERS.
A. General
It is unlawful for contract or commercial collectors or haulers to use the streets for the collection, removal or disposal of any receivable solid waste and yard waste without first having obtained a license to perform such services from the finance officer and upon approval by the City Council. As a condition to the granting of any said license, all commercial collectors and haulers shall agree to abide by all city ordinances or landfill regulations involving the collection or depositing of any receivable solid waste and yard waste. In the
32
event any commercial garbage collector or hauler fails to abide by these said ordinances or regulations the City of Mobridge reserves the right to terminate said license. This requirement does not apply to building contractors removing and disposing of receivable solid waste incidental to a construction contract, nor to any firm or individual who, for a fee engages in the removal of receivable solid waste for disposal for fewer than two days in any calendar year. (2003)
B. License Application
Application for license shall be filed and license fee paid in full at the office of the finance officer five (5) days prior to any consideration and approval by the council. The license fee shall be three hundred sixty-five dollars ($365.00) per year, without regard to the time of year of issuance, for commercial collectors or contract haulers collecting and transporting receivable solid waste including any one of the following types of material: garbage, household waste, industrial waste, and commercial waste. Such license shall also entitle holder to collect and transport yard waste and large trees and limbs. All licenses expire December 31 in the year they are issued. The license plate or placard issued shall be displayed on each such vehicle at all times. Licenses cannot be transferred. (2003)
C. Liability Insurance
Each license applicant shall, at the time of the submission of the license application, provide written verification to the city that the applicant met the financial liability requirement of state law for liability insurance coverage for the vehicles used in the collector’s or hauler’s business. (2003)
D. License Revocation, Suspension or Denial
The City Council may revoke, suspend, refuse to issue or transfer any license under this article to any licensee or applicant who fails to comply with the requirements of this article or engages in unfair business practices. Any license issued under the provision of this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the City Council for violation of any applicable provision of this chapter, any other City ordinance rule or regulation or provision of state or federal law by such licensee, its agent or employee. The council shall give fifteen days’ written notice prior to hearing. (2003)
E. Rules and Regulations
The City Council is hereby empowered to promulgate and from time to time change any and all rules and regulations necessary for the conduct of garbage collectors and haulers.
5-4A-5 DUTY OF COLLECTORS AND HAULERS
Licensed collectors and haulers shall obey all the ordinances and all the rules and regulations of the City of Mobridge or its designated officer and report to the police department any violation of this chapter which may come to their notice. All licensed collectors and haulers may provide a subscription service for each customer. All charges for the collection of yard waste shall be made separate and distinct from any basic charges for all other collection services of receivable solid waste. Any violation of this article or other rules and regulations that may be made from time to time by the City of Mobridge, or any nonpayment of the fees provided by this article will result in the suspension or revocation of the license to haul. (2003)
33
5-4A-6 COLLECTION
Every licensed commercial collector or hauler shall collect receivable solid waste from the residence buildings at least once in each week and from the business buildings at least three times in each week. The collection for the business shall be made as early in the day as is convenient. When there is more than two inches of snow, the Street Superintendent may determine, when the residential and business alleys are passable for purposes of garbage collection. Commercial garbage collectors and haulers shall be under no obligation to remove receivable solid waste unless the payments for the removal of such receivable solid waste, as provided by arrangement with the customer, shall have been made. Every licensed commercial collector or hauler may, in addition to the regular collection, collect all yard waste. (2003)
5-4A-7 GARBAGE COLLECTION/HAULING VEHICLES
A. Licensed collectors and haulers of garbage and/or commercial solid waste and industrial waste shall provide themselves with suitable vehicles which shall be all metal, water tight, and be of the packer type. Such vehicles shall be thoroughly washed and sanitized weekly from May through September and bi-weekly from October through April. Garbage shall be so loaded and unloaded so that the contents shall not fall or spill upon the ground. No article or item shall be carried on such vehicles so as to drag upon the streets.
B. Licensed collectors and haulers of yard waste and large trees and limbs shall provide themselves with suitable vehicles, which, when transporting or loading, the contents shall not spill upon the ground. No articles or items shall be carried on such vehicles so as to drag upon the streets.
C. It is prohibited for any licensed refuse collector or hauler to collect or haul wet refuse or material subject to rot, decay or putrefaction, or material or liquids emitting strong or noxious odors, in any type of vehicle except in an all metal, packer type vehicle.
D. Any licensed commercial collector or hauler shall not operate a refuse collection vehicle except in conformity with this chapter and any other applicable ordinances.
E. Painting and identification. Refuse hauling vehicles used by licensed collectors or haulers under this article shall be painted at regular intervals so as to be kept in a sanitary condition. Each vehicle shall identify the name of the collector or hauler. In addition, the box capacity shall be displayed on the left side of all compact vehicles in such a manner that the capacity numbering is visible from twenty-five feet. The tire weight shall be shown in like manner and shall be certified annually at time of licensing.
F. Refuse truck weight limits. Trucks used for regular daily residential solid waste and yard waste collection, and commercial solid waste, shall adhere to all state size and axle weight limitations and shall, under no circumstances, exceed a total gross weight of 55,000 pounds.
34
G. Premises where parked or serviced. The premises on which commercial refuse vehicles under this article are parked or serviced shall be kept free from rubble, trash, debris or garbage. They shall not be parked in a residential area. (2003)
5- 4A-8 VIOLATIONS
Any person, firm or corporation failing to comply with provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine of two hundred dollars ($200) for each day’s failure to comply therewith and each day shall be a separate violation. In addition, any commercial garbage collector or hauler convicted of a violation of any terms of this Chapter shall forfeit his/her/its license for not less than 30 days. (2003)
5-4A-9 EFFECTIVE DATE
This Chapter shall not become effective until July 1, 2003. (2003)
CHAPTER 5-5 NUISANCES DANGEROUS TO THE PUBLIC AND MAINTENANCE AND SANITATION OF PREMISES AND BUILDINGS
5-5-1 Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance is to protect, promote, and enhance the welfare, safety, health, and property of the general public by prohibiting the keeping or maintaining of properties at variance with and inferior to the level of maintenance of surrounding properties.
5-5-2 Definitions
(a) Building: Any structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons or property.
(b) Premises: A lot or parcel of land, improved or unimproved, parking areas thereon, walkways, and sidewalks.
(c) Sidewalk: A strip of property lying in front of and between the curb line and property line of the adjoining or abutting lot, piece, or parcel of land within the city.
(d) Building Official: As used in this ordinance, shall be construed to mean the City Health Officer, the Chief of Police, the Fire Chief, the Building Official, their respective authorized representatives, or any other city official authorized by the legislative body of this jurisdiction with enforcement of this ordinance.
5-5-3 Maintenance of Premises and Buildings Generally
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any buildings or premises in the city to keep or maintain such building or premises in a manner which is at variance with and inferior to the level of maintenance of surrounding properties.
35
5-5-4 Enumeration of Conditions Constituting Nuisance
(1) Impure Water. Any well or other supply of water used for drinking or household purposes which is polluted or which is so constructed or situated that it may become polluted.
(2) Undressed Hides. Undressed hides kept longer than twenty-four hours, except at the place where they are to be manufactured, or in a storeroom, or basement whose construction is approved by the Health Department.
(3) Manure. The accumulation of manure, unless it be in a properly constructed fly-proof, pit, bin, or box.
(4) Breeding Places for Flies. The accumulation of manure, garbage, or anything whatsoever in which flies breed.
(5) Stagnant Water. Any excavation in which stagnant water is allowed to collect.
(6) Weeds. Permitting weeds to grow to maturity, or permitting weeds or grass to grow in excess of 10” tall, on any property, including vacant lots. All noxious weeds are prohibited. (2006ORD841) (1998ORD746)
(7) Dead Animals. For the owner of a dead animal to permit to remain undisposed of longer than twenty-four hours after its death.
(8) Privies and Cesspools. Erecting or maintaining any privy or cesspool except such sanitary privies and cesspools, the plans of which are approved by the State Health Department.
(9) Handling Garbage Improperly. Throwing or letting fall on or permitting to remain on any street, alley or public ground any manure, garbage, rubbish, filth, fuel or wood engaged in handling or removing any such substance.
(10) Rodents. Accumulating of junk, old iron, automobiles, or parts thereon, or anything whatsoever in which Rodents live, breed, or accumulate.
(11) Bonfires in Public Places. Burning, causing, or permitting to be burned in any street, alley, or public ground any dirt, filth, manure, garbage, sweeping, leaves ashes, paper, rubbish, or material of any kind.
(12) Parking Livestock Trucks or Trailers in Residential Districts. Parking or permitting livestock trucks or trailers to remain on any street, area, or public ground in a residential district where such truck or trailer gives off any offensive odor or is contaminated with manure or other filth.
(13) Buildings which are abandoned, boarded up, partially destroyed, or partially constructed and uncompleted subsequent to the expiration of building permits.
(14) Building with deteriorating or peeling paint that allows the exterior building coverings to deteriorate or to permit the effects of sun and water penetration so as to encourage decay, dry rot, warping, and cracking.
36
(15) Broken windows, doors, attic vents and under floor vents.
(16) Overgrown vegetation which is unsightly and/or likely to harbor Rodents or vermin.
(17) Dead, Decayed, or diseased trees, weeds and other vegetation.
(18) Trash, garbage, or refuse cans, bins, boxes, bags, or other such containers permanently stored in front yards visible from public streets.
(19) Lumber, junk, trash, tires, debris or salvage materials maintained upon any premises which is visible from a public street, alley, or adjoining property.
(20) Abandoned, discarded or unused furniture, stoves, sinks, toilets, cabinets, refrigerators, deep freezes, washer and dryer appliances, or other household fixtures or equipment stored on the premises.
(21) Premises having topography, geology, or configuration which as a result of grading operations or improvements to the land causes erosion, subsidence unstable soil conditions, or surface or subsurface drainage problems as to pose a threat to or be injurious to adjacent premises.
(22) Abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative trailers, campers, boats, and other motor vehicles which are accumulated or stored in yard areas.
(23) Building exteriors, walls, fences, driveways, or walkways which are cracked, broken, defective, or deteriorated, in disrepair or defaced.
(24) Any like and similar condition or conditions.
(25) No person, firm or corporation shall leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building, or other structure or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling, or other structures under their control in a place accessible to children any abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or other container which has an air-tight door or lid, snap lock, or other locking device which may not be released from the inside, without first removing said door or lid, snap lock or other locking device from said icebox refrigerator, or container.
(26) Every privy in the City of Mobridge which is located upon any lot, part of a lot, or parcel of ground abutting upon a street in Mobridge along which an underground sanitary sewer passes adjoining said lot in front or on the side, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
(27) Every outdoor privy in the City of Mobridge which is located upon any lot, part of a lot, or parcel of ground abutting upon a street in said City along which an underground City water main passes in front of or along the side of said lot; and where there is a sanitary sewer adjacent thereto, shall be provided by installation and maintenance of septic tanks or cesspools; and any such privy located adjacent to said water main and not having available sanitary sewer
37
facilities as above described, which does not provide sanitary septic tanks or a cesspool, shall be and is hereby declared a public nuisance.
5-5-5 Required Sanitation of Buildings and Premises
It shall be unlawful to permit by act or omission the following specific acts, conditions, and things which are hereby also declared to be public nuisances:
(a) Failing, refusing, or neglecting to keep the sidewalk in front of or surrounding a house, place of business, or premises, in clean and safe condition.
(b) Maintaining upon a premise any unsightly, partly complete, or partly destroyed buildings, structures, or improvements in the city which may endanger or injure neighboring properties or the public health, safety, or general welfare.
(c) Maintaining upon such premises or upon the sidewalk abutting or adjoining such lot parcel, tract, or piece of land, loose earth, mounds of soil, fill material, asphalt, concrete rubble or waste material of any kind (all such materials hereinafter be referred to as “waste materials”), except for waste materials used for construction or landscaping upon premises in which case it shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, occupant, or persons in possession of premises wherein the waste materials exist, to maintain weed control during construction and to level or remove waste materials after construction is completed, or in any event, within eight (8) months from time of placement of waste materials upon premises.
For sites where filling, grading, or excavation activities have or will span more than one year it shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, occupant or person in possession of said premises to level or remove the waste materials from said premises at least once each year during the months of either June, July, or August for the purpose of maintaining weed and rodent control.
5-5-6 Right of Entry
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this ordinance, or whenever the building official or his/her authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises, any condition which is prohibited under this ordinance, the building official, or his/her authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this ordinance, provided that if such building or premises be occupied, he/she shall first present proper credentials and demand entry and if such building or premises be unoccupied, he/she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry. If such entry is refused, the building official or his/her authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy by law to secure entry.
No owner or occupant or any other person having charge or care of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper demand has been made as herein provided, to properly permit entry therein by the building official, or his/her authorized representative, for purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this ordinance. Any person violating this subdivision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
38
5-5-7 Notice to Abate, Issuance
Whenever the building official is notified that any condition or conditions prohibited in this ordinance exist on any premises located within the city, the building official shall give, or cause to be given, notice to abate the unlawful condition or conditions existing on the premises. Such notice shall be in writing to the person creating, permitting, or maintaining such nuisance to abate the same within a reasonable time as provided in such notice as follows:
(a) If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be repaired, the order shall require that all permits be secured therefore and the work physically commenced within such time (not to exceed sixty days from the date of the order) and completed within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable under all of the circumstances.
(b) If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be vacated, the order shall require that the building or structure shall be vacated within a certain time from the date of the order as determined by the building official to be reasonable.
(c) If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be demolished, the order shall require that the building be vacated within such time as the building official shall determine reasonable (not to exceed sixty days from the date of the order), that all required permits be secured therefore within sixty days from the date of the order, and that the demolition be completed within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable.
Whenever the owner, occupant, or agent of any premises in or upon which any nuisance may be found is unknown, or cannot be found, the building official shall proceed to abate the issuance without notice. In either case, the expense of such abatement shall be collected from the person who may have created, caused, or suffered such nuisance to exist.
5-5-7.1 Notice of Violation and Order – Not Buildings.
Whenever an authorized city official determines or has grounds to believe that there has been a violation of this code, other than a building violation under Section 5-5-7, notice and order shall be given to the owner of the property where the violation is occurring, and/or the person or persons responsible for the property. Such notice and order shall:
1. Be in writing.
2. Include a description of the property where the violation is occurring, sufficient for identification.
3. Include a statement of the violation(s).
4. Include an order to correct the violation and bring the property into compliance with the provisions of this code within a specified reasonable amount of time.
5. Inform the property owner or other persons responsible of their right to appeal.
6. Be delivered either in person or by certified mail. If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or about the property where the violation is occurring.
39
Notice and Order to cut weeds and grass may be given at the beginning of or during the growing season and shall require the owner or person(s) responsible for the property, within seven (7) days after the mailing thereof and at all times subsequent during the growing season as may be necessary, to cut and remove all weeds and grass as described in Section 5-5-4(6).
Whenever the owner, occupant, or agent of any premises in or upon which any nuisance may be found is unknown, or reasonably cannot be found, the city official shall proceed to abate the issuance without notice. In either case, the expense of such abatement shall be collected from the person who may have created, caused, or suffered such nuisance to exist. (2006ORD841; 1998ORD746)
5-5-8 Right of Appeal from Building Official’s Determination
The owner, or any person affected, shall have the right of appeal to the City Council for investigation and review of the building official’s determination. Such appeal shall be in writing, shall state the objections of the person filling the same, shall be filed with the City Finance Officer within ten days after the date of posting, publishing, serving, or mailing of notice to abate, and shall be presented to the City Council by the City Finance Officer at its next regular meeting. The City Council shall determine by resolution whether the building official shall proceed in accordance with the abatement notice, or as modified by the Council, or not at all, and its decision thereon shall be final and conclusive.
5-5-9 Abatement of City
In the event that a person shall fail to abate any nuisance created, permitted, or maintained by him/her following written notice to do so, the Building Official shall cause such nuisance to be abated. In the event one notice to abate a nuisance has been provided to a property and that property again is the subject of a like kind nuisance, the Building Official shall cause such nuisance to be abated without further notice.
The Building Official shall prepare a statement of expense incurred in the raising, demolishing, removing, reconstruction, or other affirmative act necessary to abate the unlawful conditions and shall file such statement with the City Finance Officer. Such statement shall refer to the particular premises including and improvement, structures, or buildings thereon, upon which the actions taken to abate the unlawful conditions occurred. With regard to the premises or each piece of property therein referred to, the statement shall show the number of the lot and block and the name of the addition or subdivision in which the lot lies or upon which the structures, improvements, or buildings were located at the time that the actions to abate the unlawful conditions were taken or shall describe such premises in any other way that they may be easily identified.
Upon receipt of the statement referred to herein, the City Finance Officer shall add to the expense an administrative fee which shall be an amount set by Resolution to compensate the City for the additional time and costs of City personnel associated with abating the nuisance condition.
40
5-5-10 Alternate Abate Procedure
In addition to any method of abatement of nuisance within the city provided by the provisions of this article, any nuisance found within the city may be abated in the manner provided by state law.
5-5-10.1 Emergency Action Without Notice
This Article shall not apply to any nuisance that an authorized city official believes is an immediate danger to any person(s), in which case said official may take emergency action to abate the nuisance immediately without the Notice and Order described in Section 5-5-7. (2006ORD841)
5-5-11 Notice of Equalization Assessment
Within 30 days after the receipt of the expense statement referred to in 5-5-9, the City Finance Officer shall cause the expense statement to be billed to and to be served upon the owner, agent of the owner, lessee, occupant, or person in possession of the parcel of land described in the statement personally or by mail addressed to his/her last known address, or to the general delivery, Mobridge, South Dakota, 57601, if such address is unknown.
For any billing statement which remains unpaid more than 90 days after service, the City Finance Officer shall add an Additional Administrative Fee which shall be an amount set by Resolution to compensate the City for the additional time and costs of City personnel associated with assessing the costs as a lien on the property upon which nuisance was abated.
5-5-12 Equalization of Assessment; Hearing
The owner, or any person affected, shall have the right to appeal to the City Council concerning the billing statement and proposed assessment. Such appeal shall be in writing, shall state the objections of the person filing the same, and shall be filed with the City Finance Officer within ten days after the billing statement was served. Said objections shall be presented to the City Council by the Finance Officer at its next regular meeting. The City Council shall determine by resolution the assessment and shall proceed to place a lien against said property until the assessment is paid.
5-5-13 Recovery of Expenses-Special Assessment
The City may recover the expenses and administrative costs incurred by the City in abating a public nuisance by taxing the costs thereof by special assessment against the real property on which the nuisance occurred.
5-5-14 Recovery of Expenses-Civil Suit
The city may recover the expenses incurred by the building official in abating any nuisance under the provisions of this ordinance from the person creating, permitting, or maintaining the same in a civil suit instituted for such purpose.
41
5-5-15 Property Demolition Requirements
Upon demolition of real estate, the property owner(s) shall remove all basement concrete or wood walls and floors at the expense of the owner and shall cap the sewer and water at its access point within 10 days. The demolition shall be under the direction of the Code Enforcement Officer and the disconnecting and/or capping of sewer and water shall be inspected and approved by the Water Superintendent. (2006ORD838; 2005ORD824)
5-5-16: NUISANCE JURISDICTION.
All provisions of Chapter 5-5 of the Revised Ordinances of the City of Mobridge, South Dakota including all provisions of Sections 5-5-1 through 5-5-16 shall apply to all properties and owners of property located within the City of Mobridge and shall also apply to all properties and owners of property located within one (1) mile of the corporate limits of the City of Mobridge, South Dakota notwithstanding that only the word City is included in the Ordinance. For all purposes of Chapter 5-5 of the Revised Ordinances of the City of Mobridge, South Dakota the word City shall include all properties and owners of property located within the City limits and within one (1) mile of the corporate limits of the City of Mobridge, South Dakota
CHAPTER 5-6 RODENT ERADICATION
5-6-1 Definitions
Terms used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise plainly requires, shall mean:
A. "Business Building" - Any structure, either public of private, that is adapted for occupancy for transaction of business, play, sale or storage of goods, wares or merchandise, or for the performance of work and labor, including, but not being limited in its application to hotels, rooming houses, office buildings, public buildings, stores, theaters, markets, restaurants, grain elevators, abattoirs, warehouses, work shops, factories, and all out buildings sheds, barns and other structures on premises used for business purposes.
B. “Rodent-proofing" - A form of rodent -proofing to prevent the ingress into business buildings, from the exterior or from one business building to another. It consists essentially of the closing, with material impervious to rodent gnawing, of all openings, in the exterior walls, ground on first floors, basements and foundations, that may be reached by rodents from the ground by climbing or by burrowing.
C. "Rat Harbors" - Any condition which provides shelter or protection for rodents, thus factoring their multiplication and continuous existence in, under or outside of a structure of any kind.
D. "Health Officer" - The City Health Officer, or his or her authorized representative.
E. "Owner" - The actual owner of the business building, either individual, partnership or corporation, the agent of the owner in charge of said building, the person having custody of said building, and the person to whom any rental upon said building is paid. In case of business buildings leased under agreement that the lessee will in such cases also be considered as the "owner" for the purpose of this Ordinance.
42
F. "Occupant" - The individual or partnership who, or the corporation that, has the use of or occupies any business building, or a part or portion thereof, whether the actual owner, tenant or sub-tenant. In the case of vacant buildings, or any vacant portion of a business building, the owner, agent or other person having custody of said building, shall have the responsibilities or an "occupant" of said building.
5-6-2 Rodent -proofing Buildings
It is hereby provided and required that all business buildings in said City shall be rodent - proofed, freed of rodents, and maintained in a rodent -proof and rodent -free condition, and to repair all breaks and leaks that may occur in the rodent-proofing, under the direction and supervision of the Health Officer.
5-6-3 Notice to Owners
Upon receipt of written notice and/or order from the Health Officer, the owner of any building specified in said notice or order shall take immediate steps for rodent -proofing said building, and unless said work and improvements required for such rodent -proofing have been completed by the owner of said building in the time specified in said written notice or order, or within the time to which a written extension may have been granted by the Health Officer, then the owner shall be deemed to have violated a provision of this Ordinance.
5-6-4 Notice, Charge Against Owner
Whenever the Health Officer notifies the occupant of a business building that there is evidence of rodent infestation of said building, said occupant shall immediately institute appropriate steps for freeing the premises of all rodents, and unless suitable measure for freeing said building of Rodents are instituted within ten days after receipt of such notice, and unless continuously maintained in a reasonable manner until said building is free of rodents, the Health Officer is hereby authorized and directed to free said building of rodents and to levy a charge against the occupant to cover the charge for labor, materials and equipment necessary for the eradication measures carried out.
5-6-5 Inspections
The Health Officer is empowered to make unannounced inspections of both the interior and exterior of business buildings within said City as in his or her opinion may be necessary to determine whether there has been a full compliance with this Ordinance, and to require a full compliance with this Ordinance. If at any time of any such inspection, the Health Officer finds evidence of rodent infestation, and/or the existence of breaks and leaks in the rodent -proofing, or new openings through which rodents may again enter said building, the Health Officer shall serve upon the owner or occupant of said building a notice and/or order to abate the conditions so found.
5-6-6 Installation of Floors
Whenever conditions inside or under business buildings provide such extensive harbors for rodents that the Health Officer deems it necessary to eliminate such harbors, he or she may require the owner to install cement floors in basement or to replace wooden first floors or
43
ground floors or require the owner to correct such other interior rodent harbors as may be necessary in order to facilitate the eradication of rodents in a reasonable length of time.
5-6-7 Removal of Rodent -Proofing
It shall be unlawful for the occupant, owner, contractor, public utility company, plumber or any other person to remove the rodent -proofing from any business building for any purpose and fail to restore the same in a satisfactory condition; and, in like manner, it shall be unlawful for any such person to make any new openings that are not sealed or closed against the entrance of rodents.
5-6-8 Storage of Feed
All food and feed kept within said City for feeding poultry, cattle, swine, horses or other animals shall be kept and stored in rodent -free and rodent -proof building.
5-6-9 Metal Containers
All garbage or other refuse consisting of waste, animal or vegetable matter upon which rodents may feed, and all small dead animals, shall be placed and stored, until collected by the garbage department, in covered metal containers, and it is hereby declared to be a violation of this Ordinance for any person, firm or corporation to dump or place on any premises any dead animals, or any waste, vegetable or animal matter of any kind.
5-6-10 Dumping of Garbage or Rubbish Unlawful
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place, leave, dump or permit the accumulation of any garbage, rubbish or trash in any building or upon any premise so that the same shall or may provide food or harbors for rodents.
5-6-11 Storage of Lumber and Other Material
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit to accumulate upon any premises, whether improved or vacant, or upon any open lot or alley in said City, any lumber, boxes, barrels, bricks, stones, or any other materials that may be permitted to remain thereon for any longer time tan a temporary period reasonably required for the use of such materials in the building or repairing of property, unless the same shall be evenly piled or stacked so that such material will not afford harbors for rodents. That all persons and businesses shall store firewood on their premises in a neat pile with no junk materials mixed in with the firewood. no more than two cords of wood may be stored at a time.
CHAPTER 5-7 RESTAURANTS
5-7-1 License
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a restaurant in the City who does not posses a license to do so issued by the State of South Dakota, under the provisions of SDCL 34-18 and acts amendable thereto.
44
5-7-2 Regulations
Every restaurant in the City shall conform to all sanitary regulations in the operation of said restaurant as provided by SDCL 34-18 and acts amendable thereto or as may hereafter be provided by the rules and regulations of the Department of Agriculture of the State of South Dakota.
5-7-3 Inspection
The Health Officer of the City shall have the right to inspect any such restaurant at any time and to report infractions of sanitary regulations to the Department of Agriculture of the State of South Dakota.
CHAPTER 5-8 SLAUGHTER HOUSES AND MEAT MARKETS
5-8-1 Offensive and Unwholesome Material on Premises It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation engaged in the business of slaughtering animals or packing them for market, or rendering of any animal matter, or conducting a meat market within the City limits or within one mile thereof, to permit or suffer to remain on the premises where such business is carried on, any decaying meat, blood, bones, offal, filth or other animal matter so that the same shall become offensive and unwholesome and endanger health or be a nuisance to the neighborhood. Such premises shall at all times be kept in a clean, healthy and inoffensive condition.
5-8-2 May Enter for Inspection The Health Officers and police of the City, and any or all of their assistants, shall be permitted free entrance at all hours of the day or night to all places used for any purpose specified in this Chapter, and shall have the right to free unrestrained examination of such places and of the machinery and utensils therein contained, and of the meat or provisions therein exposed for sale and the manner of conducting and operation such business.
5-8-3 Destroying Spoiled Meats, etc.
If in the opinion of the Health Officers of the City, any meat provisions exposed for sale in any market, shop or other building in the City are tainted, putrid, unwholesome and dangerous to the public health, it shall be the duty of the Health officer of the City to serve notice in writing upon the person exposing for sale such meat provisions, requiring him or her to destroy the same in such manner and within such time as shall such notice be prescribed, and if the person so served neglects to conform to such notice, it shall be the duty of the Health officer to destroy such meat provisions at the expense of the City, and report in writing to the City Council the amount of such expense and the name of the persons exposing such meat provisions for sale, and the person violating the provisions of this Section shall be liable to the City for any expense incident to the abatement of this dangerous and unwholesome condition.
45
CHAPTER 5-9 CATS 5-9-1 Cats as a Nuisance No person owning a cat confined on his/her premises, running at large or otherwise, shall suffer or permit such cat to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood by continuously making loud or unusual noises, depositing upon any public or private property offal or excrement from a cat or cats, fighting or interfering with the property of others.
5-9-2 Notification of Violation Upon a complaint to the animal control officer that any person is keeping or harboring any cat which disturbs the peace as herein set forth, it shall be the duty of the animal control officer to notify the owner of such cat in writing of said complaint; after said owner has been given forty-eight hours notice of such violation the animal control officer, police officer, and any person with proper authority is empowered to go upon the premises and impound any such cat so disturbing the peace. If there is no known owner of the cat, then the cat may be immediately impounded. 5-9-3 Disposal of Cats All cats impounded shall be disposed of pursuant to Section 6-4-4 of the City Ordinances except that no license for the cat is required. (2001 ORD 783)
TITLE 6- LICENSES
CHAPTER 6-1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 6-2 - AUCTIONEERS, AUCTIONS
CHAPTER 6-3 - DANCE HALLS
CHAPTER 6-4 - DOGS
CHAPTER 6-5 - JUNK DEALERS
CHAPTER 6-6 - PAWN BROKERS
CHAPTER 6-7 - PEDDLERS, HAWKERS
CHAPTER 6-8 - MOBILE HOME PARKS
CHAPTER 6-9 - BICYCLES
CHAPTER 6-10 - TAXICABS
CHAPTER 6-11 – RESERVED
CHAPTER 6-12 – TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS
CHAPTER 6-13 - FIREWORKS
CHAPTER 6-14 – BUILDING MOVERS
CHAPTER 6-1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
6-1-1 License, Unlawful Without
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm or corporation to engage in any trade, business or occupation within the corporate limits of the City of Mobridge for which a license is provided in this ordinance, without first having obtained such license as hereinafter provided; provided that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any public officer who may in pursuance of legal process sell at publication auction, any property of any kind whatsoever,
46
nor shall the provisions of this chapter include or apply to persons engaged in the sale of farm products only.
6-1-2 License, How Obtained
Any person, persons, firm or corporations wishing to obtain a license to engage in any trade, business or occupation, as herein provided, shall pay to the City Finance Officer the amount provided by this title for the license applied for, who shall issue a receipt therefore and shall make written application to the City Council, stating the name of the person, post office, address, business, calling or vocation in which such person desires to engage, the length of time for which such license is wanted, and the particular place at which said license is to be used, and upon the presentation of said application to the City Council, said City Council shall act upon said application, and if they shall deem the applicant a suitable and proper person to have such license shall be countersigned by the City Finance Officer, and attested by the corporation seal, and shall authorize said person to carry on the business, calling or vocation in said application; but if the application is refused, it shall be endorsed upon the receipt by the City Finance Officer and he/she shall refund said money paid by the applicant.
6-1-3 Expiration of License
All annual licenses granted under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on the 31st day of December next following the granting thereof, except as in this chapter otherwise provided, and shall not be granted for any sum less than the annual rate, and there shall be no rebate made on the termination of said calling, vocation, or kind of business for which said license was issued.
6-1-4 When License May be Revoked
The City Council shall have power at anytime to suspend or revoke any license granted under the provisions of this ordinance whenever said council shall be satisfied upon written complaint that any such calling, vocation or kind of business for which said license has been issued, has been made or conducted in an indecent, indecorous, improper or illegal manner, and in case of such revocation thereof, the said City Council may refund to the holder of such license such proportionate amount of money paid therefore as said board shall deem just.
6-1-5 Records
The City Finance Officer shall keep a record of all licenses issued by said City Council stating when and to whom issues, for what purpose and for what length of time issued, and the amount of money paid for said license, and the place where said business is to be carried on.
6-1-6 Issuance of License
Except as otherwise provided, all licenses shall be issued by the City Finance Officer, if the issuance of the license is approved by the licensing authority and the applicant shall have complied with all requirements for issuance of the license. Unless otherwise provided, all licenses shall be signed by the City Finance Officer and shall have affixed thereto the official seal of the City.
47
6-1-7 Revocation
The Council shall have the power to cancel any license issued by the City, for failure of the licensee to comply with any ordinance or regulation of the City or state law respecting such license or the manner of exercise thereof or for other good cause, after hearing upon notice to the licensee. Notice of intention to revoke such license shall be given to licensee by notice in writing at least six (6) days prior to the time at which such actions shall be taken.
CHAPTER 6-2 - Auctioneers, Auctions
6-2-1 License
Any person, firm, or corporation engaging in auctioning in the City of Mobridge shall first obtain a South Dakota Auctioneer’s License, and a copy shall be kept on file at city hall with the Finance Officer.
6-2-2 Auctions Prohibited on Streets, Sidewalks and Public Property
It shall be unlawful to conduct an auction under this Chapter on any of the streets, sidewalks or public property of the City of Mobridge, except as approved by the City Council.
CHAPTER 6-3 - DANCE HALLS - CABARET
6-3-1 Definitions
Cabarets - The term "Cabaret" in this chapter shall mean a place of public amusement where the public resorts to with or without cover charge, for the purpose of dancing, drinking and entertainment and where chairs, benches, seats or booths are provided and where lunches, soft drinks, non-intoxicating beer, wine, or other intoxicating liquors are served to patrons.
6-3-2 Hours
It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate a public dance in any public place licensed hereunder at any time later than one o’clock a.m. of any week day, or at any time on Sunday; provided, however, that the Mayor of said City may, in his discretion, grant a permit to continue such public dance not later than two o’clock a.m. of any week day.
6-3-3 Application for License
Any person, firm, association or corporation desiring to conduct, operate or maintain a cabaret shall make application for license therefore to the City Finance Officer, stating:
1. The address of the proposed public dance hall or cabaret.
2. The name, age and residence of the applicant, if a natural person or if a firm, association or corporation, its name, location and principal place of business, if any, and the name and addresses of the presiding officers and of the resident manager.
48
Such application shall be signed by the applicant and filled with the City Finance Officer, who shall refer the same to the City Council of the City of Mobridge. Before any license is granted by said City Council it shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department, the Chief of Police and the Zoning Officer of the City of Mobridge to visit and inspect the proposed public dance hall, and to make a full report to the City Council concerning the general character, safety, sanitation, and environment of the building in which said public dance hall or cabaret is located. Every license granted hereunder shall be posted by the licensee in a conspicuous place in said establishment.
6-3-4 Building
No license for a public dance hall shall be issued until it shall be found that such room, place or hall complies with and conforms to all ordinances and health and fire regulations of the City of Mobridge, and that it is properly ventilated and is a safe and proper place for such purpose.
6-3-5 License Fee
In case the City Council shall grant any applicant a license to conduct, operate or maintain a cabaret as defined in this title upon payment of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) to the City Finance Officer, and it shall be unlawful for anyone to operate such cabaret without first having obtained such license. All licenses granted pursuant to the provisions here of shall expire on the first day of January following, and shall not be transferable.
6-3-6 Persons Under Age of 18
It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder, or agent or employee of such licensee or any person in charge of a public dance conducted in a public dance hall licensed hereunder, to permit any person under the age of 18 years to attend or participate in any public dance conducted in any cabaret, unless accompanied by his or her parent or guardian or natural guardian, and there shall be posted by the licensee in a conspicuous place in every public dance hall licensed hereunder, a sign in letters not less than four inches in height and in heavy type the words,” No person under 18 years of age allowed in this room unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.”
6-3-7 Falsely Stating Age
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to gain admission to any cabaret licensed hereunder while a public dance is being conducted, by means of any fraud or falsehood respecting his or her age. It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself or herself to be the parent or natural or lawful guardian of any person under the age of 18 years accompanying such person at any public dance hall while a public dance is being conducted therein.
6-3-8 Police Supervision
Public dances conducted in any cabaret licensed hereunder shall at all times be subject to the police supervision by the police of the City of Mobridge, who are authorized to remove from such public dance hall any person who is intoxicated or is conducting himself in any improper or disorderly manner, or who is under the age of 18 years and not accompanied by his or her parent or guardian. Any police officer may require any person attending such public
49
dance or cabaret whom he suspects to be under the age of 18 years to state his or her age and remove such person from such public dance hall for a refusal to state his or her age when so required, unless such person is accompanied by his or her guardian, or parent.
CHAPTER 6-4 DOGS, CATS AND DOMESTIC ANIMALS
6-4-1 License
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons within the City of Mobridge or within one mile of the corporate limits of the City. to keep maintain or have in his custody or under his control, any dog or animals of the dog kind, without first having obtained a license so to do from the City Finance Officer as hereinafter provided and without having paid the license fee therefore.
6-4-2 Application
Any person or persons desiring to keep, maintain, or have in their custody or control by themselves, or an agent, within the City of Mobridge or within one mile of the of the corporate limits of the City, any dog, shall, prior to the first day of February in each year, make application to the City Finance Officer for a license to keep such dog, exhibiting to the City Finance Officer at the time of making said application a valid health certificate for said dog, showing the same to have been vaccinated for rabies and distemper by a licensed veterinarian; whereupon they shall fill out a written application stating the name, sex, color, and other distinguishing characteristics of said dog, and the name and address of the owner thereof and that said dog has no vicious propensities so far as in known to said applicant, which application shall be made on a printed form furnished by the City Finance Officer or Animal Control Officer or designee. For any dog not licensed by the first day of February in each year, the City of Mobridge shall charge the owner of said dog a late licensing fee set by resolution of the City of Mobridge City Council.
6-4-3 Dog License Fee and Tag
A. The applicant, at the time of making application, shall present to the City Finance Officer a certificate from a qualified adult showing that said dog has been inoculated against rabies and pay to the Finance Officer as a license fee, the sum of $4.00 for each male or neutered dog and the sum of $8.00 for each unneutered female dog or intact male, for which such license is sought. The applicant for a neutered dog license shall furnish a veterinarian’s certificate that such dog has been neutered. It shall be the duty of the Finance Officer or Animal Control Officer at the time of the issuance of the license provided for, to furnish and deliver to said applicant a metallic dog tag for each dog for which such license is issued, upon which the tag shall be stamped or engraved with the registered number of the dog and the year when the dog was registered, and it shall then be the duty of the owner of said dog to place a collar around the neck of such dog to be owned or kept by him/her, on which collar shall be securely fastened with the metallic tag so furnished by the City Finance officer or the Animal Control Officer; provided, that in the case of the loss of any tag so issued, the City Finance Officer is only authorized to issue a duplicate tag thereof upon payment to him of the actual cost of the same tag upon application being made therefore, and upon satisfactory proof that such dog tag has been lost. The fees for registration may be hereafter amended by resolution of the council.
50
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a dog owned by them or under their control to run at large within the City or within one mile of the corporate limits of the City. Any dog shall be deemed running at large within the meaning of this section when such animal is not confined upon the premises of its owner, or on the premises by consent of the owner or under the direct and immediate control or on a leash in the hands of some attendant. Otherwise, any dog found running at large shall be prima facie evidence of the violation of this section.
C. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog, licensed or unlicensed, confined on the premises or otherwise within the city or within one mile of the corporate limits of the City shall permit such dog to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood by continuous barking or making other loud or unusual noises. Upon receipt of a signed complaint to the Police Department that any person is keeping or harboring any dog which disturbs the peace or is vicious as herein set forth, it shall be the duty of said Police Department to notify the person keeping said dog in writing of said complaint; and after such person has been given forty-eight hours’ notice of such habit, any police officer or person of proper authority is hereby authorized and empowered to go upon the premises and impound any such dog or animal so disturbing the peace.
6-4-4 Destruction of Dogs and Cats Running at Large
(1) The Chief of police is hereby authorized to employ, whenever he deems it necessary, a sufficient number of persons to capture and convey to the dog pound, all dogs and cats running at large thus violating this ordinance. All captured animals will be kept with humane treatment and supplied with sufficient food and water for a period up to 48 hours, unless claimed sooner by the owner or keeper. The owner or keeper shall have the animal released to their custody providing the costs of keeping such animal are paid, and they can exhibit a license for the animal. If the owner or keeper fails to claim the animal within 48 hours, the pound shall have the right and duty to destroy the animal and cause it to be removed and buried. Persons in charge of the animal holding facility may, at their option, sell or adopt said animal at a private sale providing the sale is sufficient to cover vaccinations and other costs incurred and so long as said animal is not a “vicious animal” as herein defined.
(2) Vicious Animal Defined: An animal defined as vicious or has a vicious disposition or dangerous habits which is located within the city or within one mile of the corporate limits of the City is defined as follows: Any animal that has inflicted injury on a human being on public or private property (other than in a private home or vehicle in defense of person or property) or that has killed or seriously injured a domestic animal while off the owner’s property or any animal harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of fighting or which is trained for fighting or any animal which chases or approaches a person on either public or private property in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack (other than in a private home or vehicle in defense of person or property).
(3) In cases where a dog or cat has shown actions that deem the dog or cat a vicious animal, or is diseased, the police, or a designated agent thereof, shall notify the owner or possessor of said dog or cat in writing or in person to confine such animal and if thereafter such owner or possessor fails to comply with such notice, the police are authorized, empowered, and directed to kill or cause to be killed such dog or cat,
51
whether found running at large or upon the premises of the possessor of such dog or cat, forthwith, and without impounding such dog or cat.
(4) Any animal involved in an unprovoked attack which results in injury to any human or other animal, shall be impounded and quarantined and if unable to be captured, any law enforcement officer is authorized to destroy the animal to prevent further endangerment to humans or other animals. After the quarantine period, any animal impounded for an unprovoked attack which results in injury to any human or other animal shall be euthanized or at the discretion of Mobridge Chief of Police or an agent thereof, the animal may be placed at a home outside of the city. No vicious animal shall be returned to reside in the city or within one mile of the corporate limits of the City.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any owner or possessor of a vicious animal to allow said vicious animal to be in violation of the provisions of this ordinance. Each day a condition prohibited by this ordinance is allowed to exist shall be deemed an additional violation of this ordinance.
(6) Police dogs in performance of its duties are exempted from the provisions of this Chapter 6-4.
(7) Quarantine or quarantine period as used in 6-4-4 and 6-4-5 shall require the animal to be housed at a safe location as determined by the Chief of Police to be monitored for a period of not less than 10 days.
6-4-5 Rabies control, generally
A. Every animal that bites a person shall be promptly reported to the Police Department or Animal Control Officer, and shall thereupon be securely quarantined until expiration of the quarantine period. Such quarantine may be at the shelter designated as the city animal shelter, or at the owner’s option, in a veterinary clinic of his/her choice located in Walworth County, but in either case quarantine shall be at the expense of the owner or keeper of the animal. In the case of stray animals, or in the case of animals whose ownership is not known, such quarantine shall be at the shelter designated as the City animal shelter.
B. The owner or keeper, upon demand made by the Police Department or the Animal Control Officer, shall forthwith surrender any animal which has bitten any human, or which is suspected as having been exposed to rabies, for supervised quarantine, the expense of which shall be borne by the owner.
C. Every unvaccinated animal bitten by an animal showing positive symptoms of rabies shall be forthwith destroyed or shall at the owner's or keeper’s expense and option, be held under 10 days quarantine.
D. When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid, or suspected by a licensed veterinarian as being rabid, and dies under such observation, the Animal Control Officer shall immediately send the head of such animal to a competent laboratory for pathological examination and shall notify the proper public health officers of reports of human contacts and the diagnosis made of the suspected animal. When one or both reports give a positive diagnosis of rabies, the Police Department shall recommend a city-wide quarantine for a period of thirty (30) days, and upon the invocation of such quarantine no animal shall be taken into the streets or permitted to be in the streets, during such period of quarantine. In the
52
event that there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring during the period of the quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended for an additional six (6) months.
E. No person shall kill, or cause to be killed, any rabid animal, any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal biting a human, except as herein provided, nor remove the same from the city limits, without written permission from the Animal Control Officer. The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand, be surrendered to the Animal Control Officer. The Animal Control Officer shall direct the disposition of any animal found to be infected with rabies. No person shall refuse or fail to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction as required heroine when demand is made therefore by the Police Department or Animal Control Officer.
6-4-6 Reports Required When Animal Bites Person
A. Every owner or keeper of an animal having knowledge that his animal has bitten or is suspected of biting a human being shall forthwith report the same to the Police Department for disposition of such animal under the provisions of this chapter.
B. It shall be the duty of every physician, or other practitioner, to report to the Police Department the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such information as will be helpful in rabies control.
6-4-7 Veterinarian's Reports of Quarantine and Diagnosis of Animals
It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the Police Department his/her diagnosis of any animal observed by him/her as a rabies suspect. All quarantined animals must be reported to the Police Department.
6-4-8 Interference With Enforcement of Chapter
It shall be unlawful to interfere with, hinder, molest, or impose or resist any police officer or Animal Control Officer in the performance of any duty under this chapter, or seek to release any animal in the custody of the Police Department, except provided for in this chapter.
6-4-9 Poisoning Animals
No person shall unlawfully, willfully or maliciously expose any substance with the intent that it shall be eaten or drunk by any animal which is the property of another person.
6-4-10 Teasing, Molesting, Etc., Dogs, Cats
It shall be unlawful for any person to tease, molest, bait, or in any way bother and dog or cat not belonging to him/her or not legally under their control.
6-4-11 Animals may be Redeemed
Animals impounded under Ordinance 6-4 which are not destroyed, may be redeemed at the City Pound during regular business hours, Monday through Friday, each week, by calling the Animal Control Officer, or the Police Department, prior to disposal and upon payment of the costs and expenses incurred for the impounding. Any unlicensed male or female animal shall
53
not be released until the animal is spayed or neutered and such costs are paid by the owner of said animal.
6-4-12 Fines and City Pound Charges
Where any animal is picked up and held at the City Pound the charge to redeem such animal shall be set by resolution by the City of Mobridge City Council for the first, second, and third and subsequent impoundments. Unless such charges are paid within 3 days, the impounded animal shall not be released and it may then be destroyed or given away. Payment of such charges on weekends may be made to the Animal Control Officer or the Police Department and proper receipt shall be issued for such payment.
Unless otherwise specified, any person in violation of any section of ordinance 6-4 shall be fined an amount set by resolution by the City of Mobridge City Council.
6-4-13 Adult Animals Allowed
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons within the City of Mobridge or within one mile of the corporate city limits to keep, maintain or have in his custody or under his control on any lot or premises more than four adult dogs, cats, or combination thereof that are more than six months of age, for compensation or not, except for a pet store in a commercially zoned area. (2000 ORD 765, 1999 ORD 759)
6-4-14 Pit Bull Dogs - Repealed
CHAPTER 6-5 - JUNK DEALERS
6-5-1 Definition
The term "junk dealer" as used in this ordinance shall mean any person or persons, firm or corporation who is engaged in business as a dealer and/or trader in junk, old metals, rags, waste paper, old automobiles or other articles or things, the worn condition of which renders them useless for the purpose for which it was made.
6-5-2 License Required
Every person or persons, firm or corporation who is engaged in the business of junk dealing shall before engaging in such business obtain a license.
6-5-3 Application for License
Any person, persons, firm or corporation desiring to procure a license as herein provided shall file with the City Finance Officer a written application pursuant to Section 6-1-2 shall also describe in detail the character of the business in which he/she, they or it desires to collect, but, sell or otherwise deal with. It shall also state the following:
A. The length of time the applicant(s) has or have resided in the City of Mobridge, places of previous employment, whether he or they or any of them have been
54
convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, and if so what offense, when and in what court.
B. The premises where the business is to be located or carried on. Such description shall be given by street and number in case of a building and in case such business is carried on wholly or in part on a vacant lot or lots, the lot and block number shall be given, together with the exact dimensions of the space to be occupied in any manner in the conduct of such business.
C. Such other information as may be required by the City Council.
D. Such application shall contain the consent and agreement by the applicant that any license granted for such application may be revoked by the City Council at any time without notice or hearing upon violation by the holder of said license of any of the provisions of this ordinance or any other ordinance of the City of Mobridge or statute of the State of South Dakota
6-5-4 License Fees
Every junk dealer shall pay an annual license fee of $250.00 for each established place of business. All licenses shall be issue as of January 1 of each year and shall continue in force until December 31st, next succeeding the date of issuance thereof unless sooner revoked by the City Council.
6-5-5 Licenses, Granting
Upon filling of the application, together with the necessary license fee, as provided in the preceding section, the City Council, if they deem such applicant a fit person to engage in such business, shall by majority vote grant such license and thereupon such license shall be issued by the City Finance Officer in the manner as provided for the issuance of other licenses in the City of Mobridge by Chapter 6-1 of the Title, and no applicant to whom a license has been refused shall make further application until a period of at least twelve months shall have elapsed since the last previous rejection, unless he can show that the reason for this rejection no longer exists.
6-5-6 Revocation of Licenses
The City Council may at any time, for such cause, if it, upon investigation deems sufficient, revoke any license granted under the provisions of this ordinance without any hearing or notice to the holder of such licenses and whenever such license shall be revoked, no refund of any unearned portion of the license fee shall be made. Notice of such revocation and the reasons shall be served by the city Council upon the person or persons, firm, association of corporation named in the application either by personal service or by mailing the same to the address given in the application and filling a copy with the Finance Officer of the City of Mobridge.
6-5-7 Record of Purchases
Every junk dealer shall keep in such form as the Chief of Police shall prescribe, and written in ink or indelible pencil, a daily record of all articles purchased, the name, residence, age and occupation of the person from whom each article was purchased and the name of the
55
employer of such person, also the day and hour of such purchase and the price paid. the records shall at all reasonable times b e open to the inspection of the Chief of Police or any police records shall be changed, erased, obliterated, or defaced.
6-5-8 Reports to Police Department
Every junk dealer, upon being served with written notice so to do by a member of the Police Department, shall report to the Chief of Police a description of all goods, articles or things purchased or received by him in the course of business of a junk merchant at such time and during such period of time specified in the notice, stating the amount paid for and the name, residence and general description of the person from whom such goods, articles or things were received.
6-5-9 Restrictions
A. No junk dealer shall carry on business at or from any other place that the premises designated and described in the application and license and all junk of all kinds and description shall be kept wholly within the boundaries of such premises.
B. It shall be unlawful for any junk dealer to bury old cars or other refuse on the premises covered by said license or at any other place within the City of Mobridge.
C. The wrecking and dismantling of old cars or other material for the purpose of junking the bodies, obtaining scrap material, or securing old parts, shall be done wholly inside the buildings occupied by said junk dealer or within the enclosure hereinafter provided for and shall not in any event be done upon the highways or streets of the City or outside the premises described in the application and license.
D. In all cases where the business of a junk dealer is to be conducted on a vacant lot or lots, or in a partially enclosed structure, said lots or structure shall be enclosed by a tight board fence, ten feet in height, or by a ten-foot Cyclone wire fence or other wire fence of like construction. Said fence shall be properly maintained and kept in regular repair by the licensee and shall be so constructed with gate or gates to prevent unauthorized entry to said premises, and all junk of all kinds and description shall be kept wholly within the boundaries of such enclosure and shall not in any event be deposited on the highways, streets, sidewalks or boulevards of the City.
Licensee shall be allowed until six months from the effective date of this Ordinance, to comply with the provisions of this section for the erection of enclosures as herein provided, and failure so to do prior to such time shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of any license issued under the provisions of this chapter.
CHAPTER 6-6 – PAWN BROKERS
6-6-1. Definition.
(a) The following term, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to it in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Pawnbroker means any person who:
56
(1) Engages in the business of lending money on the deposit or pledge of personal property, or other valuable thing on the condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price; or
(2) Purchases personal property with the expressed or implied agreement or understanding to sell it back at a stipulated price.
(b) This definition shall exempt the following transactions:
(1) Any person whose primary business is selling new, unused articles, and receiving used articles in trade from the purchaser.
(2) Casual or occasional sales of used household goods by the owner thereof to the public, this category includes those sales commonly referred to as "garage sales."
(3) Any person dealing exclusively in the resale of used automobiles.
(4) Any person that operates as a salvage yard for wrecked automobiles.
(5) Transactions in secondhand goods at stores or events sponsored by nonprofit corporations, fraternal organizations, or religious organizations. (2005ORD809)
6-6-2. License Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of pawnbroker without first obtaining a license from the city finance office. (2005ORD809) (1998 § 6-6-1)
6-6-3. Prohibited for person with felony conviction.
No pawnbroker's license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a felony. (2005ORD809)
6-6-4. Fixed premises.
(a) No person shall engage in business as a pawnbroker unless such person has a fixed premise where such business is conducted, either on a continuing basis or from time to time, and unless such person has first obtained a license to engage in that business at that premises.
(b) For the purposes of this section, the term "fixed premises" shall include any nonmobile premises where such business is conducted and such pawned articles are held. (2005ORD809)
6-6-5. License fee.
The annual pawnbroker's license fee shall be as provided by resolution of the city council, payable in advance. (2005ORD809) (1998 § 6-6-2)
6-6-6. Bond.
Before any license shall be issued to any person for doing business as a pawnbroker, as defined in this article, having an established place of business, he/she shall first file with the city finance officer a surety bond in the sum of $1,000.00. All such bonds shall be conditioned that the principal named therein shall observe the ordinances of the city in relation to pawnbrokers and conduct business in conformity thereto, and will account for and deliver to any person legally entitled thereto any goods, wares or merchandise, article or thing which may come into his/her hands, through his/her business as such pawnbroker or in lieu thereof will pay in money to such person the reasonable value thereof. (2005ORD809)
57
6-6-7. Records required.
(a) At the time of each transaction, each licensee must immediately record in English the following information using ink or other indelible medium on forms or in a computerized record approved by the city police department:
(1) A complete and accurate description of each item including, but not limited to, trademark, identification number, serial number, model number, brand name, description, color, size, or other identifying mark.
(2) Purchase price or amount of money loaned.
(3) The maturity date of the transaction and the amount due.
(4) Whether the item was pawned, sold, or consigned.
(5) Date, time and place the item of property was received by the licensee.
(6) The unique alpha and/or numeric transaction identifier that distinguished it from all other transactions.
(7) Full name, address, date of birth, sex, of the person pawning the merchandise.
(8) Identification number and state of issuance of photo ID from the person pawning the merchandise.
(9) The signature of the person pawning the merchandise.
(b) Records shall be open to inspection by the city police department at all reasonable times.
(c) All items sold, pawned, or offered for sale on the licensed premises are included in the records requirement. Private sales to employees require the same reporting as transactions completed with the licensed premises.
(d) Any licensee who fails to keep such records, or fails to make the required entries therein, or who intentionally or knowingly makes any false or unintelligible entry, or any entry which he has reason to believe is untrue, or who fails to produce his records when requested by a city police officer during reasonable business hours, or who destroys such records, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(e) The licensee is exempt from reporting bulk purchases of new merchandise from a merchant, manufacturer, or wholesaler having an established permanent place of business. The licensee is required to maintain a record of such a purchase, which describes each item. (2005ORD809) (1998 § 6-6-3)
6-6-8. Inspection of items.
At all times during the terms of the license, the licensee must allow police officers to enter the premises during normal business hours to inspect items held by the licensee or records required by these ordinances. (2005ORD809)
6-6-9. Label required.
The licensee must attach a label to every item at the time it is pawned, purchased, or received in inventory from any reportable transaction. The label shall contain the unique alpha and/or numeric transaction identifier that distinguished it from all other transactions. The label must be attached to the item at all times while the item is on the licensed premises. (2005ORD809)
58
6-6-10. Receipts.
Every pawnbroker or dealer in secondhand goods, purchasing or receiving on deposit for a loan any article or personal property, shall give to the person selling or depositing such article or personal property a plain written or printed ticket or receipt for the article or property so sold or deposited, showing the terms and amount of such sale or loan and a description of the property purchased or deposited as security for the loan. (2005ORD809)
6-6-11. Purchase from minors, etc.
No pawnbroker or dealer in secondhand goods shall purchase or receive on deposit any personal property, goods, wares, merchandise, articles or thing, from minors, persons of unsound mind or intoxicated persons, except that the parents or guardians of minors may give their written consent for such transactions. (2005ORD809) (1998 § 6-6-4)
State law references: Power of city to forbid the purchase from minors of articles without the consent of their parents, SDCL § 9-34-9.
6-6-12. Reports to police.
The licensee is required weekly to provide the city police department with copies of all pawn, buy, or consignment transactions. Such copies may be carbon copies of the original pawn ticket or a computerized record. The copies or computerized record shall contain all the information required by section 6-6-7. (2005ORD809)
6-6-13. Holding period.
Any person licensed as a pawnbroker, who purchases any new or secondhand goods from any individual not engaged in trade, shall keep the goods for 30 days from the time of transfer. The property shall be held on the licensed premises and shall not be disposed of or altered from the form in which it was received. (2005ORD809)
6-6-14. Law enforcement hold order.
Any officer of the city police department may, by written order, order a pawnbroker to hold any article or articles for the purpose of further investigation. The written law enforcement hold order shall be valid for a period of 30 days. The licensee shall not dispose of or alter the article during the hold period. (2005ORD809)
6-6-15. Suspension, revocation of license.
(a) After written notice and a public hearing, the city council may suspend the pawnbroker's license of any licensee who violates any provision of this article, for a prescribed period not to exceed 60 days.
(b) After written notice and a public hearing, the city council may revoke the license of any licensee who violates the provisions of this article. (2005ORD809)
59
CHAPTER 6-7 – PEDDLERS – HAWKERS
6-7-1 Definitions
Peddler – A person, firm or corporation who sells or solicits the sale of any merchandise or trade from house to house, place to place, or upon the public street or public place within the City Limits of Mobridge
Transient Merchant- A person, firm, or corporation that engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, services, and/or merchandise within the city limits of Mobridge and lease, use, or occupy any building, structure, motor vehicle or tent for the sale or display of such goods or services either privately or at a public auction. Associating temporarily with any local dealer or merchant does not constitute exemption from this definition.
Public Market- A place where persons may stand and offer for sale from vehicles, stands or other receptacles, farm or orchard produce within city limits of Mobridge. Persons offering for sale produce raised by them and living within the local trade area of Mobridge are exempt from this definition.
6-7-2 Permits and Fees
Any person engaging in the sale or transfer of goods as defined in section 6-7-1 shall make application in writing to the City Finance Officer. Listed on the application shall be the legal name of person(s), firm, or corporation conducting business, nature of sale, duration of business and any applicable South Dakota sales tax and/or business license number. A signed permit will be issued providing the form is correctly completed, and all licensing in place.
A fee in the amount of $20 per day, $75 for a 30-day permit, or $250 for an annual permit shall be collected prior to issuance of the permit.
6-7-3 Trespassing
No person, firm or corporation, as defined in section 6-7-1, or representatives thereof, shall engage in the practice of being in and upon private residences in the City of Mobridge unless they are invited or requested to do so by the owner(s) for the purpose of selling goods, services, or merchandise. Such violations shall be declared nuisances and punishable as a misdemeanor.
6-7-4 Enforcement
Any person, firm or corporation as defined in section 6-7-1 shall, upon demand of the Chief of Police of Mobridge, display evidence of compliance with above requirements. Failure to secure permit prior to start of sale shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100 for each violation.
6-7-5 Supervision of Open Markets
Person(s), firms, or corporations engaging in open markets shall be subject to the control and supervision of the Mobridge Police Department. Such open markets shall be kept
60
in a clean and sanitary manner, free from rubbish and decaying debris. Violations shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100 per violation.
6-7-6 Exceptions to Section Provisions
The provisions of this section shall not apply to solicitations, sales or distributions made by charitable, civic, educational or religious organizations which have their principal place of activity in the city. (2003 ORD 799)
CHAPTER 6-8 – MOBILE HOME PARKS
6-8-1 Definitions
A. ”Mobile Home” is any moveable or portable unit constructed and designed to be towed on its own chassis and designed to be connected to utilities for human occupation and habitation as a permanent residence.
B. The term “person” shall be construed to import both plural and singular and shall include natural persons, firms, partnerships, associations, companies and corporations.
C. “Mobile Home Park” means any park, trailer park, trailer court, camp, site, lot, parcel or tract of land designed, maintained or intended for the purpose of supplying a location or accommodation by the owner, tenant or lessee, or third persons for any trailer coach or coaches and upon which any trailer coach or trailer coaches are parked and shall include all buildings used or intended to be used as a part of the equipment thereof, whether a charge is made for the use of the trailer park and its facilities or not. “Mobile Home Park’ shall not include automobile or trailer sales lot on which unoccupied trailers are parked for purposes of inspection and sale.
D. “Mobile Home Site” shall mean any site, lot, parcel or tract of land upon which is located or parked, temporarily or permanently a trailer coach to be used and occupied, or which is used and occupied for dwelling or sleeping quarters, or both, for one or more persons, whether the site, lot, parcel, or tract of land is owned by the owner of the trailer coach or not, and whether or not the same is occupied by the owner thereof or by a tenant.
6-8-2 Administration
The administration of Chapter 6-8 shall be under the supervision and jurisdiction of the Mayor and the City Council. The Mayor and City Council or their duly authorized representatives shall have the right and are hereby empowered to enter upon any premises on which any mobile homes are located, or about to be located and inspect the same and all accommodations connected therewith at any reasonable time; and are further empowered to issue orders granting, renewing, and revoking such permits or licenses as provided for in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
61
6-8-3 Location and Areas
(1) Mobile Home Parks shall be located only in the business and industrial zoned areas of the city of Mobridge as described and defined by the City of Mobridge Zoning Ordinance.
(2) After a public hearing, the City Council may issue a license for the location of a mobile home park in any district in which licenses are herein prohibited. Notice of such public hearing shall be given by publication once at least one week prior to the date set for said hearing. If upon such hearing the board finds that denial of such licenses will cause unnecessary hardship on the applicant, and finds in addition that the owners of all property within 200 yards of the proposed trailer coach park shall not suffer unnecessary hardship by reason of the operation of the mobile home park at the proposed location, the license can be granted.
(3) No mobile home parks shall be located within the limits of the City of Mobridge unless City water and sewer connections and fire protection and fire protection facilities are available.
(4) All licensed mobile home parks in existence at the date of the passage and adoption of this ordinance shall have their licenses renewed from year to year upon application and payment of license fees as herein provided. In the event any trailer coach park in existence at the time of the passage and adoption of this ordinance located other than in the area herein provided be abandoned, the same shall not again be renewed except upon notice and hearing for special license as herein provided.
6-8-4 License for Mobile Home Park, Application Therefore and Issuance Thereof
A. No persons shall establish or maintain a mobile home park, as defined herein, without first obtaining a license therefore from the governing body of the City of Mobridge, and agreeing, in writing to comply with the terms of this ordinance, provided that a plot of ground upon which unoccupied mobile homes are located for the purpose of sale or trade shall not be constructed to be a mobile home park, nor shall said situated mobile homes be used at any time, for housing or sleeping of persons. All mobile home parks in existence upon the effective date of this ordinance shall obtain a license and in all other respects comply fully with the requirements of this ordinance, except that the mobile homes already parked and established upon any lot or lots within the City of Mobridge on the effective date of this ordinance, may be granted a special renewal license by the City Council to remain as part or located upon said site, even though the same may not Comply fully with the provisions of this ordinance. The special permit or license shall be at the discretion of the City Council.
B. Application for license. Any reputable person desiring to establish, maintain, or operate the mobile home park shall make application in writing to the governing body of the City of Mobridge for a license which application shall set forth the following:
1. Sketch of area to be used for park purposes, showing dimensions, driveways, proposed location of units, and location of sanitary conveniences.
2. Statement relative to water supply, sewage and garbage disposal.
3. The location and legal description of the mobile home park.
62
4. Plans and specifications of all buildings or other facilities already constructed, or to be constructed and used in connection with the operation of said mobile home park.
5. Location of office where books and records pertaining to the operation of said mobile home park as required by this ordinance shall be kept.
C. License fee, mobile home park. Fifty Dollars for first trailer; and $2.00 for each mobile home over one contained within the mobile home park.
D. License granted. Before a license is granted, all applications shall be examined by the City Council or their representatives, who shall investigate the applicant and inspect the premises and proposed plan to make certain that the applicant is of good moral character, and the proposed mobile home park will be in compliance with all provisions of the City of Ordinances and the laws of the State of South Dakota in regard to zoning, safety, and sanitation; and such officer shall, in writing, submit their findings to the City Council. Licenses issued hereunder grant no right to erect any buildings or to do any plumbing or to do any electrical work. All plumbing, electrical, building and other work on or at any mobile home park licensed under this chapter, shall be in accordance with the ordinances of the City of Mobridge regulating such work unless such ordinances specifically made inapplicable under the terms of this ordinance.
E. Transfer of license. Licenses granted under this ordinance shall not be transferable without the approval of the governing body of the City of Mobridge upon application made in writing to the City Council for such transfer, which application shall set forth the following:
1. The name and post office address of the person holding such license.
2. The name and post office address of the person to whom application for transfer is made.
3. The location and legal description of the mobile home park upon which application for transfer is made.
F. Revocation and suspension of license. The governing body may revoke any license issued pursuant to this ordinance if, after due notice to the holder of said license and hearing thereon it is determined that the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this ordinance, or that any mobile home or mobile home park becomes a nuisance, or is being maintained in any immoral, unsanitary, unsafe or unlawful manner.
G. Connection with Water and Sewer Systems. Every mobile home park shall be connected with the City Water and Sewer systems if any portion of the plot is within 200 feet thereof, where such facilities cannot be made available, water supply for the trailer coach park shall have the approval of the City Health Officer, and septic tanks shall be installed as directed by the Health Officer. In no case shall privies be allowed.
63
H. It shall be unlawful to permit water from sinks, showers, or other fixtures of any kind in any unit to be discharged onto the ground or street.
I. Electricity shall be provided for each mobile home and the mobile home park grounds, and if washroom, toilets and other service buildings are available upon the mobile home park site, the same shall be properly lighted with electricity at all times.
J. Setback and spacing. No occupied mobile home shall be located within the setback line established in the zoning district in which said unit is located. There shall be no less than six feet between trailer coaches, end to end, and no less than ten feet between such homes, side to side, and no mobile home shall be closer than six feet to any building nor shall it be located within sex feet of the property line or the adjoining property.
K. Garbage disposal. The manager of each mobile home park shall provide sufficient water tight metal garbage cans, with tight fitting covers, and the garbage disposed of by the person operating the camp at least three times each week, or placed in such places as will be collected by the City of Mobridge garbage collector.
L. Management. In every mobile home park, there shall be an office for the person in charge of said park at which shall be kept a register of guests, showing the names addresses, dates of entrance and departure, license number of all mobile homes, automobiles and states issuing such licenses. Each register shall be kept available for public inspection at any time and shall not be destroyed until the expiration of twelve months from the date of registration.
6-8-5 Permit for Mobile Home Site, Application Therefore and Issuance Thereof
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to locate or maintain, or permit to be located or maintained upon any property owned or controlled by him or her, a mobile home upon a mobile home site within the City of Mobridge, without first having secured a permit therefore, from the City of Mobridge granted and existing in compliance with the terms of this chapter.
(1) No mobile home site shall be located within the City of Mobridge upon any site, lot, part of lot, parcel or tract of land, EXCEPT, as provided by the City of Mobridge Zoning Ordinance.
(2) The City Council may issue a permit for the location of a mobile home site in any district in which permits for mobile home sites are herein prohibited after a public hearing if upon such hearing said boards finds that denial of such permit will cause unnecessary hardship on the applicant and finds in addition that the owners of all property within 200 yards of the proposed site will not suffer unnecessary hardship by reason of the location of said trailer home site, at the proposed location. Notice of such public hearing shall be given by publication once at least on week prior to the date set for said hearing.
(3) No mobile home site shall be located within the limits of the City of Mobridge, unless City water and sewer connections and fire protection facilities are available.
64
(4) It shall be unlawful, within the limits of the City of Mobridge, for any person to park any mobile home on any street, alley or highway or other public place, or on any tract of land owned by any person, occupied or unoccupied, within the City of Mobridge except as provided in this chapter.
(5) All mobile home sites established prior to the effective date of this ordinance, even though located in an area in which said mobile home site is prohibited shall not be affected by the location provisions of this section, but shall be required to comply with all other provisions of this ordinance. Provided, however, that any mobile home site located in an area prohibited by this section if abandoned by removal of said retailer coach shall thereafter come within the provisions of this ordinance and shall not again be occupied as a mobile home site except upon special permit as herein provided.
B. Upon said application being presented to the City Council they shall inspect said premises, said mobile home, the area within which the same is to be located and be satisfied that the location of said mobile home site shall comply with all of the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances of the City of Mobridge. Permit shall be granted only upon the favorable vote of a majority of the governing body.
CHAPTER 6-9 BICYCLES
6-9-1 Licensing Procedures
No person who resides within the City of Mobridge, South Dakota, shall ride or propel a bicycle on any public street, alley, sidewalk or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles unless such bicycle has been licensed and a license tag is attached thereto as provided herein.
Application for a bicycle license tag shall be made upon a form provided by the City Finance Officer. An annual fee of $1.00 shall be paid to the City Finance Officer. This license shall expire on December 31 of each year.
6-9-2 Conditions of Licensing and Regulations for Operation of Licensed Bicycles
A. No bicycle shall be ridden faster than is reasonable and proper, and every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard to the safety of the operator and any person upon the public sidewalks, street, alleys and other public right of way of the City.
A. Every person riding or propelling a bicycle upon any street or other public highway in the City shall observe all traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto, and shall turn only at intersections, signal for all turns, ride at the right-hand side of the sidewalk, street, alley, highway or right of way, pass to the left when overtaking and passing vehicles and pass to the right when meeting vehicles.
B. Carrying articles. No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handle bars.
65
C. Clinging to vehicles. No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself o any vehicle upon the roadway.
D. Parking bicycles.
(1) No person shall park or leave unattended any bicycle upon a public street except in a regularly designated parking area.
(2) No person shall park or leave unattended any bicycle upon a public sidewalk so to obstruct the free passage thereon by pedestrians, nor shall said bicycle be parked or left unattended upon any sidewalk so as to obstruct free passage to and from any doorway.
E. Parent and Guardian liability. The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this article.
6-9-3 Penalty
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days; or both such fine and imprisonment, provided that in case of violation of any provisions hereof the Court may, in lieu of or in addition to, the penalty provided herein, suspend the license of any person granted hereunder, for a period of not more than 30 days; and may suspend permission of the person violating this Ordinance from operating any bicycle for a period of 30 days, and may impound any bicycle used in violation of this Ordinance for a period of not more than 30 days.
CHAPTER 6-10- TAXICABS
6-10-1 License Required
No person, firm or corporation shall operate a taxicab within the city of Mobridge without first having obtained from the City Council a license therefore and without having complied with all provisions of this chapter.
6-10-2 License Fee
The fee for such license is to be paid annually and in advance, shall be; for the first taxicab, the sum of the Fifty Dollars and for each additional license issued to any one person, firm or corporation, the sum of Twenty-five Dollars. Licenses shall extend from the first day of January until the thirty-first day of December following, and full license fee must be paid for any part of such year.
6-10-3 Inspection
No taxicab shall be licensed until it has been thoroughly and carefully tested and inspected, and found to be in a thoroughly safe condition, for the transportation of passengers, and clean, fit, and good appearance.
66
Mechanical Tests: Mechanical tests shall be made by any testing garage or testing station approved by the Chief of Police and shall include the following: brakes, horn, windshield wiper, rear view mirror, steering mechanism, head lights, and tail lights.
Physical inspection shall be made by the Chief of Police and shall include the following: condition of tires, including spare tire, cleanliness and general appearance.
It shall be the duty of the owner of each taxicab to submit to the Chief of Police, for inspection of each cab prior to the issuance of the license, or at any time upon complaint, and the Police Department may inspect such vehicles at other times as they may deem necessary, and it shall be unlawful for the owner or persons in charge of any taxicab to use or permit its use, in case it has been condemned by the Chief of Police, until such vehicle has been repaired to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police.
6-10-4 Application for License
Any person, firm or corporation desiring a license for a taxicab or taxicabs shall make a written application therefore to the City Council upon blanks to be furnished by the City Finance Officer. Said application shall contain the full name and address of the owner, the make, model and year of manufacture of the vehicle, the South Dakota license number and the engine and factory number of the same.
6-10-5 Insurance, Bond
Before any taxicab license is granted, or any pre-existing license renewed, applicant shall file with City Finance Officer a certificate or policy of insurance issued by a responsible insurer, covering the vehicles to be operated by applicant, providing public liability insurance for injuries to one person in an amount not less than Three Hundred Thousand Dollars ($300,000.00) and for any one accident not less than Three Hundred Thousand Dollars ($300,000.00) and property damage insurance in an amount not less than Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00), such coverage to be continuing, notwithstanding any recovery or settlement thereunder.
The Policy or certificate shall specify:
(1) That the insurer shall be responsible for all liability of the applicant arising from the use of any motor vehicle as a part of applicant’s for hire fleet in the City of Mobridge even though such vehicle is not described in the policy or certificate of insurance.
(2) That violation of any of the provisions of the policy or certificate of insurance shall not relieve the insurer from liability thereunder to any third part claimant against applicant, including cases where applicant becomes bankrupt or insolvent.
(3) That the policy or certificate shall not be modified or canceled without ten days actual notice to the City Finance Officer.
In lieu of the policy or certificate of insurance herein provided for, applicant may furnish corporate surety bond, issued by a surely company authorized to do business in the State of South Dakota, if it meets the foregoing requirements.
67
The policy, certificate of insurance or bond shall be approved by the City Council prior to issuance of the license.
6-10-6 Taxicab Marking
Every taxicab licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall have the name of the owner on the door. If any licensee operates more than one such taxicab, each taxicab shall be numbered with figures not less than two inches high, and no two vehicles shall bear the same number. All names and numbers herein provided shall be of such color and type as to be legible to one of normal eyesight at a minimum distance of twenty-five feet.
6-10-7 City License Plate
Every owner of any licensed vehicle shall forthwith place a number plate to be furnished by the City, upon the vehicle corresponding to the license, placed in a conspicuous place on the outside of such vehicle and shall keep the same plain and distinct at all times when used, during the continuance of such license, and upon the expirations of such license or cancellation, such person shall cause such number to be removed from said vehicle and shall not allow said vehicle to be used with such number thereon. No number plate shall be displayed on any public vehicle except the one for which it was issued.
6-10-8 Fares
Every taxicab operator licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall file with the City Finance Officer a schedule of fares to be charged for conveying passengers in taxicabs within the City of Mobridge, and shall make no changes in such fares without the approval of the City Council.
6-10-9 Transfer of License for Taxicabs
Any license for a taxicab may be transferred from one taxicab to another under the same ownership by the City Finance Officer, with the consent of the City Council, upon payment of a transfer fee of $1.00 provided the second vehicle has been inspected as complying with this chapter.
6-10-10 Revocation of License
The City Council may revoke any license issued under the provisions of this Ordinance upon proof that the licensee has violated any provision hereof.
CHAPTER 11 – RESERVED
CHAPTER 12 TATTOOING AND BODY PIERCING ESTABLISHMENTS
6-12-1: DEFINITIONS.
The terms used in this chapter mean:
68
1. "Communicable disease," a disease which is capable of being transmitted from person to person;
2. "Minor," a person who is under the age of 18 years;
3. "Patron," a person who receives a tattoo or body piercing or has a tattoo removed;
4. "Permanent tattoo establishment," a building where tattooing and/or removal of tattoos is practiced on a year-round basis;
5. "Tattoo artist," a person engaged in the practice of tattooing and/or removal thereof;
6. "Tattoo establishment," the building or structure where tattooing and/or removal thereof is practiced;
7. "Tattooing," to puncture the skin of a person with a needle and insert indelible permanent colors through the puncture and leave permanent marks or designs;
8. "Tattooing area," within a tattoo establishment, the immediate vicinity where tattooing is performed;
9. "Body piercing," the placing of a permanent or temporary foreign object in a person's body, such as ears, nose, lips, genitals, nipples or parts thereof, for a decorative or other nonmedical purpose by a person not directly under the supervision of a licensed physician as defined by SDCL 36-4-11; the site or location, on the patron, of the body piercing;
10. "Body piercing area," within a body piercing establishment, the immediate vicinity where body piercing is performed;
11. "Body piercing artist," a person engaged in the practice of body piercing;
12. "Body piercing establishment," the building or structure where body piercing is practiced;
13. "Permanent body piercing establishment," a building where body piercing is practiced on a year-round basis;
14. “Certification” is defined as 60 hours of schooling or 12 months of apprenticeship under a tattoo/body piercing artist who has had an established business for no less than 14 months. (2005 ORD 814)
6-12-2: LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person shall engage in, conduct or carryon or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on in or upon any premise within the city a tattoo establishment or body piercing establishment unless a license has been issued by the City which remains in effect in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter. (2005 ORD 814)
69
6-12-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
Each application for a license shall be upon a form provided by the City and shall be submitted to the City along with a check in the amount of $150.00 for application fee and shall contain the following information:
1. A definition of service to be provided.
2. The location and mailing address of the proposed establishment.
3. The name and residence address of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, the name and address of the registered agent and of the officers. If the applicant is a partnership the names and residence addresses of each of the partners, including limited partners, and the address of the partnership itself, if different from the address of the tattoo establishment.
4. The last two previous addresses (if any) during the past three years immediately prior to the present address of the applicant.
5. Written proof that the applicant is over the age of 18 years.
6. Individual or partnership applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and sex.
7. Copy of identification such as driver's license and social security card.
8. The history of the applicant in the operation of a tattoo establishment or similar business or occupation, including, but not limited to, whether or not such person has previously had a similar license revoked or suspended and the reason therefore.
9. The name, address, and certification of schooling or apprenticeship of each tattoo or body piercing Artist who is or will be employed in the establishment.
10. Each tattoo or body piercing artist must show proof of current Hepatitis and Tetanus vaccinations, and a clean TB test.
11. Any other information or identification necessary to substantiate these provisions.
6-12-4: INSPECTION.
After the City receives an application, the City shall request that the tattoo and body piercing establishment be inspected by the Department of Health within 30 days, and annually upon renewal of the license. (2005 ORD 814)
6-12-5: MINIMUM SANITATION STANDARDS.
The establishment shall meet the minimum sanitation standards set forth by the South Dakota Administrative Rules, Chapter 44:12:01 and 44:12:02 before a license will be granted with the following exceptions or changes to the minimum standards.
70
1. Tattoo/Body Piercing establishments -- General provisions. A tattoo/body piercing establishment must be a minimum of 60 square feet for one tattoo/body piercing artist and 40 square feet for each additional artist. A tattoo/body piercing establishment must be physically separated from facilities used for practices other than tattooing/body piercing. A tattoo/body piercing establishment must be a permanent structure. Floors and walls of the tattooing/body piercing area must be smooth, easily cleanable, nonabsorbent, and in good repair. A removable floor covering over a carpet is acceptable. Ceilings above the tattooing/body piercing area must be smooth, easily cleanable, or removable and in good repair. A minimum of 30 foot-candles of light must be provided for applying the tattoo/body piercing and a minimum of 10 foot-candles for general lighting.
(based on SDAR 44:12:01:03)
2. Required equipment for tattoo artists. A tattoo artist must have the following minimum equipment:
(1) Fifteen liner tubes of whatever style and design preferred in sealed sterile envelopes;
(2) Fifteen shader tubes of whatever style and design preferred in sealed sterile envelopes;
(3) Fifteen needle bar setups with needles attached in sealed sterile envelopes or fifteen disposable needle bar setups with needles attached in sealed sterile packaging;
(4) One hundred disposable pigment containers;
(5) One hundred disposable latex or vinyl examination gloves;
(6) Two liters each of germicidal soap, isopropyl alcohol, and distilled water for prepping skin;
(7) Access to the applicable sterilization and sanitization measures in this chapter;
(8) Closed dustproof containers for the exclusive storage of instruments, dyes, pigments, stencils, and other equipment;
(9) Gauze and bandages
(10) One biohazard container when disposable needle setups are used.
(based on SDAR 44:12:01:11)
3. Record of patrons. A tattoo/body piercing artist shall keep a record of each patron which includes name, address, age, consent form with medical inquiry, and the locations and description of tattoos/body piercing. This record must be available for inspection by the department of health and kept for a period of at least two years. Any inspection of these records for legal purposes will require a subpoena or search warrant. (based on SDAR’s 44:12:01:15; 44:12:02:10)
4. Sterilization methods. Equipment requiring sterilization must be sterilized by using the method of steam pressure sterilization with at least 15 pounds of pressure per square inch for at least 30 minutes at a temperature of 250 degrees Fahrenheit in an autoclave. This must be certified by a chemical indicator which is attached to the autoclave bag and turns color when the required temperature has been reached. A tattoo/body piercing establishment owner or operator shall provide lab result slips which state that each autoclave has been bacteriologically tested monthly and has passed the test. Dry heat is not an acceptable method of sterilization for the purpose of this article. When the option of disposable needles is used, each needles setup will remain sealed until it is used on the patron. Each disposable needle is intended for single-use for one patron only and must be disposed of in a biohazard container. (based on SDAR 44:12:01:16)
71
5. Sterile equipment -- Packaging and storage. All sterile equipment and supplies must be stored in a closed dustproof container in such a manner as to prevent being contaminated. All needles and tubes must be packaged prior to autoclaving either individually or in quantities for individual tattoos/body piercing. Autoclave packages must be constructed so that the contents are visible without opening the package. Autoclave packages containing equipment which has been autoclaved must be dated with an expiration date. The expiration date may not exceed 30 days from the date autoclaved. Sterile equipment may not be used after the expiration date without being resterilized. A tattoo/body piercing machine must be stored in a manner that will prevent contamination. If disposable needles and/or tubes are used, they should be received in individually sealed, sterile, clear containers and remain sealed until they are used. In accordance with this section, they must be stored in a closed dustproof container in such a manner as to prevent being contaminated. A tattoo/body piercing machine must be stored in a manner that will prevent contamination. (based on SDAR 44:12:01:17)
6. Tube construction -- Sterilization required. All tubes, including the grips on the tube, must be either stainless steel, nickel-plated carbon steel, Lexan, or be disposable. The grips may also be constructed of anodized aluminum. Lead-bearing solder may not be used in the construction of the tubes. Tubes must be thoroughly cleaned and sterilized between patrons, or disposed of between patrons. (based on SDAR 44:12:01:19)
7. Disposal of contaminated products. Gauze, cotton swabs, or other single use products which are contaminated with body fluids must be disposed of in impervious double plastic bags which are securely sealed. When needles, tubes, or other multiple use products used in conjunction with the practice of tattooing/body piercing are disposed of, they must be sterilized and placed in an impervious rigid container which is securely sealed. Single use (or disposable) needles must be disposed of in a biohazard container. (based on SDAR’s 44:12:01:34; 44:12:02:31) (2005 ORD 814)
6-12-6: GRANTING OF LICENSE.
Upon proof of compliance from the Department of Health, the city shall grant the establishment a license which shall be effective for one year. (2005 ORD 814)
6-12-7: DENIAL OF LICENSE.
The City shall not issue such establishment a license if the Department of Health report finds that establishment does not meet the minimum sanitation standards or the applicant has knowingly made any false or fraudulent statement in the application for the license.
The city shall notify the applicant of the denial and the reasons for the denial in writing and send it to the applicant by certified mail. The applicant may request a hearing with the City Council by filing the request within ten days of receipt of the notice. (2005 ORD 814)
6-12-8: RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
An application to renew a license shall be made no later than 30 days before the expiration of the current license along with payment of $100.00 for renewal fee. After an inspection is completed by the Department of Health which shows proof of compliance, the city shall renew the license for an additional year. (2005 ORD 814)
72
6-12-9: CHANGE OF LOCATION OF ESTABLISHMENT.
A license is not transferable to a new location until a transfer fee of $100 has been submitted and an inspection showing that the establishment is in compliance with the sanitation standards. (2005 ORD 814)
6-12-10: REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
Any establishment granted a license under this chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the city council for violation of any provision of this chapter, or applicable provision of the city ordinances, administrative rule, state law, or for grounds that should warrant the denial of the issuance of such license in the first instance. The suspension or revocation of a license shall be accomplished pursuant to a hearing held before the city council at which time evidence shall be received for the purpose of determining whether or not such license shall be suspended or revoked or retained. Following the hearing, if the license is suspended or revoked, the notification of and reasons for such decision shall be set forth in writing and sent to the licensee by means of registered or certified mail or hand delivery. Notice of such hearing shall be in writing, directed to, and delivered to the applicant by means of registered or certified mail or hand delivery at least ten days before such hearing. (2005 ORD 814)
6-12-11: PATRONS RESTRICTED.
a) Any establishment may not tattoo or remove a tattoo or body pierce a patron without first obtaining a signed consent. The consent must include a statement by the patron that he/she is free from infectious or contagious diseases in a communicable stage. This includes rashes, skin lesions, boils, and blood-borne diseases such as viral hepatitis B and human immunodeficiency virus infection. An establishment may not tattoo or remove a tattoo or body pierce a patron with evident skin lesions or skin infections or who is known or suspected to have an infectious or contagious disease in a communicable stage.
b) Minors may not be tattooed or body pierced or have a tattoo removed unless the minor's parents have signed a consent form authorizing the tattoo or removal or body piercing in the presence of an employee at the licensed establishment. No establishment may tattoo or remove a tattoo or body pierce a patron who is under the influence of alcohol or other mind-altering drugs.
c) The establishment shall conspicuously post a notice stating that it is illegal to tattoo or body pierce any person under the age of 18 without the parents' signed consent. (2005 ORD 814)
6-12-12: Liability Insurance
All licensees shall have at all times a valid certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of South Dakota indicating that the licensee is currently covered in the tattoo/body piercing business by a liability insurance policy. The minimum limits of coverage for such insurance shall be:
1. Each claim, at least two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000).
2. Each group of claims, at least five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000).
73
Such insurance shall be kept in force during the term of the license and shall provide for notification to the City prior to terminating or cancellation. A certificate of insurance shall be filed with the City with each license application. (2005 ORD 814)
CHAPTER 13 - FIREWORKS
6-13-1: Application for permit to sell.
(1) All applications for permits to sell consumer fireworks shall be in writing to the Fire Chief, on forms provided by the City Finance Office, and shall be accompanied by a license issued by the State Fire Marshall, and a permit fee in the amount of $250.00. The person must provide a valid permit for the sale of fireworks issued pursuant to title 18 of the United States Code.
(2) The application shall be made in duplicate, and the applicant shall ascertain and state in the application the proposed location of the fireworks stand applied for. The original of the application shall be retained by the Finance Office; and one copy thereof shall be sent to the Fire Chief.
3) The application shall state the name, address and telephone number of one or more responsible adults who will be in charge of and responsible for the fireworks stand during the period fireworks are sold, displayed or stored. The license shall be displayed at all times, openly and publicly, at the licensee's place of business. The license shall be issued within a reasonable time after application. (2005 ORD 816)
6-13-2: Age of Applicant
No person under the age of 21 shall be engaged in the business of handling or selling any display or consumer fireworks; provided, however, that a person less than 21 years of age but at least 18 years of age may handle and sell display or consumer fireworks at a licensed sales or storage location or may handle display or consumer fireworks at a permitted display site if he or she is under the direct supervision of a person 21 years of age or older. (2005 ORD 816)
6-13-3: Insurance
Within two (2) weeks of the notification of the tentative approval of the permit, the applicant shall furnish to the Finance Officer evidence of a public liability and property damage insurance policy in an amount of not less than $50,000. for injury or death to one person, $100,000. for all injuries or deaths resulting from one occurrence, and $25,000. for property damage with riders attached to said policy designating the City of Mobridge as an additional insured thereunder. The applicant shall also furnish evidence of insurance coverage under a products liability insurance policy covering all merchandise sold by said applicants. The products liability insurance policy shall be in an amount of not less than $100,000. for injury or death to one person, $300,000. for injuries or deaths resulting from one occurrence, $100,000. for property damage resulting from any one occurrence, and $300,000. in the aggregate.
74
The Finance Officer shall issue the permit to the applicant upon the presentation to the Fire Chief of the evidence of a public liability and property damage insurance policy and a products liability insurance policy as hereinabove specified. (2005 ORD 816)
6-13-4: Penalties
Any person who knowingly provides false information on an application for the sale of fireworks as provided in this section shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor.
(2005 ORD 816)
Chapter 6-14 Building Movers
6-14-1 Definitions.
Terms used in this chapter mean:
(1) "Building mover" any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or association who engages in the business work of moving a building across a public property within the city limits.
(2) "Building moving" the moving of any house, building, structure, or any part or parts thereof, except structures or parts of structures less than 9 feet wide, 60 feet long, 13 feet total height when loaded, from one location to another when moving requires traveling upon, across, along, or over any street, avenue, highway, thoroughfare, alley, sidewalk, or other public ground in the city.
(3) "Agency" the, administrative official, police department, and the city street department. (2006ORD845)
6-14-2 License required.
No person except a building mover licensed by the City of Mobridge shall move any building, house or structure or part thereof across, along or over any public property. (2006ORD845)
6-14-3 License application.
Any person desiring to engage in the business of building moving must file a written application for a building mover's license in the finance office. (2006ORD845)
6-14-4 License fee.
The fee for the building mover's license shall be $25.00 and the license shall expire on December 31 of each year. The applicant for a building mover's license shall file with the city finance officer a certificate of building movers insurance which indemnifies the public against loss by negligence of the applicant or its agents in the sum of not less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) to anyone person and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) in anyone accident, for both bodily injury and property damage, and the form and content of such policy shall be approved by the city council. The policy shall be issued by an insurance company approved by the city council. The applicant, if a license be granted, shall conform to all requirements which are now or may be hereafter established by the city council and shall promptly repair and make good to the satisfaction of the City Administrator
75
all damage to any pavement, sidewalk, crosswalk, hydrant, street, alley or other public property which results from moving any building or in connection with the moving thereof; and that the licensed building mover will indemnify and save harmless any person or persons by reason of negligence of the licensed building mover or applicant or applicant's employees or agents in connection with the moving of any building or the use of any public street or ground for that purpose. (2006ORD845)
6-14-5 Revocation.
A building mover's license may be revoked at any time if the mover violates the provisions of this chapter or rules established by the agency, or conducts this business in a careless or reckless manner, or refuses to make prompt payment of any sums due the city from him under any of the provisions of this chapter or whose insurance as required herein has been cancelled or otherwise terminated. (2006ORD845)
6-14-6 Transferability.
No license or permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable. (2006ORD845)
6-14-7 Permits required.
No person shall engage in building moving, unless and until a moving permit has been obtained. (2006ORD845)
6-14-8 Restrictions on moving through streets.
All movement of the building once started shall continue until completed and no buildings shall be parked along the route unless deemed an emergency and approved by the Police Chief. The Policy Chief may require police escorts, temporary removal of traffic devices, or may restrict or specify the day and hours during which the moving operation must be accomplished. (2006ORD845)
6-14-9 Escorts.
Movers shall provide a front and rear escort with revolving lights for all movements. (2006ORD845)
6-14-10 Flags.
Red or orange flags, 12 inches by 12 inches, must be fastened to the farthest rear comers of the moving structure. (2006ORD845)
6-14-11 Reporting_ damage.
The building mover shall immediately report any damage done by the moving operation to any street, sidewalk, curb, utility equipment, tree, sign, or other public or private property to the city. (2006ORD845)
76
TITLE 7-OFFENSES
CHAPTER 7-1 - ALOHOLIC BEVERAGES
CHAPTER 7-2 - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC WELFARE
CHAPTER 7-3 - OFFENSES AS TO PUBLIC PLACES
CHAPTER 7-4 - OFFENSES AS TO PROPERTY
CHAPTER 7-5 - GAMBLING
CHAPTER 7-6 - ANIMALS
CHAPTER 7-7 - MINORS
CHAPTER 7-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
7-1-1 Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to implement the provisions of SDCL Title 35, including the fees to be changed for each of such places.
7-1-2 Classification and Fees
The classifications and fees for sale of alcoholic beverages shall be set by resolution and published in the office of the Finance Officer and if not so set shall be the same as set by SDCL Title 35.
7-1-3 Limitation of Number of Licenses
The number of on sale licenses issued shall not exceed three for the first 1,000 of population and not exceed one of such licenses for each additional 1,000 population or fraction thereof, provided, however, the number of such licenses shall not exceed the total number of such licenses allowable or issued prior to July 1, 1981. The quotas established in this section do not apply to the licenses issued pursuant to SDCL 35-4-2 (16) and (17)
7-1-4 Application
The form of application, notice of hearing thereon and approval thereof shall be as required by SDCL Title 35, as amended.
7-1-5 Restrictions/Minors
No Licensee shall sell any alcoholic beverage to anyone under the age of 21. Persons under the age of 21 shall not be allowed to consume any alcoholic beverage nor shall they be allowed to loiter on licensed premises. The licensee shall not sell alcoholic beverages to persons already intoxicated.
7-1-6 Times When On Sale Service Prohibited
All on sale licensee shall be allowed to sell, serve or allow to be consumed on the premises covered by the license, alcoholic beverages, including malt beverages at the times as stated in SDCL Title 35, except as herein otherwise stated.
Any individual or corporation holding a valid South Dakota on-sale alcoholic beverage license and who shall qualify and secure a valid South Dakota special Sunday sales license under SDCL 35-4-2.1 for the right to sell, serve or allow to be consumed alcoholic beverages
77
between the hours of 11:00 o’clock a.m. and 12:00 o’clock midnight on Sunday shall be permitted to operate within the City provided that said licensee comply with the requirements of SDCL 35-4-2.1 and pay to the City an annual license fee that is set by resolution.
7-1-7 Times When Off Sale Service Prohibited
All off sale licensees shall be allowed to sell alcoholic beverages covered by the license, at the times as stated in SDCL Title 35, except as herein otherwise stated. All off-sale licensees as defined in SDCL 35-4-2 (3), (16), (17), (17A) and (20) shall be allowed to sell malt beverages on Sunday between the hours of 7:00 o’clock a.m. and 12:00 o’clock midnight on Sunday. No other off-sale licensees licensed under SDCL Title 35 shall be allowed to sell alcoholic beverages on Sunday.
7-1-8 Location of Premises
No application for “on-sale and\or “off-sale” license for the retail sale of intoxicating liquor Shall be approved unless said business is located on property abutting Main Street south of Grand Crossing Boulevard or on Grand Crossing Boulevard between the east City limits and the north City limits of said Grand Crossing Boulevard. Provided, however this amendment shall not affect any location of an existing “on-sale” or “off-sale” license on the effective date of this amendment or the subsequent renewal of a license for such location.
7-1-9 Regulation, Place and Manner Off Sale License
No off sale licensee shall permit any intoxicating liquors to be consumed in or about the Sale licensed premises and no off sale dealer shall be permitted to make any deliveries of intoxicating liquor outside of the premises described in his or her license; except said licensee may make a sale and delivery through a pass through door or window providing such pass through door or window shall be located fronting on a public street, and shall be not more than 40 feet from the public street and shall be well lighted at the pass through entrances and for a distance of 25 feet therefrom. All pass-through entrances shall be subject to the approval of the City Council prior to the use thereof as herein provided, and the City Council may, at its discretion, at any time order any pass-through door or window closed and the licensee to discontinue the use thereof as a pass through for the delivery of beverages permitted to be sold under an off-sale license.
7-1-10 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed Guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of $200.00 or imprisonment in the County Jail not to exceed 30 days, or by such fine and imprisonment. That any violation of this Chapter shall be sufficient cause for the City Council to suspend for a period of time not exceed one year, or to revoke the license of the person, firm or corporation found guilty of such violation. Whenever any person shall be a clerk, servant, agent or employee of any other person, firm or corporation and violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance, he or she shall be guilty as a principal, and shall be punished as herein provided; and the principal shall be held liable for the act of his or her clerk, servant, agent or employee. Each and every violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall constitute a separate offense.
78
7-1-11 SPECIAL PERMIT LICENSES
Upon proper application to the City, pursuant to SDCL 35-4, the City shall be entitled to issue special event beverage licenses to educational, fraternal or veterans’ organizations and to certain other licensees. The fees to be charged for the special events licenses shall be set by resolution, which fee must accompany the application.
CHAPTER 7-2 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC WELFARE
7-2-1 Disorderly Conduct
No person shall act in any unseemly manner or way tending to degrade and unsuited to the promotion of the morals, health or comfort of the inhabitants of the City.
7-2-2 Disturbing the Peace
No person shall disturb the peace of the City or of any person by violent, tumultuous or offensive conduct, or by loud or unusual noises or by profane, obscene, indecent, violent or threatening language, or by assaulting, striking, or attempting to assault or strike another person, or inviting or defying another person to fight or quarrel, or by willfully or maliciously destroying or attempting to destroy or injure any property belonging to another, or by engaging in a fight with another.
7-2-3 Assault and Battery
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to commit an assault or an assault and batter upon any other person within City limits. Assault and assault and batter shall be determined, defined and limited as provided by the statutes of the State of South Dakota.
7-2-4 Carrying Concealed Weapons
No person shall carry concealed about his or her person any pistol or other firearm, sling shot, brass knuckles or knuckles of other material, or any sand bag, dagger, bowie knife, dirk knife, or other dangerous or deadly weapon, or any instrument or device which when used is likely to produce death or great bodily harm. Any peace officer may wear and carry such weapons, as may be necessary and proper for the discharge of his or her official duties.
7-2-5 Resisting, Escaping from or Assaulting an Officer
No person shall refuse to obey the command of any police officer given in the performance of his or her official duties, nor shall any person resist or obstruct any police officer in the performance of any official duty, nor in any way aid or assist any person to resist or escape from any such officer, nor assist any person to escape from any lawful confinement. No person shall assault or strike any police officer, nor in any way interfere with a police officer in the discharge of his or her duty.
79
7-2-6 Impersonating Officer
No person not duly authorized shall exercise the duties conferred by law upon policeman, wear a policeman badge or represent him or herself as being a policeman or peace officer, or attempt to exercise the duties of a policeman or peace officer.
7-2-7 Indecency
No person shall appear in any public place in the state of nudity, in indecent dress or make any indecent exposure of his or her person. No person shall exhibit, show or perform any indecent, immoral, or lewd show, act, play, motion picture or other representation in any theater or place of public resort. The forgoing shall not be interpreted or construed to prohibit or regulate, women from nursing or breast-feeding in public or private.
7-2-8 Obscene Written and Printed Matter
No person shall exhibit, publish, pass, sell or offer for sale, or have in his or her possession with such intent, any obscene, lewd or lascivious books, pamphlets, papers, magazines, writings, advertising circulars, cards, prints, letters, pictures, drawings, films, or other immoral, lewd or indecent representations or publications.
All other obscene matter is declared to be a nuisance and any police officer is authorized to seize any such obscene matter found in the possession of any person arrested for a violation hereof, and upon conviction of a violation of this section, the court shall order as a part of the judgment in addition to the other penalties prescribed, that the officer having the custody of such obscene matter shall destroy the same.
7-2-9 False Emergency Alarms Prohibited
No person shall knowingly make or give any false alarms of fire or other emergency by calling or causing to be called, the Fire Department, and police officers or any authorized emergency vehicle.
7-2-10 Displaying License Unlawfully
No person shall carry or display any City license or permit which has been terminated or revoked or which has not been lawfully procured and issued.
7-2-11 Discharge of Weapons
It shall be unlawful for any person, except a police officer in the performance of his or her duties, or any person granted a special permit in writing from the Chief of Police of the City, to discharge any firearm, air rifle, or bow and arrow, or slingshot or any device of like character, within the limits of the City, and within one mile of the corporate limits of the City, EXCEPT in designated rifle and archery ranges, areas posted by the State of South Dakota as “Game Production Areas” and all other locations and times as specifically permitted under South Dakota Administrative Rule 41:03:01:16.
7-2-12 Fireworks
No person shall sell, shoot off or discharge fireworks of any kind or substances designed or intended for pyrotechnic display within the limits of the City; except fireworks can
80
be sold within 100 feet of City Limits where it is zoned as highway commercial, and upon approval by the fire chief and City Council. A pyrotechnic display of fireworks may be held within the limits of the City under such rules, regulations and supervision and such times as may be designated by resolution of the City Council.
Any fireworks remaining unfired after a public display or the selling of fireworks is concluded shall be immediately disposed of or stored by the retailer in a manner which is safe for that particular type of firework remaining.
(2005 ORD 812)
CHAPTER 7-3 OFFENSES AS TO PUBLIC PLACES
7-3-1 Gatherings on Streets
No person shall call or cause the gathering of any crowd of people or address or exhibit any show or performance to such crowd, in any alley, street or other public property of the City, without the written permission of the Chief of Police.
7-3-2 Crowds Obstructing Streets
It shall be unlawful for persons to gather in crowds or groups or for any person to stand on any public street or sidewalk in such a manner as to obstruct free passage thereon, or to annoy other persons passing along the same, and any police officer is authorized to disperse the crowd or group or to cause the removal of any person violating the provisions of this Section and to summarily arrest any person in case of refusal to obey any reasonable direction given by such officer for the purpose of clearing the way.
7-3-3 Hindering or Molesting Passerby
No person shall upon any street, or at the entrance of any building on any such street, alley or sidewalk, wrongfully hinder, impede or molest any passerby, or use any rude, obscene, vulgar, indecent or threatening language to any passerby, or by any indecent act, gesture or noise molest, annoy or insult or put fear in any person passing or attempting to pass on such street, alley or sidewalk or through the entrance to such building.
7-3-4 Goods on Sidewalk
No person shall place any goods or merchandise for sale or exhibition upon any sidewalk, except that, for the purpose of loading and unloading, such articles may be placed upon the outer sidewalk for such time as may be necessary to load or unload or obstruct the same.
The forgoing shall not apply to events sponsored by the Mobridge Chamber of Commerce during normal business hours.
In no instance shall any such articles be left upon the sidewalk in the night time without the written permission of the Chief of Police.
7-3-5 Broken Seal
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any open container or package containing any intoxicating liquor upon any public place.
81
7-3-6 Securing a Permit to Sell Liquor Temporarily
Upon application and approval by the city council a temporary permit may be issued to an organization, group, or individual to sell and allow alcoholic beverages to be consumed on a limited basis upon public property. Such permit shall state the purpose, place and duration of the permit.
Any person violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine set by resolution or 30 days imprisonment or both such fine and imprisonment.
7-3-7 Smoking In City Owned Buildings
No person shall smoke in any city-owned building. (1999ORD755)
CHAPTER 7-4 OFFENSES AS TO PROPERTY
7-4-1 Damaging Signs
No person shall deface, remove, change, mar or in any way interfere with or obliterate either wholly or in part any sign, signboards, or card placed, posted, extended or erected by the City.
7-4-2 Traffic Signs
No person shall deface, injure, move, obstruct or interfere with any official traffic sign or signal, or street sign, or parking meter.
No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street, any unofficial sign, signal or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic sign or signal, of which attempts to direct the movement of traffic. Every suck prohibited sign, signal or device is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the Chief of Police is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause the same to be removed without notice.
7-4-3 Destroying Trees and Plants
No person shall willfully injure, destroy or deface any tree, shrub, plant, or grass in any parking lot of park, or on the property of another.
No person shall willfully injure or destroy any cultivated fruits or vegetables, ornamental trees, shrubs, hedges, vines or flowers, nor injure or carry off any of the products thereof, which are property of another.
7-4-4 Electric Light Posts and Apparatus
No person shall interfere with, injure, break or jar any electric light, telephone, telegraph or fire alarm system, post or pole or apparatus in any manner, or climb any telegraph, telephone, electric light or fire alarm pole without being properly authorized to do so.
7-4-5 Gas, Water or Electrical Pipe or Wire
No person shall, without lawful authority, connect or cause to be connected, with any main service pipe, wire or other conductor of gas, water, or electrical energy, any pipe wire or
82
other device for the purposes of obtaining gas, water, or electrical current therefrom; nor shall any person, with intent to defraud, connect or cause to be connected with any meter installed for the purpose of registering the amount of gas, water, or electricity supplied to any customer, any pipe, wire or other device or disconnect change or in any manner to interfere with any such meter of any pipe, wire of appliance connected there with, that such meter will not measure or restore the full amount of gas, water or electricity supplied to any customer.
7-4-6 Interference with City Engineer, Instruments, Stakes
No person shall interfere with the City Engineer while engaged in his or her official duties in any manner or by driving any vehicle of any kind against the person, surveying instruments or apparatus of said City Engineer or any of his or her assistants, or by moving or displacing any stake, monument or bench mark fixed or located by him or her or by his or her assistants.
7-4-7 Interference with City Property
No person shall climb or in any manner interfere with any building, water tower, bridge or structure belonging to the City, without first being authorized to do so by the City, and no person shall in any manner injure or deface any such structure.
7-4-8 Destroying Property
No person shall willfully damage, deface, break, destroy, or interfere with the property of the City or of another person.
7-4-9 Fences
No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter construct, erect or maintain or cause to be constructed, erected or maintained in the City any fences of any character or material, exceeding seven feet in height, about the sidewalk or the surface of any lot of parcel of ground; provided, that any such fence so constructed, erected or maintained shall not exceed five feet in height when the same is within forty feet of the street line, and provided further, that no fence or any part thereof shall be constructed of barbed wire.
7-4-10 Certain Advertising Methods Prohibited
No person shall put up, erect, hang, post, or suffer to remain so placed, any sign, posted notice, or other advertising matter, upon any telephone, telegraph, or electric light pole in the City.
No person shall paint, print, write, post, or in any manner place upon any sidewalk, pavement or crosswalk in the City, any letters, words, figures, sign, pictures, notices, or advertisements of any kind.
7-4-11 Graffiti prohibited:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(a) Definition: Graffiti means any writing, printing, marks, signs, symbols, figures, designs, inscriptions or other drawings which are scratched, scrawled, painted, drawn or otherwise
83
placed on any exterior surface of a building, wall, fence, sidewalk, curb or other permanent structure on a public or private property which has the effect of defacing the property.
(b) No person shall intentionally place graffiti on any surface located on public or private property.
(c) No owner of any property may allow graffiti to be placed on any external surface on the owner’s property. The owner of any such property shall remove graffiti, which has been placed thereon within fifteen days after having received written notice from the Police Department, or a waiver is signed allowing the police department to remove the graffiti. If the property owner does not comply, the City may institute nuisance abatement procedures and recover the cost of the removal, pursuant to legal remedies available.
(d) Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to the maximum penalties allowed for a class 2 misdemeanor and the court shall order restitution for damages or loss caused by the offense. (2005ORD808)
CHAPTER 7-5 GAMBLING
7-5-1 Gambling Prohibited
No person shall in the City, or within one mile of the outer boundaries thereof, play at roulette, chuck-luck, poker, black jack, twenty-one or any other gambling game, dice game, or game of chance upon which money or any articles of value is staked, or to resort to, attend, or be present at any place where such gambling games or games of chance are carried on.
7-5-2 Gambling Apparatus Nuisance
Every article, apparatus or device used, operated or kept in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter, shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be seized by the officers at the time of the arrest, of a person, for violation of any provisions of this Chapter, having the same in his or her possession. Upon conviction of such person for such violation, said gambling apparatus or article may be destroyed under order of the court.
7-5-3 Allowances
Games of chance authorized by the State of South Dakota are not subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
CHAPTER 7-6 ANIMALS
7-6-1 Cruelty to Animals
No person shall cruelly or immoderately beat, torture or injure any domestic animal, or overload any working animal, nor shall any person willfully or negligently mistreat or abuse, or treat or neglect in a cruel or inhuman manner any animal.
84
7-6-2 Animals Prohibited in City
It shall be unlawful for anyone to house or to permit to run at large any domestic fowl, horses, goats, pigs, sheep, cattle, or any animal with a propensity to be dangerous within the City Limits.
7-6-3 Responsibility for Animals
(a) No person shall create or maintain any condition or operate any equipment or keep any animal, fowl, pet, or insect under his jurisdiction in such a way that such condition or operation causes or is likely to cause the transmission of diseases from animals or insects to man
(b) No owner, keeper, caretaker, or attendant of an animal shall allow an animal to defecate on public or private property other than his own. If such animal does defecate upon public or private property the owner, keeper, caretaker, or attendant must immediately and thoroughly clean the fecal matter from such property.
(c) Animals used in parades or involved in law enforcement are exempt from this inspection. (2003 ORD 797)
CHAPTER 7-7 MINORS
7-7-1 Loitering of Minors Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of seventeen years to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play, ride or be in any motor vehicle, in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots, or other unsupervised places, or to be or remain in any dance hall, restaurant, café, theater, or other public place between the hours of 11:00 o’clock p.m. and 6:00 o’clock a.m. on Sunday through Thursday nor between the hours of 12:00 o’clock, midnight, and 6:00 o’clock a.m. on Fridays or Saturdays, official City time; provided, however, that the provisions of this section do not apply to a minor accompanied by this or her parents, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business, directed by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care or custody of the minor, said authorization shall be on file with the City Police Department or in the personal possession of the minor. (2005ORD821)
7-7-2 Responsibility of Parents
It shall be unlawful for the parent or guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor who has not reached the age of seventeen years to knowingly permit such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play or ride or be in any motor vehicle in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots, or other unsupervised places, or to be or remain in any dance hall, restaurant, cafe, theater, or other public place between the hours of 11:00 o’clock p.m. and 6:00 o’clock a.m. on Sunday through Thursday nor between the hours of 12:00 o’clock, midnight, and 6:00 o’clock a.m. on Fridays or Saturdays, official City time; provided, however, that the guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or where the minor; is upon an emergency errand of
85
legitimate business directed by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor. (2005ORD821)
7-7-3 Responsibility
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation operating places of amusement and entertainment, restaurants, cafes, theaters or other public places, to permit minors under the age of seventeen years to enter or remain in such place of amusement and entertainment, restaurant, café, theater, or other public place during the hours prohibited under this Chapter, or owner or operator of any motor vehicle to permit or allow any minor to be in or ride in such motor vehicle during the hours prohibited by this chapter; provided, however, that the provisions of this Section do not apply when the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor. (2005ORD821)
7-7-4 Penalty
It shall be the right of any authorized officer or person to detain or take into custody any minor violating the curfew and to keep said minor detained until his or her parent, guardian or custodian is notified when said minor may be released upon the giving of a promise by the minor and his or her parent, guardian or custodian that such minor together with his or her parent, guardian or custodian will appear at a stated time before the proper authority to answer to the charges.
Once a minor has been detained for violating curfew and the minor is being held until a parent, guardian or custodian can be notified to pick the minor up, the arresting officer shall give the parent guardian or custodian a reasonable time to pick up the minor and if the minor is not picked up within a reasonable time then there shall be assessed against the parent, guardian or custodian a penalty of $20.00 per hour payable to the City of Mobridge for the care and custody of the child. Such penalty to be assessed along with any other court penalties assessed by the court.
Any person, parent, child, guardian, or custodian violating any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class 2 Misdemeanor, and shall upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00 or imprisonment not to exceed thirty days or by both such fine and imprisonment. Upon a first offense under this chapter, only a money fine shall be imposed against the person deemed guilty of the misdemeanor and upon a second offense, the court shall impose a fine and a jail term.
TITLE 8 – CONTRACTOR CODE
CHAPTER 8-1 - LICENSES AND PERMITS
CHAPTER 8-2 - PLUMBING CODE
CHAPTER 8-3 - ELECTRICAL CODE
CHAPTER 8-4 - GENERAL CONTRACTOR CODE
CHAPTER 8-1 LICENSES AND PERMITS
8-1-1 LICENSES
No individual or company shall engage in the business of plumbing, electrical work, or contract work consisting of, but not limited to, cement or concrete contracting, either flat, form,
86
or masonry contracting; water or sewer line installer; dirt excavator; or sidewalk or street pavement improvements or repairs, within the city of Mobridge unless licensed as such under the provisions of the state of South Dakota where necessary, and the codes of this chapter. The licenses shall not be transferable. A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid to the city finance officer and the license shall expire December 31st of each year.
8-1-2 Insurance and Bonds
Before any contractor does work for the city or within the city for the general public as listed in section 8-1-1, he/she shall file with the city finance officer a certificate if insurance showing proof of workman’s compensation, where applicable, and public liability insurance with a combined single limit of $500,000.
The contractor must also furnish a bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), conditioned for the faithful performance of all duties required by this ordinance or any rule or regulation of the city council. Said contractor agrees to repay the city, or those affected, all damages sustained by reason or neglect of work done or careless guarding of excavations made, or failure to put all streets or public places opened, in as good condition as before breaking up or opening up same or far any other causes growing out of the negligence or carelessness of such licensee or their employee.
CHAPTER 8-2 PLUMBING CODE
8-2-1 Code and Amendments
The National Standard Plumbing Code that was adopted by the City and the rules and regulations therein provided shall be, and the same are hereby changed and amended to at all times comply with changes and amendments officially adopted by the State Plumbing Board under Chapter 36-25 of the South Dakota Compiled Laws, as amended.
In addition to the pipe provided for in the national plumbing code for drainage, waste and vents acrylo nitrile butadiene serene pipe may be used in all new construction or replacement.
8-2-2 Title and Scope
A. Title. South Dakota State Plumbing Code, may be so cited and referred to in this Chapter as the “Code.”
B. Scope. The provisions of this Code shall apply to governing plumbing as defined in the Code, including the practice, materials and fixtures used in the installation, maintenance, extension and alternation of all piping, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances, in connection with any of the following: sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities, ventilating system, and the public or private water supply systems within or adjacent to any building or other structure or conveyance; also, the practice and materials used in the installation, maintenance, extension or alteration of storm water or sewage system of any premises or their connection with any point of public disposal or other terminal.
C. Facilities. It is recognized that certain facilities in or adjacent to public streets are referred to in this Code, only a portion of which is under the ownership or control of
the owner or occupants of the building or premises to which this code applies.
87
D. Administration and Enforcement. The administration and enforcement of this Code shall be the duty of the Water Superintendent and /or Building Official and representatives of the State of South Dakota as provided in said Code, who are hereby authorized to take such action as may be reasonably necessary to enforce the provisions and purposes of this Code. Such persons may be appointed and authorized as assistants or agents of such administrative authority as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Code.
8-2-3 Duties of Building Inspector
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to see that the construction and maintenance of the plumbing, draining and ventilation of all buildings in the City shall hereafter conform to and comply with the rules and regulations established by this Ordinance; to pass upon all plans submitted, and to keep a record of all work, including all notices served and applications received, permits granted, violations of these regulations and all other matters which may pertain thereto. The Building Inspector shall inspect all plumbing in course of construction, in new or old buildings, and shall see that the rules and regulations and regulations of the City Council are enforced. The Building Inspector shall approve or reject all plans within twenty-four hours, when practicable, and in no case to delay to do so for more than five days.
8-2-4 Supervision
All plumbing work in the process of construction, alteration or repair, shall be under the supervision of the Building Inspector, who is hereby empowered to stop such work when the same is being done contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance, provided, that whenever questions arise in regard to renewing or changing pipes or fixtures not covered by this Chapter, the Building Inspector is in such cases authorized to require such work to be done as he or she shall deem best and furnish specifications therefore.
8-2-5 Access
The officers and employees of the Department of Building and Building Inspector shall have access to all buildings for the purpose of examining and carrying into effect all ordinances relating to health and ventilation.
8-2-6 Test
The Building Inspector may, if he or she deems it necessary, before approving any plumbing, required either of the following tests: (1) by plugging all openings and filling with water to the highest point. (2) or by a pressure of air of not less than 15 pounds to square inch; such test to be made in the presence of some authorized officer or employee of the Building Inspector, and it shall include soil, waste, ventilation pipes, brass ferrules and soldering nipples in connection with the same, to finished line or face of the floor or sidewalk.
8-2-7 Permits
A. Issuance of Permit: No plumbing work, unless excepted in this Section, shall be undertaken prior to the issuance of a permit therefore by the Building Official. A permit shall be issued to a licensed plumber, except as provided in paragraph B of the Section.
88
B. Exception: Any permit required by this Code may be issued to any person to do any work regulated by this Code in any structure owned by the applicant, where the plumbing work is to be done exclusively by the owner and the materials purchased by said owner for work on said property.
In addition to the exceptions and provisions contained in the National Plumbing Code Regulations, permits will not be required for the removal of stoppage in oil or waste pipe or for replacing broken fixtures, providing such fixtures conform to the regulations contained in this Chapter or Code, nor for replacing tanks or faucets or repairing leaks in waste pipes nor for the repair of water supply pipes or tanks.
C. Application for Permit: Application for permit shall be made on suitable forms provided by the Building Official. If application be for tapping water or sewer mains, the application must be accompanied by the fee provided for such tapping in Title 11 of this Ordinance.
8-2-8 Notice to Inspector
Any plumber or person doing work under the provisions of this Code shall, when work is prepared for Inspection as provided in this Code, notify the Building Official that such inspection is required, giving the location of premises, the time such work will be ready for inspection. The Building Official shall inspect such work within a period of two work days after notification that such work is ready for inspection.
CHAPTER 8-3 ELECTRICAL CODE
8-3-1 General
The administration and enforcement of this Ordinance shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer who is hereby authorized to take such action as may be reasonably necessary to enforce the purposes of the City's Electrical Code which is the same as the National Electric Code as adopted by the National Fire Protection Association. Such persons may be appointed and authorized as assistants or agents of such administrative authority as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of the Code.
8-3-2 Scope
The provisions of this Code shall apply to govern electrical work as defined in the Code, including the practice, materials and fixtures used in all new installations, electrical conductors, fitting devices and fixtures for light, heat and power service equipment and all equipment used for power supply to radio and television receiving systems and amateur radio transmission systems and buildings and structures; and all alterations and/or extensions to existing wiring systems and within or adjacent to any building or other structure or conveyance or on any premises within the limits of the City.
89
8-3-3 Definitions
The following terms, as defined herein, and as used in the Code are as follows:( other terms are defined in Article 100 of the National Electrical Code, as adopted)
1. Building Service Equipment: The mechanical, electrical and elevator equipment, including piping, wiring, fixtures and other accessories, which provide sanitation, lighting, heating,ventilating, fire fighting and transportation facilities essential for the habitable occupancy of the building or structure for its designated use and occupancy.
2. Electrical Equipment: All installations of electrical conductors, fittings, devices and fixtures within or on public and private buildings.
3. Electrical Service Equipment: The equipment located at point of entrance of supply conductors to a building which constitutes the main control of supply and means of cut-off of electricity, including circuit- breaker switches, fuses and electrical accessories.
8-3-4 License- Electricians
If said electrician has provided the State Electrical Board a surety bond and proof of liability insurance as required by SDCL 36-16, such electrician shall not be required to post the bond of said amount hereinabove referenced, but shall provide proof of their State license to the City Council.
CHAPTER 8-4 GENERAL CONTRACTORS
8-4-1 Definition
It shall be unlawful to engage in business for the city as a general contractor without first having obtained a license there as herein provided.
The term "General Contractor" shall mean and include anyone engaged in the business of cement or concrete contracting, either flat, form, or wall work, or as a masonry contractor; or as a carpenter contractor; or as a general building contractor; water and sewer installer; dirt excavator; or any person engaged in the construction, alteration, or repair of buildings or other structures, or sidewalk or street pavements.
Engaging in the above-mentioned professions in the municipality for which a permit is required under the ordinances of the municipality shall be construed as doing business as a contractor in the municipality.
8-5-2 Subcontractors
Any person, firm, or corporation doing business as a subcontractor shall be construed as engaged in the business of a general contractor for which a license is required by this ordinance.
8-5-3 Regulations
It shall be the duty of all general contractors to comply with all ordinances relating to the construction of building or other structures, the construction of streets, sidewalks, masonry
90
items, water or sewer line installation, or repair of excavation services, and all laws local, state, or national (federal) pertaining to or regulating the activities engaged in.
8-5-4 Revocation
Any contractor’s license may be revoked by the mayor or council for repeated violations of any ordinance relating to the construction of buildings, the use of streets, the replacement of streets, sidewalks or parkways, or any other ordinance relating to the work performed by such contractor. Such revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed for violating this ordinance.
8-5-5 Insurance and Bonding
No permit shall be issued for the construction of a building or structure in the city, or for the repair or alteration of the exterior or interior of any building or structure, cement work, water or sewer repair work without a certificate or other proof showing the contractor carries workman’s compensation, where applicable, and public liability insurance with a combined single limit of $500,000.
Before any contractor doing any work for the city an any street or highway, or on any building or premises owned by the city commences work, he or she shall file with the clerk a certificate of other proof showing that he carries workman’s compensation and public liability insurance as required by the ordinances and the terms of his contractor. Furthermore, each said contractor shall furnish a bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000) and such proof shall be kept on file at City Hall.
TITLE 9 – STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND PUBLIC PLACES
CHAPTER 9-1 - NAMES, NUMBERING, CURB LINES AND GRADES
CHAPTER 9-2 - SNOW REMOVAL ON SIDEWALKS
CHAPTER 9-3 - USE OF STREETS
CHAPTER 9-4 - MOVING BUILDINGS ON STREETS
CHAPTER 9-5 - EXCAVATION IN PUBLIC PLACES
CHAPTER 9-6 - SIDEWALKS
CHAPTER 9-7 - PUBLIC LIBRARY
CHAPTER 9-8 – PARKS AND RECREATION
CHAPTER 9-9 - CEMETARIES
CHAPTER 9-10- PUBLIC AIRPORTS
CHAPTER 9-11- WIDTHS
CHAPTER 9-12- MOTOR VEHICLES
CHAPTER 9-13 - TREES
CHAPTER 9-1 NAMES, NUMBERING CURB LINES AND GRADES
9-1-1 Names of Streets and Avenues
Names of the streets and avenues in the City of Mobridge shall be known and designated by those names shown upon the several plats and divisions and subdivisions of the City of Mobridge within its corporate limits and as may have been changed by Ordinance
91
of the City of Mobridge and as now are shown upon the map and plat now on file in the office of the City Finance Officer of the City of Mobridge which said plat is hereby by reference adopted and the names of the streets and avenues as shown there on are hereby adopted and designed as the names of the said streets and avenues. All streets and avenues need to correspond with 911 system.
That the present City Plat is hereby amended to change the names of the avenues and streets on the official plat adopted in the original Ordinance of the City of Mobridge so as to change the designation of Vermont Avenue to Twelfth Avenue East; Kansas Avenue to Thirteenth Avenue East; Arizona Avenue to Fourteenth Avenue East; Nevada Avenue to Fifteenth Avenue East; Colorado Avenue to Sixteenth Avenue East and the avenue one block east of Sixteenth Avenue East to be named Seventeenth Avenue East; the road running from Revheim Road along the southern edge of the City of Mobridge to the drive-inn theater be named Twentieth Street East; that road from Ninth Avenue East to U.S. Highway 12 on the east boundary of Mobridge be named Airport Road and the road on Tenth Avenue West north of Twentieth Street West of the City Water Plant be named Water Plant Road.
9-1-2 Buildings Numbered
All houses or buildings fronting on any public street or avenue within the City, shall be numbered in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
Buildings on the east side of Main Street or of any Avenue shall receive even numbers and buildings on the west side thereof shall have odd numbers; buildings on the north side of any street shall receive even numbers and buildings on the south side shall receive odd numbers.
9-1-3 Numbering- Where to Commence
The numbering on all houses and buildings on Main Street and on all avenues shall commence to number from Railway Street and shall number north and south from said Railway Street as the case may be, as far as said streets and avenues may extend or may hereafter extend, commencing with the number one at Railway Street; at the number one hundred one block north or south of Railway Street, and so on, increasing the numbers one hundred for each block.
9-1-4 Numbering for Streets
That Main Street as laid and platted is hereby designated as the place from which to begin numbering all houses and building on streets both East and West thereof; the first number in the first block on each street to be number “one” and the first number in the second block being “one hundred one”, and so on increasing one hundred for each bock east and west of Main Street.
9-1-5 Numbering of Avenues
All avenues shall be numbered in the same manner as they would be if full blocks existed as they do exist on Main Street in said City; that is all avenues commencing north and south of the intersection of Main Street and Railway Street shall take as the starting number of said avenue the corresponding number as provided for Main Street.
92
9-1-6 Vacant Property
Vacant lots fronting on said streets and avenues shall be entitled to their proper numbers, allowing each twenty-five foot space fronting on said streets and avenues to receive a separate number as closely as said distance can be adhered to.
9-1-7 Posting Numbers
All owners of buildings, business houses and dwelling places be and they are hereby required to publicly post upon some conspicuous portion of such building, business house or dwelling place, its proper number under this Ordinance.
9-1-8 Curb Lines
The curb lines in the City heretofore established by ordinances of the City and as shown and set forth on plat marked “Map A - Curb Lines” on file in the office of the City Finance Officer, as of the date of the adoption of this ordinance, are hereby established and adopted as the official curb lines in the City and Map A curb lines are hereby incorporated herein by reference with the same full force and effect as though set forth at length herein.
9-1-9 Grades
The grade of the following described streets at the curb line 10 ½ feet from the property line on Main Street, First Street East, Second Street East, Second Street West, Third Street East, Third Street West, Fourth Street East, and Fourth Street West, and on First Avenue East from First Street East to Third Street East, and at the curb line 13 feet from the property line on First Avenue East from Third Street East to Grand Crossing Avenue, and on First Avenue West from Second Street West to Grand Crossing Avenue, shall be and is hereby fixed and established and kept on file at City Hall.
The datum used is measured up from a point or elevation located 100 feet below the top of the present sidewalk at the northeast corner of Lot, Block 11, Original Town Plat of Mobridge. (See description)
CHAPTER 9-2 SNOW REMOVAL ON SIDEWALKS
9-2-1 Duty of Owner or Occupant
It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant or person in possession or in charge of any lot, parcel, or plot of ground fronting or abutting upon any sidewalk, to keep such sidewalk free and clear from snow and ice at all times. When it is impossible to take snow and ice from such walk by reason of its being frozen to the sidewalk, the owner or occupant or person in charge of such lot shall sprinkle or spread some suitable material upon the same to prevent the walk from becoming slippery and dangerous to travel.
9-2-2 City Shall Remove
If the owner or person in possession or in charge of any of the said lots, parcels, or plots of grounds, fails or refuses to remove the snow or ice from such sidewalk within twelve hours of the falling of said snow of the forming of said ice, the City shall remove or cause to be
93
removed said snow or ice each time it is necessary and assess the cost thereof against the fronting or abutting property.
9-2-3 Cost Assessed
The officer in charge of streets shall cause an account to be kept against each lot for the removal of snow from the sidewalks each year and some shall be certified to the City Finance Officer on or before the 15th of May each year.
The City Finance Officer shall prepare an estimate of the assessment against each lot for the removal of snow for the proceeding winter and fall and submit the same to the Council for its approval on or before the 1st day on June of each year, and shall publish in the official newspaper a notice to property owners of the time and place when and where the Council will meet for the purpose of approving such estimate. Such notice shall be published at least one week prior to the date set for said hearing.
Upon the day so named, the Council shall meet; and if they find said estimate correct, shall approve the same, with or without modification or amendments as they may deem proper, and file said assessment with the City Finance Officer. From the date of such approval and filling, the same shall be collected in like manner as special assessments are now collected for public improvements.
9-2-4 Recovery by City
In lieu of spreading the cost of such snow removal as a special assessment against said property in the discretion of the Council, said amount may be recovered in a civil action against the owner or occupant of said property.
9-2-5 Penalty Any person whose duty it shall be to remove snow as set forth in Section 9-2-1 and 9-2-6 and who fails to remove such snow within the time therein set forth, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and in addition thereof, shall be liable to the municipality all costs incurred to remove the snow and ice and for any other damage caused by the neglect to keep such sidewalk clear and free of snow and ice as provided in this chapter.
9-2-6 Main Street District Duty to Remove Snow
For purposes of this ordinance, the Main Street District shall be defined as Main Street commencing at the southern edge of the intersection of Railway Street and ending at the northern edge of the intersection of Sixth (6th) Street and for one block east and west of Main Street for all streets which intersect with Main Street between said Railway Street and Sixth (6th) Street. In addition to the obligations set forth in 9-2-1, it shall be the duty of the owner or occupant or person in possession or in charge of any lot, parcel, or plot of ground fronting or abutting upon any sidewalk in the Main Street District to remove all snow from the sidewalks on said lots prior to 8:00 A.M. Central Time. If the owner or person in possession or in charge of any of the said lots, parcels, or plots of grounds in the Main Street District, fails or refuses to remove the snow or ice from such sidewalk prior to 8:00 A.M. Central Time, the City shall remove or cause to be removed said snow each time it is deemed necessary by the City and assess the cost thereof against the owner, occupant or person in possession or in charge
94
of the fronting or abutting property. The costs to be assessed for the snow removal shall be an amount set by Resolution.
CHAPTER 9-3 USE OF STREETS
9-3-1 Obstruction on Streets/Parking on Streets and Yards
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle, boat, trailer, camper, or other object, on Main Street between railroad avenue and 6th avenue continuously for a period of time longer than 12 hours or on any other street continuously for a period of longer than seven days. For the purpose of this paragraph, the term “park” shall mean to allow the vehicle, boat, trailer, camper to remain on the street or streets of the City without having removed the vehicle, boat, trailer, camper more than 100 feet for a period of at least 4 hours. The changing of the position of a vehicle, boat, trailer, camper from one point directly to another point, within the same block, shall be deemed as one continuous parking period. For the purposes of this ordinance, the term “block” shall mean both sides of a street between two cross streets and shall include the adjoining cross streets.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle, boat, trailer or camper on Main Street at any time for residential parking purposes, which includes the purposes of going to or from a residence or apartment. For the purpose of this paragraph, the term “park” shall mean to allow the vehicle, boat, trailer, camper to remain unattended at any time.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to park a commercial vehicle which is defined as a motor vehicle or trailer which is more than 80 inches wide overall or weighs in excess of 12,000 pounds on any street, alley, yard or residential parking area in residential areas zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3 for more than one hour except when engaged in deliveries or as support to an ongoing business activity such as construction, moving, carpentry, plumbing, or landscaping, but then only for the time reasonable and necessary to support the activity or make the delivery.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle or trailer in the front or side yards of a residence or business, unless the motor vehicle or trailer is parked in a driveway. For the purposes of this ordinance, Front Yard and Side Yard is as defined in the definitions of the Mobridge Zoning Ordinances Title 4. For the purposes of this Ordinance, a Driveway is defined as any area which is constructed for the purpose of parking motor vehicles, and which is surfaced with asphalt, concrete, pavers or stone and any area which is surfaced with pavers or stone shall be constructed with an edging or other boundary material which prohibits the movement and spreading of the pavers or stone in order to be deemed a driveway. Any driveway must connect to the public street and must include a curb cut where street curbing is present.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle, boat, trailer, camper, or other object within fifteen (15) feet of any crosswalk, stop sign or other stop signal.
(f) Unless otherwise authorized by the Ordinances of the City of Mobridge, it shall be unlawful to block or obstruct any street or alley for more than eight hours within the City without first obtaining a Permit issued by the City Finance Officer or City Administrator. The cost of the Permit shall be determined by motion of the Council and the permit shall be applied
95
for at least 24 hours prior to the time the street or alley will be blocked or obstructed. The form of the Permit shall be approved by the council.
(g) Unless otherwise authorized by the Ordinances of the City of Mobridge, it
shall be unlawful to block or obstruct any street or alley for anytime less than eight hours within the City without first notifying the Mobridge Police Department or City Administrator.
(h) Any vehicle, boat, trailer, camper, or other object parked in violation of this ordinance may be removed by the Police Department or the Street Department and the owner thereof in addition to the other penalties prescribed for the violation of a city ordinance shall be required to pay the cost of the towing and removing of said vehicles.
9-3-2 Materials in Streets, Permits
The Council is authorized to grant permission in writing to any person to deposit and keep lumber, stone, brick or other materials for building, on any public sidewalk, street, road, or alley adjacent to the building to be erected or repaired, but such permission shall not excuse the obstruction or occupancy with such materials of more than one-third of the width of any driveway of any street or road.
9-3-3 Permits
Such permits shall not be issued for a longer period than thirty days, but may in case of necessity, be renewed for a like period, and shall be issued only when the applicant therefore has filed with the City Finance Officer a written agreement executed by him or her and approved by the City Attorney to hold the City harmless from any and all damages for which the City may be or become liable because of such occupation of the street to pay any and all cost of repairing and damage to the City because of such occupation or to reimburse the City for removal of said obstruction, should the applicant unlawfully occupy said street. Such permits shall, during the time the work is in progress, be kept on the ground and shall be exhibited upon the demand of any officer or authorized employee of the City, and any officer or employee shall take up and return to the Mayor, any expired permit, or any permit which does not cover the work being done.
9-3-4 Cleaning Streets of Rubbish
Every person to whom permission shall be granted as herein provided, to place and keep building material in street, highway, avenue or alley, shall cause all such material and rubbish resulting therefrom to be removed from such street, highway, avenue or alley at the expiration of the time limited in the permit, unless the time, for good cause, shall be extended by the office herein designated. And any person depositing and keeping any building material in any street, highway, avenue or alley under a permit from the Mayor or City Finance Officer as here in before provided shall during every night while the same shall there remain keep one or more lighted lanterns so placed that such material or obstruction may be easily seen by persons passing along said street, highway, avenue or alley.
9-3-5 Excavation Near Street
It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of land within the City, to make or cause to be made any excavation on said lot or parcel of land, except the same be securely guarded so as to prevent the injury of any person or persons or animals
96
passing upon or along said sidewalks, street, alleys or public grounds or traveled path or roadway.
9-3-6 Building in Street
No person shall erect or maintain any building in such a position that the same shall stand in whole or in part upon any public street, road, alley or sidewalk in said City or so constructed that any part of the building proper shall project into or over such street, road, alley, or sidewalk; provided that just windows, cornices, and other projections from the buildings above the first story, may extend over an adjusting street, road, alley, or sidewalk not exceeding eighteen inches; and no person shall construct any step, area, or other appurtenance to any building extending over and upon the sidewalk, nor shall any person erect in any public street or road any flight of stairs or steps leading to any floor of any building.
9-3-7 Eave Pipes
No person shall place or maintain any pipe leading from the eaves of any building or any part of any building in said City in such a position that the water discharged from the roof of said building will flow upon or over any public sidewalk in said City.
9-3-8 Garbage in Streets
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to throw, or deposit any ashes, offal, dirt, garbage, decaying vegetables, fish, meat, manure, filthy water, slops or any other offensive or putrid matter or thing into or upon any street, venue, lane, alley or public ground within the corporate limits of the City or into any stream of water within the limits of the said City or forming the boundaries thereof.
9-3-9 Continuing Nuisance
The occupation of any street, highway, avenue or alley contrary to the provisions of this Chapter, shall be deemed a continuing nuisance and the same shall be abated by the police officers of the City and the cost of said abatement shall be assessed to the abutting lot, piece or parcel of land.
9-3-10 Hedges and Other Obstructions
No person shall plant, grow, maintain or permit any hedge, shrub, tree, fence or other object creating an obstruction to view from the public street, upon the part of the street or alley between the curb and sidewalk location, commonly known as the boulevard, or if there be no sidewalk within the sidewalk area adjoining his or her property. Any object located in violation of this Ordinance shall be a nuisance and shall be abated as provided by Section 9-3-9.
9-3-11 Coasters, Roller Skates, etc., Generally:
It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize or use roller skates or coasters, roller blades, toy vehicles, skateboards or any nonmotorized wheeled conveyances upon the sidewalks, streets or parking lots in the downtown core area, which shall include an area whose boundaries would be Main St. from Railroad St. north to 6th St and one half (½) block
97
east and west off of Main Street. This ordinance does not apply to those used by the handicapped and bicycles are only prohibited from the sidewalks. (2006ORD___)
CHAPTER 9-4 MOVING BUILDINGS ON STREETS
9-4-1 Permission to Move
It shall be unlawful for anyone to move any building, into, along or across any public street, alley or highway within the City without first having obtained permission to do so in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. This chapter does not apply to any structures or parts of structures less than nine (9) feet wide and thirteen (13) feet high when loaded. (2006ORD846)
9-4-2 Application
Anyone desiring to move any building into, along or across any public street, alley or highway within the City shall first apply with the City Council, in writing for permission to do so on a form approved by the City Council and upon submitting a $50.00 non-refundable application fee. In addition, the application shall be accompanied with the sum set by resolution to be deposited with the City Finance Officer as pledge or guarantee funds to protect the City against loss or damage to crossings, sidewalks or other public or private property, or expense for protecting such property against the injuries that may be caused by the removal of such building; said deposit or the balance thereof, after deducting the amount of damages or expenses, if any, caused by such removal, to be returned upon an official report to the City Council by the Chief of Police. (2006ORD846)
9-4-3 Guarantee Fund
Whenever the City Council shall decide from an examination of the application and from such other information as may be obtained, that the sum set by resolution is not sufficient as a guarantee fund for ample protection of the City against the probable damages and expenses that may be caused by the removal of such building, the City Council is hereby authorized to require the deposit of a sum more than that set by resolution, not less than five hundred dollars or more than five thousand dollars. (2006ORD846)
9-4-4 Permit
Upon the receipt of the application, fee, and the guarantee fund as hereinbefore provided, the City Council may personally or through the Chief of Police, investigate the representations of the applicant and if such investigations are satisfactory to the City Council, applicant shall deposit said guarantee funds with the City Finance Officer to be held subject to the order of the City Council, who shall thereupon issue to the said applicant a permit in writing for the removal of such building along or across the streets, highways or alleys, to be designated by the City Council, said removal to be finished prior to the time by him or her stated in such application. (2006ORD846)
9-4-5 Refunds
Before refunding said guarantee funds or any part thereof, it shall be the duty of the City Council to examine the report of the Chief of Police and pay out of said funds or set aside for
98
such purposes the amount claimed or ascertained as damages to the public or private property, including the expenses for protection to electric, telegraph, cable television and telephone wires as aforesaid caused or occasioned by the removal of such building. (2006ORD846)
9-4-6 Applicant Must Serve Notice
If the permit includes streets, alleys or highways on which are located, or across or along which are strung electric light, telegraph, telephone wires or cable television wires, it shall be the duty of such applicant to notify in writing the resident manager or managing agent or officer of such public service corporation or owner of said lines or wires at least 48 hours before the commencement of such work of his or her intent to so move such building under or across such line or wires and of the approximate time for such crossing of line or wires by such building. In addition, all home owners whose trees may have to be trimmed must be notified at least 48 hours in advance of moving the building. (2006ORD846)
9-4-7 Damage to Property
Nothing shall be construed as authorizing the applicant to break, injure or move any telegraph, telephone, electric motors or lines, wires or poles, or in any way injure any trees or other property without the permission of the owner(s) thereof. The building mover shall immediately report any damage done by the moving operation to any street, sidewalk, curb, utility, equipment, sign, tree or other public or private property to Chief of Police. (2006ORD846)
9-4-8 Permit Contents
On the receipt of the application and the guarantee fund as hereinbefore provided the City Council may personally or through the Chief of Police, investigate the representations of the applicant and if such investigations is satisfactory to the City Council, applicant shall deposit said guarantee fund with the City Finance Officer to be by him or her held subject to the order of the City Council, who shall thereupon issue to the said applicant a permit in writing for the removal of such building along or across the streets, highways or alleys, to be designated by the City Council, said removal to be finished prior to the time by him or her stated in such application.
9-4-9 Refunds
Before refunding said guarantee fund or any part thereof, it shall be the duty of the City Council to examine the report of the Chief of Police and pay out said fund or set aside for such purposes the amount claimed or ascertained as damages to the public or private property, including the expenses for protection to electric, telegraph, cable television and telephone wires as aforesaid caused or occasioned by the removal of such building as aforesaid.
9-4-10 Applicant Must Serve Notice
If the permit includes streets, alleys or highways on which are located, or across or along which are strung electric light, telegraph, telephone wires or cable television wires, it shall be the duty of such applicant to notify in writing the resident manager or managing agent or officer of such public service corporation or owner of said lines or wires at least 48 hours before the commencement of such work of his or her intent to so move such building under or
99
across such line or wires and of the approximate time for such crossing of line or wires by such building.
CHAPTER 9-5 EXCAVATIONS IN PUBLIC PLACES
9-5-1 Permit Requires
No person shall make or cause to be made any excavation in or under any street, parking area, sidewalk, alley or public ground, or remove any earth, soil, paving, gravel or material therefrom without having first obtained a permit therefore as hereinafter provided.
9-5-2 Excavator’s License and Responsibility
Any person, firm, or corporation performing the work of excavation of water, sewer, electrical or gas lines within the City of Mobridge on any street, boulevard, or private land shall first obtain a license from the finance office for the City of Mobridge. An annual fee of $50 shall be collected and a copy of liability insurance as required by the city council shall be on file prior to issuance.
Licensed excavators shall be held responsible for the acts of their agents or employees, done under and by virtue of his or her license. By issuance of this license, said excavator agrees to maintain any state or national license requirements. Any defective work must be changed to conform to code, and any expenses incurred shall be reimbursed by the licensed party.
9-5-3 Fees and Applicant Responsibility
The homeowner shall make application to the water superintendent for a permit to do any excavation within the City of Mobridge for the purpose of water or sewer line installation, either new or for repair. If installation extends to the boulevard, alley, or street, the approval of the street superintendent is also required. An excavation permit fee of $10.00 shall be paid. If applicable, a water and/or sewer tapping fee shall also be collected per Section 11-3. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to ensure that all utility companies are notified of the exact place or excavation, prior to excavation.
If excavation extends to the alley or street, the applicant shall make deposit with the finance officer of $500 for a paved street or alley, or $300 for a gravel-based street or alley, and will be held until said repairs are complete. An actual bill will be prepared and due in 30 days.
9-5-4 Supervision of Excavations
The street and/or water department shall have opportunity to supervise all excavation done in or on city streets, alleys, or boulevards or public grounds. All excavations will be back filled as written in Section 9-5-6. The contractor is required to use, or have the city workers use, a street saw to cut pavement to help with the aesthetics of repair work.
9-5-5 Guarding Excavations
Any person receiving a permit to make excavations in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public ground shall, during the progress and continuance of the work, erect and maintain
100
around the same both day and night suitable guards, fenced, flares, and signals so as to prevent injury to persons, animals, or vehicles on account of such excavations. Excavation without proper barricades will be subject to a $100 fine.
9-5-6 Refilling Excavations Any person making such excavation shall, when the same shall be completed, promptly and without delay, refill the same as herein provided. In refilling any excavation the earth shall be thoroughly settled as the refilling progresses by using water to compact earth; the earth shall be thoroughly tamped in successive layers of approximately six inches, in such a manner that all the earth shall be replaced in the excavation leaving the surface in its original condition. In making connection to fire hydrants for flushing excavations, all rules and regulations of the Water Department relating thereto shall be observed.
In all cases where excavations are made in the paved district, the earth shall be replaced in the manner above specified, and the pavement shall be replaced by the Street Department.
CHAPTER 9-6 SIDEWALKS AND CURBS 9-6-1 Sidewalks Required Sidewalks, curbing with gutter and ramps are to be constructed on all lots within the City whenever a dwelling or building is constructed or placed upon a lot which fronts a Street or Avenue and shall be in accordance with the Americans Disabilities Act, City Ordinances, and Federal regulations. Such construction shall take place within 6 months of completion of such dwelling or building. Failure to place sidewalk and/or curbing will constitute a violation of the building permit and said permit will be in violation and shall be subject to the City's general penalty clause. (2005ORD829)(2005 ORD 813)
9-6-2 Width and Design. REPEALED. Replaced by 9-6-2(1). (2005ORD829) (2005 ORD 813)
9-6-2(1) Specifications.
The construction of all sidewalks and curb and gutter, whether to be done by direct contract with the City of Mobridge or by contract with the abutting property owners, shall be done strictly in accordance with the specifications for sidewalks and curb and gutter adopted by the city council and on file in the office of the finance officer. Where curb and gutter has been constructed in any one block, any additional curb and gutter constructed in that block shall be constructed to be of the specifications adopted by the city council and on file in the office of the finance officer.
The city council may condemn work and material not in accordance with the requirements of said specifications. (2005ORD829)
9-6-3 Repairs. Repealed. Replaced by 9-6-3(1). (2005ORD829)
101
9-6-3 (1)Property Owner Responsible for Sidewalk Construction and Repair.
It shall be the duty of the person in possession of any lot, parcel, or plot of ground fronting or abutting upon any sidewalk, to keep such sidewalk in repair as provided by SDCL 9-46-2. When the city council deems it necessary to construct, rebuild or repair any sidewalk in the city, it shall notify the owners of lots adjoining the sidewalks to construct, build or repair the sidewalk at their own expense with a designated time. The written notice shall be served personally or by certified mail, return receipt, or by publication, once in each week for two consecutive weeks. If the sidewalk is not constructed, reconstructed or repaired in a manner or within the time prescribed in the notice, the city council may cause the work to be done by the hour or by the job and assess the cost of the work against the lots fronting or abutting upon the sidewalk as provided by SDCL 9-46-4 through 9-46-9. (2005ORD829)
9-6-4 Permit Required Before any sidewalk or curbing is constructed within the limits of the streets and alleys in the City by any contractor or person, for the owner or owners of abutting property, said contractor or person must first secure a permit therefore from the Zoning Officer. The construction of all sidewalks and curbing shall be in accordance with lines and grades furnished by the Zoning Officer and constructed of concrete in accordance with specifications now on file in the office of the City Finance Officer. No charge shall be made for providing stakes for line and grade for sidewalk or curb and gutter construction. In the event grade stakes for sidewalk or curb and gutter previously staked are required to be reset, a new permit shall be secured from the Zoning Officer for which a fee set by resolution shall be paid to the City Finance Officer and receipt thereof presented to the Zoning Officer prior to issuance of said permit.
9-6-5 Supervision of Sidewalk and Curbing Construction
The building and construction of all sidewalks, curb and gutter, and ramps within the limits of the streets and alleys of the City of Mobridge shall be done under the direct supervision of the Zoning Officer and all such sidewalks and curbs shall be constructed on the grades as determined by said city, provided however, that the City Council, by resolution, may waive the sidewalk and/or curb requirement when requested by the owner of the property. (2005ORD829)
CHAPTER 9-7 PUBLIC LIBRARY
9-7-1 Trustees, Appointment of
The Board of Trustees, with the approval of the Mayor and City Council, shall appoint, as vacancies occur, trustees for the City Public Library; such Board of Trustees shall consist of five competent citizens, two of whom must be women, one additional member may be a member of the governing body with full voting rights. Such trustees shall be appointed for terms as provided in SDCL 14-2-35.
102
9-7-2 Organization of Board
In July, each year, said library trustees shall organize by electing from among their members, a president, a vice president, a secretary and a treasurer on each of whom shall devolve the duties usually pertaining to such office.
9-7-3 Trustees Duties
It shall be the duty of such public library trustees to provide suitable accommodations of the public in using the same. Such trustees shall oversee the selection of books, papers and periodicals for such library and may exclude therefrom any reading matter they deem harmful. They may accept gifts of books, money or property for the use and benefit of such library. They shall appoint the librarian and other necessary employees, and fix their compensation, and shall make all necessary rules and regulations pertaining to use of such library facilities. Such trustees may also place certain books upon a pay shelf, and make a reasonable charge for use thereof.
9-7-4 Duty of Finance Officer of Municipality
It shall be the duty of the Finance Officer of the City to keep all funds derived from the levy authorized by SDCL 14-2 in a separate fund and to pay the same upon warrants duly drawn by such trustees.
9-7-5 Library Board Meetings
The library trustees shall organize as a Board at their July meeting and shall hold monthly meetings for the consideration of matters relating to the City Public Library and they shall furnish to the City Council, once each year, a copy of the report provided by law, to be made to the State Library Commission. The library trustees shall, on or before August 1, in each year, make an estimate of the necessary expenses or budget for the maintenance of the public library for the ensuing year and shall verify the same expense in the regular tax levy of the City for the ensuing year. The said trustees and City Council shall have such further duties as are prescribed by SDCL 14-2 and acts amendable thereto.
CHAPTER 9-8 PARK AND RECREATION
9-8-1 SUPERVISION
Primary supervision of the City’s public parks, including the control and management over the planting, maintaining, trimming and removal of trees, shrubs and plants in any and all public grounds or as may be provided by other ordinances of the city shall be performed by the City Administrator subject to approval by the City Council.
9-8-1.1 REPEALED
9-8-2 Definition
Wherever in this chapter the term “Board” is used, it shall be deemed to mean the Park and Recreation Board as established by this ordinance.
103
9-8-3 Creation
There is hereby created in and for the City of Mobridge a Park And Recreation Board for the City and for the land within three miles of its corporate limits and not located within any other municipality with the powers and duties as set forth in this Chapter.
9-8-4 Members of Park and Recreation Board
The City Park and Recreation Board shall consist of seven members, citizens and residents of this city, appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council. At least one member shall be from the City Council. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation for service on the Board.
9-8-5 Terms of Members
The terms of each member of the Park and Recreation Board shall be for 3 years, except that when such Park and Recreation Board is first appointed, two members shall be appointed to serve a one-year term, two members shall be appointed to serve a two year term and three members shall be appointed for a three year term. Thereafter, appointments of each member shall be for three years so that there will be an overlapping of tenures.
9-8-6 Vacancies
Any vacancy in a membership on the Board shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as for appointment.
9-8-7 Organization
Upon appointment the Board shall be called together by the Mayor and shall organize by electing a Chairperson, Vice-chairperson, and a Secretary from among its members for a term of one year with eligibility for re-election, and may fill such other of its offices as it may create in a manner prescribed by the rules of such Board. The Vice-Chairperson shall act in the absence or disability of the President. In case of death or retirement of an officer, a successor shall be elected immediately. The Board shall hold regular meetings at least once each month and as many special meetings as it deems proper. Four members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
9-8-8 Duties
The Board shall have the following duties:
(1) To initiate, review, and make recommendations for ordinances, policies, and rules governing the use of the city’s public parks and other facilities in connection therewith.
(2) To provide the city council with a comprehensive parks and recreation system plan.
(3) To develop plans based upon projected growth and expansion of the city for future park needs, locations and necessary facilities.
(4) To initiate and review parks and recreation programs, and to make recommendations to the mayor and city council for their adoption.
(5) To review and make recommendations to the mayor and city council on any matters affecting the establishment, improvement, maintenance, and regulation of the parks.
(6) Advise and assist the City Administrator relative to parks and recreation.
104
9-8-9 REPEALED
9-8-10 REPEALED
9-8-11 REPEALED
9-8-12 REPEALED
9-8-13 REPEALED
9-8-14 REPEALED
9-8-15 REPEALED
9-8-16 REPEALED
9-8-17 REPEALED
9-8-18 Posting Bills, Signs, etc.
No person shall post, paste, paint or affix any placard, bill, notice or sign upon any structure or thing within any park and upon any of the fences or enclosures thereof, nor upon any part of any parkway. (2001 ORD 779; 9-8-2)
9-8-19 Setting Traps, Snares, etc.
No person shall at any time set, lay, prepare, or have in possession any trap, snare, artificial light, net, bird line, ferret, or any contrivance whatever for the purpose of catching, taking or killing any bird or animal in any park or parkway. (2001 ORD 779; 9-8-3)
9-8-20 Obstructions and Rubbish
No person shall place or suffer to remain in any park or parkway any goods, wares, merchandise or other articles, in the nature of an obstruction for the free use and enjoyment of said park or parkway; nor shall any person place any straw, dirt, chips, paper, shavings, ashes, swill or other rubbish, whether offensive to health or not, in or upon the same; nor shall any person throw, deposit or leave any paper, article or thing in the parks, parkways or waters therein; except in the receptacles provided for waste. (2001 ORD 779; 9-8-4)
9-8-21 Removing or Vandalizing of City Property
No person shall remove or vandalize City property in any park or parkway other than moving the picnic tables within the park. (2001 ORD 779; 9-8-5)
9-8-22 Loitering In Parks Prohibited During Closed Hours
All municipal parks and parkways shall be closed to public use between the hours of 10:00 o’clock p.m. and 6:00 o’clock a.m. without a special permit issued by the City Finance Officer or City Administrator to use the park or parkway between the hours of 10:00 o’clock p.m. and 6:00 o’clock a.m.
105
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter, use or loiter in any municipal park or parkways during the Closed Hours set forth immediately above. This section shall not apply to any person entering the park or parkway during the closed hours for the sole purposes of walking or riding a bicycle across the park or parkway in a specified manner so as to quickly and directly cross the park or parkway.
9-8-23 Penalty
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class 2 Misdemeanor, and shall upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00 or imprisonment not to exceed thirty days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
CHAPTER 9-9 CEMETERIES
CHAPTER 9-9 CEMETERIES
9-9-1 Cemeteries
The word "cemetery" as used herein shall mean and include the Mobridge Municipal Cemetery. Section C thereof is located in the northwest corner of the NW 1/4 of the NE 1/4 of Section 29, Township 124 North of Range 79 west. Sections A and B thereof as hereinafter described, are located in the northeast corner of the NE 1/4 of the NW 1/4 of Section 29, Township 124, Range 79 all in Walworth County, South Dakota, as shown by plats filed in the office of the Register of Deeds of Walworth County, South Dakota and also including Block 6, C.A. Draeger Addition to the City of Mobridge, Walworth County, South Dakota; and also includes the Greenwood Cemetery now owned by the City, located and described as Lot One in the SW 1/4 of Section 17, Township 124, Range 79, comprising ten acres, and also the First Addition to Greenwood Cemetery located in the SW 1/4 of Section 17, Township 124, Range 79, comprising ten acres, a total of twenty acres for the said Greenwood Cemetery, all in Walworth County, South Dakota, as shown by plats filed in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Walworth County, South Dakota.
9-9-2 Supervision
Mobridge Municipal Cemetery and Greenwood Cemetery shall be under the supervision and control of the Parks Department. A Cemetery Superintendent may be appointed by the City Council for coordinating the daily operations if needed. The City Finance Officer is hereby designated the Sexton. The City will provide for the basic care of leveling, seeding, and maintaining of lots and spaces. (2001 ORD 779) (2002 ORD 790)
9-9-3 Description
The Mobridge Municipal Cemetery as now established consists of Sections A, B, C and Block 6, C.A. Draeger Addition to the City of Mobridge, Walworth County, South Dakota. Section C includes lots numbered 1 to 234, both inclusive, which was established by the Mobridge Cemetery Association, and which lots are now owned by individuals or occupied by purchasers now deceased or their heirs. Unsold lots in Section C are governed by the provisions for Sections A, B, and Block 6, C.A. Draeger Addition to the City of Mobridge, Walworth County, South Dakota.
106
Section A consists of Lots numbered 4 to 56, both inclusive, of Addition A. Section B consists of lots numbered 1 to 56, both inclusive, of Addition A. Said cemetery lots in Section A, B and Block 6, C.A. Draeger Addition to the City of Mobridge, Walworth County, South Dakota shall be disposed of as hereinafter provided. Reference is made to the plat of said lots as recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of Walworth County, South Dakota and filed therein and as filed in the office of the City Finance Officer of the City of Mobridge.
9-9-4 Description
The Greenwood Cemetery as now established consists of Lot One of the Southwest Quarter of Section 17, Township 124, Range 79, comprising ten acres, and also the First Addition to Greenwood Cemetery located in the Southwest Quarter of Section 17, Township 124, Range 79, comprising ten acres, a total of twenty acres for the said Greenwood Cemetery, all in Walworth County, South Dakota, as shown by plats filed in the office of the Register of Deeds of Walworth County, South Dakota.
9-9-5 Price of Lots and Fees Charged
a) There shall be paid to the City of Mobridge for the purchase of burial lots, or parts of lots, at Greenwood Cemetery and at Mobridge Municipal Cemetery, including perpetual care, the sum of $400.00, per grave site on the lot or part of lot purchased, except those lots located in Block 6, C.A. Draeger Addition to the City of Mobridge, Walworth County, South Dakota shall be sold for the sum of $250.00 per grave site which shall be used for burial of cremains only.
b) The City of Mobridge will open and close all graves at both Greenwood Cemetery and Mobridge Municipal Cemetery. There shall be paid to the City of Mobridge for the opening and closing of graves and disinterment services the following sums:
1. For regular sized graves the sum of $350.00, per grave site during the months of May, June, July, August, September and October and the sum of $425.00 per grave site during the months of November, December, January, February, March and April.
2. For undersized graves (for babies), the sum of $250.00, per grave site.
3. For the burial of cremains (12” x 4’ hole) the sum of $125.00.
4. In the event the opening and closing of a grave shall be for a grave which will be deeper than 7 feet for the purposes of containing at some time Double Stacked graves, the opening and closing charge for the first grave shall be the sum of $425.00 during the months of May, June, July, August, September and October and the sum of $500.00 per grave site between the months of November, December, January, February, March and April. The opening and closing charge for the second grave shall be the same as for a regular sized grave as set forth in paragraph 1 above.
5. All disinterment services shall be charged a fee based upon the rate of $150.00 per hour.
107
c) All transfers of any lot or parts of lots or of a single grave to another person by the owners thereof shall be in writing in the form of a Deed as prescribed by law. Such transfer shall not be complete or recognized by the City of Mobridge, or burial of a body be permitted therein by such purchaser until the instrument, or Deed, or the transfer thereof, shall have been filed with the Finance Officer of the City of Mobridge, South Dakota, for which recording the person recording same shall pay to the City of Mobridge a recording fee of $10.00.
9-9-6 Certificate of Purchase
The Mayor and City Finance Officer of the City of Mobridge, upon receipt from the City Finance Officer showing the purchase thereof the be fully paid, shall, upon payment in full for the use of lots, portions of lots and grave spaces, deliver to the purchaser thereof a certified certificate of purchase executed by the Mayor and attested by the City Finance Officer under the seal of the City. No burial shall be permitted until the purchase price is fully paid. Blank forms for such certificates of purchase as prescribed herein shall be supplied to the City Finance Officer.
Lots are sold for no other purpose than for the burial of the human dead, and such incidental uses as are suitable and proper for a cemetery lot, but under restrictions as contained in this Ordinance.
All interments in lots shall be restricted to members of the immediate family, or relatives of the owner thereof unless permission to the contrary be obtained from the City Administrator. Double stacking of two bodies or one body plus one cremains will be allowed in one grave site in Greenwood cemetery, but not in the Mobridge Municipal Cemetery, except that double stacking of cremains shall be allowed in the Block 6, C.A. Draeger Addition to the City of Mobridge, Walworth County, South Dakota portion of the Mobridge Municipal Cemetery. Double Stacking of bodies and/or cremains are subject to the additional fees set forth in 9-9-5. Other than set forth herein for Double Stacking bodies and cremains, only one body or cremains will be allowed in one grave site except in case of a mother and infant in which case a special permission must be obtained from the City Administrator. In the event a grave is dug deep in order to allow for Double Stacking bodies, the City Administrator must be notified so the Sexton may document and keep appropriate records.,
No sale, assignment or transfer of a lot shall be valid without the consent of the City, first had and endorsed upon such transfer or assignment, and entered on record by the City.
9-9-7 Fiscal Management
There is hereby established in the City Finance Office a “cemetery fund”. In the “cemetery fund”, the City Finance Officer shall deposit all money received from:
1. The sale of lots
2. Payments received for the digging of graves
3. Receipts from all other sources.
The Finance Officer shall make available an annual itemized report to the City Council of all monies received during the year.
9-9-8 Burial at Expense of City
108
The Mayor, Finance Officer or City Administrator may order the Sexton to dig a grave and bury any person at the expense of the City whenever the deceased leaves no estate or relative whose duty it is, and who is able to defray such expenses. The City shall, when legally possible, collect for cost such lot and digging of such grave, from the county legally liable thereof.
9-9-9 Public Burying Plots
The burial plots numbered 123, 124 and 125 in Section C and burial plots numbered 53, 54, 55 and in Sections A and B in the Municipal Cemetery are hereby set apart and indicated as the public burying ground and shall continue to be used for the burial of persons for whom no other place has been provided, and shall be and remain such public burying ground.
The burial spaces in said public lots shall be numbered by the Sexton in consecutive order, eight in each lot, beginning with lot 123 in the plot first above described. The Sexton shall erect and maintain at each of said graves a marker whereon shall be cut the number thereof, and the name of the person buried therein, and whenever any burial has been made on any lot in said public ground, no burial shall be made on any other lot thereof until such first lot is full.
9-9-10 Records
The Sexton shall keep a record to be furnished and owned by the City, in which he or she shall record the decedent's name and date of death and the number of the lot and block of his or her burial; and upon request, he or she shall report to the City Council the names and other facts so required to be recorded by the Sexton. The records kept by the Sexton shall be owned by the City and kept in City Hall to be known as the Burial Record. The Sexton shall also keep a record of those graves that have been dug deep to allow Double Stacking which shall include the forgoing information pertaining to the decedent buried deep and the person buried on top.
9-9-11 Depth of Graves
All single graves in said cemetery, except for the burial of cremains, shall be dug not less than five nor more than seven feet deep. Graves dug for the purposes of Double Stacking graves shall be dug not less than 9 nor more than 11 feet for the first opening. The grade established shall be on the level with the surrounding ground and compliance with the grade of all lots shall be determined by the Sexton. In order to maintain a high standard of care and to eliminate sunken graves it is required that burial be made in an outside container or vault of steel, cement or other construction material approved by the sexton. Casket vaults are required in all of the Mobridge cemeteries, except cremains may be buried in a standard cremation container.
9-9-12 Monuments
a) REGULATIONS
All monuments hereafter erected in the cemeteries shall be set upon a concrete base not less than two inches thick, the said base to be constructed with a footing extending beyond the base stone of the monument at all points at least six inches. Such footing and all markers shall be level with the grade level of the lot or burial space so that a mowing machine may be run over it. Not more than one central monument shall be erected on any lot or on any lot or plot, and only one upright marker for each grave, except on double stacked graves,
109
two flat markers may be placed. The City shall be entitled to move any marker or monument, either temporarily or permanently, to facilitate maintenance of the cemetery.
b) APPLICATIONS FOR PERMIT REQUIRED
Every person, before placing, constructing or installing a monument, marker or headstone anywhere in the Cemetery, shall make an application to the Sexton, stating the location, ownership of lot, dimensions of stone, kind of material of stone, and proposed method of placing, construction or installation.
c) PERMIT
If satisfied that said stone and the proposed method of placing, installation or
construction comply with all ordinances of this city relating thereto, the Sexton shall issue a permit for the placing, construction or installation of same, which permit shall contain all of the information required to be stated in the application, and shall be issued in duplicate, one copy of such permit to be delivered to the cemetery Superintendent before the work of placing, constructing or installing said stone is commenced. The fee for said permit shall be set by the City Council upon recommendation by the Park and Recreation Board.
d) INSTALL ONLY IN COMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT
No person shall place, construct or install any monument, marker or headstone in the Cemetery without first complying with the provisions of this Chapter, or otherwise than in accordance with the permit.
9-9-13 : Rules & Regulations for Flowers and Wreaths
Flowers, Wreaths and other Grave adornments shall comply with the following conditions:
1. April 1st – Oct 1st: Cut and/or artificial flowers are permitted in vases integrated into monument. After Oct 1st, all remaining flowers will be removed and vases will be flipped for winter storage.
2. Wreaths, potted plants, or floral arrangements are permitted for one week following a service.
3. MEMORIAL DAY: all types and kinds of floral displays including cut flowers, potted plants, artificial flowers, wreaths, flags and the like are permitted by Friday at noon prior to the holiday and 7 days after Memorial Day. Cemetery personnel will remove wilted flowers from gravesite. After this time, personnel will remove all decorations from gravesite to facilitate mowing. Items will be held for 30 days to be picked up by owners.
4. Planting of any kind is not permitted.
5. The City shall not be responsible for any stolen, or damaged monuments, adornments, decorations or other items placed on or at any grave.
9-9-14 Reserved
110
9-9-15 Preservation of Roadways
To ensure that roadways remain in good repair throughout the cemeteries, the park superintendent may, at his discretion, close the public entranceways when weather conditions cause blockages or muddy conditions. He/she also has the discretion, with the concurrence of the funeral director to request a burial take place when road and/or weather conditions improve.
9-9-16 Vandalism
It shall be unlawful for any person to mar, mutilate, graffiti, destroy, or remove any tomb, monument, gravestone, landmark, or receptacle for flowers or shrubs lawfully placed within the cemeteries; or to willfully injure, destroy, or remove any type of vegetation placed within the cemetery; or to deface with paint, or put up signs on any fence within or around the cemeteries. It shall be unlawful to deposit, dump, or leave any waste material, rubbish, or trash within the cemetery grounds unless in designated waste receptacles.
CHAPTER 9-10 PUBLIC AIRPORT
9-10-1 Supervision
The Mobridge Municipal Airport shall be under the supervision of the City Council. Minor matters of supervision shall be under the supervision of the Airport Supervision Committee, composed of three members to be appointed by the Mayor, one from the City Council and two from the City at large, and the fourth member shall be the Airport Manager.
9-10-2 Airport Manager or Operator
The City Council shall have authority to employ an Airport Manager or Operator under contract for the general management of the Mobridge Municipal Airport facilities and activities.
9-10-3 Airport Facilities
The airport air strips, runways and aprons shall at all times be maintained for public use under rules and regulations as may be established by the City of Mobridge, the South Dakota Aeronautics Commission and or the Federal Aviation Administration.
The City Council may lease shop and administrative buildings or parts of buildings and hangars owned by the City, and may lease areas not used by the general public for Public Airport purposes and operations for construction of aircraft hangars and other uses, as may be approved by the City Council, the South Dakota Aeronautics Commission and the Federal Aviation Administration.
9-10-4 General Regulations
All ground rules and regulations for the Municipal Airport shall be kept and posted at the Airport and made readily available to the users of the facilities.
The City council shall have authority at any official regular or special meeting thereof to make additional regulations and ground rules or amend those herein specifically provided by
111
resolution provided the same is not inconsistent with the Rules, Regulations and Requirements of the South Dakota Aeronautics Commission and Federal Aviation Administration. When adopted, such rule or regulation shall be filed in City Hall and shall become effective as any other resolution and by posting a certified copy thereof at the Municipal Airport at a place open to public inspection. The City reserves the right to revoke, cancel or change any or all said rules or parts thereof. In any contingencies not specifically covered by these rules, the City Council and Airport Manager shall be the arbitrators.
No building or other improvement shall be constructed, installed or placed upon said airport property, except upon written application to the City Council and approval thereof by a majority of the City Council; and the same must conform to the current master plan for the airport administration requirements and specifications.
9-10-5 Lessee To Obey Rules, Governmental Capacity
In submitting any application to use the facilities of the airport, each applicant shall state that the rules and regulations of the airport will be followed and obeyed and the privilege of using the airport and its facilities shall be conditioned on the assumption of full responsibility and risk by the user thereof and he or she shall release, hold harmless and indemnify the City, the City Council, their officers and employees from any liability or loss resulting from such use, as well as against claims of third persons who use the airport. The exercise of the privilege of use shall constitute an acknowledgement that the City and City Council maintain said airport in a governmental capacity.
9-10-6 Penalties
The Federal, State and local laws and ordinances pertaining to intoxicating liquors and narcotics, will be respected by all persons connected with the Municipal Airport, under penalty of arrest, revocation of license and withdrawal of privileges as herein stated in this Ordinance.
The Airport Manager or Operator and/or Police Officer of the City of Mobridge, and any and all other law enforcement officers, will have authority to enforce all rules and regulations contained herein. Any person violating these rules or refusing to comply therewith, will be subject to the penalties provided by law and this Ordinance and, the enforcement of this Ordinance shall be under the jurisdiction of the City of Mobridge, Police Officers, and other Courts of competent jurisdiction.
The violator shall be given written notice of any violation requiring the violator to comply with this Ordinance within twenty-four hours after personal service thereof, or, if the violator cannot be found said notice may be posted upon the object in violation for a period of twenty-four hours; and, if the owner shall not within said twenty-four hours be in compliance, the Airport Manager or Operator, Airport Committee or City Council may order the violation abated forthwith and the cost thereof charged to the person causing or responsible for such violation. The abatement of a violation shall not relieve the person, firm or corporation in violation from liability and penalty for such violation as herein provided, as being a misdemeanor.
112
CHAPTER 9-11 WIDTHS OF STREETS, AVENUES AND OTHER
PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY
9-11-1 Width of Streets and Avenues and Other Rights of Ways
All plats, and re-plats of any area within the City limits of the City of Mobridge, any subdivision thereof or plat within the three-mile limit providing for any public street, avenue, boulevard or other public right of way, except for public alleys, shall provide for such right of way to be not less than 66 feet in width, unless for good cause shown said public right of way may be of a lesser width. Public alleys at the rear of platted lots shall be not less than 20 feet of width.
CHAPTER 9-12 ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR
INOPERATIVE MOTOR VEHICLES
9-12-1 Definitions
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms, phases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
A. City is the City of Mobridge, South Dakota.
B. Motor Vehicle is any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along the ground and shall include, but not to be limited to automobiles, busses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, campers and trailers.
C. Junked Motor Vehicle is any motor vehicle as defined by subsection (b) of this Ordinance, which does not have lawfully affixed thereto, an unexpired license plate or plates of the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative or discarded.
D. Person shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
E. Private Property shall mean any real property within the City which is privately owned and which is not public property as defined in this section.
F. Public Property shall mean any street, alley or highway which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purpose of vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other property which is publicly owned by what is commonly defined a public corporation or public entity.
G. Appropriate cover shall mean, a cover specifically adapted and made to cover car in a neat manner. Tarpaulins or tents are not acceptable.
H. Antique shall mean a vehicle that is more than thirty years old and has historical plates. (2001ORD776)
9-12-2 Storing, Parking or Leaving Dismantled or Other Such Motor
Vehicles Declared Nuisance; Exceptions
The Presence of an abandoned, wrecked dismantled, inoperative, junked or partially dismantled motor vehicle or parts of thereof, on private or public property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. The Ordinance shall not apply to any motor vehicle enclosed within a building on private property or to any motor vehicle held in connection with a business enterprise, lawfully operating within the City and properly operated in the appropriate business zone, pursuant to the zoning laws of the City or to any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adopted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways, or cars used for demolition derbies and
113
covered with an appropriate cover to screen it from view that remains on private property, or any motor vehicle retained on private property by the owner for antique collection purposes and covered with an appropriate cover. (2001ORD776)
9-12-3 Storing, Parking, or Leaving Dismantled or Other Such Motor
Vehicles on Public Property Prohibited
No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked or partially dismantled motor vehicle of any kind, whether attended or not, upon any public property within the City.
9-12-4 Removal
Whether any police officer finds an abandoned motor vehicle or an unattended motor vehicle which is in a wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked or partially dismantled condition on public property within the City, the officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such motor vehicle to a garage or place of safety. A motor vehicle that causes an obstruction and hazard to traffic may be removed at any time under the directions of the Police Department.
9-12-5 Notice to Owner
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to notify, by certified mail, the registered owner, if known, and if encumbered, the lienholder, of the removal and storage of any motor vehicle under the provisions of this Ordinance and where such motor vehicle has been stored. If the Owner is unknown, a notice of removal and storage shall be given by one (1) publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the County.
9-12-6 Sale of Unclaimed Motor Vehicle
If after three (3) months from the date of mailing or publishing the notice of removal and storage provided by this Ordinance, the motor vehicle shall remain unclaimed, such motor vehicle may be sold by the Police Department at a public auction upon notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the County not less than once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks.
9-12-7 Notice of Sale
The notice of sale provided by this Ordinance shall contain a description of the removed and stored motor vehicle, including the year, make, model, serial, no., color, license number, if any, a statement that the motor vehicle was found abandoned, the date thereof, and the place, date and time at which such motor vehicle shall be sold, which date shall not be sooner than one (1) week following the date of the last publication of the notice.
9-12-8 Lien for Costs
The Police Department shall have a possessor lien upon any motor vehicle removed under the provisions of this Ordinance for the costs in taking custody of and storing such motor vehicle.
114
9-12-9 Title May Vest in City-When
If, after three (3) months from the date of mailing or publishing the notice of removal and storage provided by this Ordinance, the motor vehicle shall remain unclaimed, the title to such motor vehicle shall be vested in the City and such motor vehicle may be disposed of in any manner as may be provided by the City Council. The proceeds of such disposal shall first be applied to the costs incurred in the enforcement of this Ordinance with the balance to be deposited to the general fund of the city.
9-12-10 Duty of Private Property Owners
No person owning, in charge of or in control of any real property within the City, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked or partially dismantled motor vehicle of any kind, to remain on such property longer then fourteen (14) days.
9-12-11 Notice to Remove
Whenever it comes to the attention of the Police Department that any person has an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, junked or partially dismantled motor vehicle on his or her property, a notice in writing shall be served upon such person requesting the removal of such motor vehicle in the time specified in this Ordinance, and this person shall be responsible for its removal.
9-12-12 Notice Procedure
The Police Department shall give notice of removal to the owner or occupant of the private property where it is located. It shall constitute sufficient notice, when a copy of the same is sent by registered mail to the owner or occupant of the private property at his or her last known address. The notice shall contain the request for removal within fourteen (14) days after the mailing of such notice, shall advise that failure to comply with the notice to remove shall be a violation of this Ordinance.
9-12-13 Racing or Antique Vehicles
No owner or occupant of private property shall have a motor vehicle which is not covered with an appropriate cover which is in operable condition specifically adopted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways or cars used for demolition derbies or an uncovered motor vehicle retained on private property for antique collection purposes, all as defined by Section 1 hereof. For notice of violation of 9-12-13, the police department will either send a notice by certified mail, or may personally deliver a Summons, to appear in Court for the violation by the owner, tenant or lessee giving the time and date of both the violation and the date of court appearance. (2001ORD776)
9-12-14 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of $200.00, or imprisonment.
115
Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
CHAPTER 9-13 – TREES
9-13-1 Purpose
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the regulation of the planting, maintenance, and removal of trees, shrubs, and other plants within the city of Mobridge.
9-13-2 Authority and Power
There is hereby created and established a City Tree Board for the City of Mobridge, which shall consist of five members, citizens and residents of this city, who shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. Members of the board shall serve without compensation. The City Tree Board shall cooperate with and be under the supervision of the Park and Recreation Board. One member of the City Tree Board shall be appointed to the Park and Recreation Board in accordance to provisions and conditions of Section 9-8-4. (2001ORD779)
9-13-3 Term of Office
The term of the five persons to be appointed by the mayor shall be three years, except that the term of two of the members appointed to the first board shall be for only one year and the term of two members of the first board shall be for two years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any members, his or her successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.
9-13-4 Applicability
This ordinance provides full power and authority over all trees, plants, and shrubs located within street rights-of-way (boulevards), parks and public places of the city, and to trees, plants and shrubs located on private property that constitute a hazard or threat as described herein. (2006 ORD 830)
9-13-5 Definitions:
Contractor: Person or persons, acting singly or as a company whose business it is to engage in the planting, relocation, pruning or demolition of trees, shrubs or other vegetation.
Park Trees: Trees and all other wood vegetation in public parks, playgrounds, cemeteries, or other areas of the city owned by the city, and are freely accessed by the citizens of Mobridge. This shall include boulevard trees and those on traffic islands created on Main Street.
Private Trees: Trees and all wood vegetation that are upon land owned by private citizens or business within the city limits of Mobridge.
Boulevard Trees: Trees and all other wood vegetation on land laying between the right-of-way lines, streets, avenues, alleys or other public rights-of-way within the City. (2006 ORD 830)
116
9-13-6 Licensing
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of planting, cutting, trimming, pruning, removing, spraying, or otherwise treating trees, shrubs or vines within the city without first obtaining a license to do so, if they are compensated or receive barter in exchange for the work. (1998ORD750)
9-13-7 License Fee and Insurance
Tree contractors shall pay an annual fee to the city of Mobridge the sum of $365.00 on or before January 1 of each year. With this fee shall come the right to use the city rubble site for the purpose of depositing tree debris at any time throughout the year.
Compensated (cash or barter) contractors who do not wish to have free use of the city rubble site shall pay an annual fee of $50.00 to the City of Mobridge.
Furthermore, before a license shall be issued, each applicant shall file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of a combined single limit of $500,000. (1998ORD750)
9-13-8 Regulations to be Obeyed
In spraying trees for the control or elimination of the infection commonly known as Dutch Elm Disease, the following regulations shall be complied with:
A. All applicable state and federal laws and regulations shall be followed.
B. Spray shall not be applied when wind velocities are greater than five miles per hour or when temperatures are below freezing, or when rain or snow is falling.
C. Feeding stations, waters places and other objects which attract birds must be protected from spray drifts.
9-13-9 Revocation of License/Penalty
Any license issued under the provisions of this Ordinance may be revoked for repeated violations of this Ordinance or any provision hereof, or of any other Ordinance relating to the work done.
Any person firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be fined up to $500.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
9-13-10 Landscaping
In new subdivisions or when the development of commercial property occurs, the Park and Recreation Board, state forester, or his or her official designee will review landscaping plans and may require boulevard trees to be planted in any of the rights-of-way, parking lots
117
parks and other public places abutting lands henceforth developed and/or subdivided. (2006 ORD 830)
9-13-11 Tree planting, Maintenance, and Removal
TREE SPECIES: The Park and Recreation Board will develop and maintain a list at City Hall of desirable boulevard trees for planting along streets. The board shall review this list every five years.
SPACING: The spacing of boulevard trees approved by the board and planted in boulevards, will be no closer together than a minimum of 13 feet, except in special plantings designated or approved by a landscape architect.
UTILITIES: No street trees other than those species approved as small trees may be planted under or within 10 lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within 5 lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility.
DISTANCE FROM CURB, SIDEWALK, and CORNER: The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curb lines, sidewalks will be 3 1/2 feet from the curb and 16 feet in from the furthermost curb line of the corner of an intersection.
TOPPING: It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs with the tree’s crown such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this ordinance at the determination of the Park and Recreation Board. (2006 ORD 830)
9-13-11.1 Removal of Stumps
All stumps of trees in the boulevards and alley right of ways, and those that are a nuisance shall be removed below the surface of the ground with the root stump grubbed out, or ground out to a depth of at least nine (8) inches below grade so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. All wood and debris must be removed from the street prior to the end of the each working day and all holes shall be filled to normal grade level with topsoil as soon as practical. (2006ORD834)
9-13-12 Landmark Trees
The state forester, or his/her official designee shall have as one of his/her duties the location, selection and identification of any trees which qualify as “Landmark Trees”. A tree may qualify as a landmark tree if it meets one or more of the following criteria: Species rarity, old age, association with a historical event or person, abnormality or scenic enhancement. (2006 ORD 830)
9-13-13 Tree Protection
Upon the discovery of any destructive or communicable disease or other pestilence which endangers the growth or health of trees, or threatens to spread disease or insect infestations, the city shall at once cause written notice to be served upon the owner of the
118
property upon which such diseased or infested tree is situated, and the notice shall require such property owner to eradicate, remove or otherwise control such condition within 15 days from the receipt of notice. No wood, bark or any part of such tree shall remain within the city limits of Mobridge.
9-13-14 Nuisance Trees / Right to Inspect
The state forester or his/her official designee has the authority to enter onto private property whereon there is located a tree, shrub, plant or plant part that is suspected to be a public nuisance. A public nuisance shall be any tree with an infectious disease or insect problem; dead or dying trees; trees or shrubs whose limbs obstruct street lights, traffic signs, the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles or a tree that poses a safety hazard. The minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof over a sidewalk shall be eight (8) feet whenever practicable, and shall be fourteen (14) feet over all streets except truck thoroughfares when the clearance shall be sixteen (16) feet, unless otherwise designated by the City Council. (2006 ORD 830)
9-13-15 Nuisances, How Abated
Any hazard as described in section 9-13-14 shall be declared a nuisance, the owner of said tree(s), shrubs, etc. shall receive from the Finance Officer or city attorney a notice stating the violation. The owner of such property wherein the nuisance is shall remove said nuisance within15 days upon receipt of notice. Failure to comply with the written notice shall make said owner subject to the penalties listed in section 9-13-18.
9-13-16 Tree Damage or Impediment of Growth
Unless otherwise specifically authorized by the City Council or the Park and Recreation Board, no person shall intentionally damage, cut or carve any tree, attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other contrivances to any tree, allow any gaseous liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact with them; or to set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fires or the heat therefrom will injure any portion of any tree.
Furthermore, no person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public place of the Municipality any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other materials which may impede the free passage of water, air, and fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing therein, except by written permit of the City Council or the Park and Recreation Board. (2006 ORD 830)
9-13-17 Enforcement
The state forester, or his/her official designee, and/or the Mobridge Code Enforcement Officer, shall have the power to promulgate and enforce rules, regulations and specifications concerning all aspects of tree care upon the right-of-way of any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place in the city. (2006 ORD 830)
9-13-18 Penalties, Claims and Appeals
PENALTY: Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance or who fails to comply with any written notice issued pursuant to provisions of the ordinance, upon being found guilty of the violation, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $200.00 for each separate
119
offense. Each day during which any violation of the provisions of this ordinance shall occur or continue shall be a separate offense. If, as the result of the violation of any provision of this ordinance, the injury mutilation or death of a tree, shrub, or other plant located on city-owned property is caused, the cost of repair or replacement of such tree, shrub, or other plant shall be borne by the party in violation. The replacement value of trees and shrubs shall be determined in accordance with the latest revision of “A Guide to the Professional Evaluation of Landscape Trees, Specimen Shrubs, and Evergreens” as published by the International Society of Arboriculture.
ASSESSMENT OF CLAIM: In the event that a nuisance is not abated by the date specified in the notice, the Code Enforcement Officer, or his/her official designee, is authorized to cause the abatement of said nuisance. The reasonable cost of such abatement shall be filed as a lien against the property on which the nuisance was located. In addition, the owner of the property upon which the nuisance was located shall be subject to prosecution. (2006 ORD 830)
APPEALS: Appeals shall be made in the same manner as other ordinance appeal procedures.
TITLE 10 – TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter 10-1 - Definitions-General Provisions
Chapter 10-2 - Operation of Vehicles
Chapter 10-3 - Parking Lots
Chapter 10-4 - Parking-Stopping
Chapter 10-5 - Signs and Signals
Chapter 10-6 - Pedestrians
Chapter 10-7 - Miscellaneous Provisions
Chapter 10-8 - Snowmobiles
Chapter 10-9 - Speed
Chapter 10-10 – Condition of Vehicles
Chapter 10-1 – Definitions – General Provisions
10-1-1 Definitions
Whenever in this title the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
“Authorized Emergency Vehicle”: Vehicles of the Fire Department (Fire Patrol),
Police vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal department
or public service corporations as are designed or authorized by the Chief of Police.
“Business District”: The term “business district” as used in this title shall include the territory contiguous to a highway when fifty per cent or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is occupied by buildings used for business.
120
“Crosswalk”: That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation of curb and property lines at intersections or any other portion of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
“Department”: The police department of the City of Mobridge.
“Intersection”: The area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of two or more streets or highways which join one another at an angle weather or not one such street or highway cross the other.
“Laned Street”: A street, the roadway of which is divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
“Loading Zone”: The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
“Motor Vehicle”: Every vehicle, which is herein defined, which is self propelled.
“Official Traffic Signals”: All signals, not inconsistent with this title, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of directing, warning or regulation traffic.
“Official Traffic Signs”: All signs or markings, other than signals, not inconsistent with this title, placed or erected by a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of guiding, directing, warning or regulation traffic.
“Operator”: Any person who is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
“Parking”: The standing of a vehicle whether attended or unattended, upon a roadway or street otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading, or in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals.
“Pedestrian”: Every person afoot.
“Police Officer”: Every officer of the Municipal Police Department or any officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
“Private Road or Driveway”: Every road or driveway not open to the use of public for purposes of vehicular travel.
“Residence District”: The term “residence district” as used in this title shall include the territory contiguous to a highway not comprising a business district when the frontage of such highway for a distance of three hundred feet or more is mainly occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for business.
“Right-of Way”: The privilege of the immediate use of the street or highway.
“Roadway”: That portion of a street or highway between the regularly established curb lines or that part devoted to a vehicular traffic.
121
“Sidewalk”: That portion of a street between the curb lines and the adjacent property lines.
“Street or Highway”: Every way set apart for public travel, except footpaths.
“Traffic”: Pedestrians, ridden animals, herded animals and vehicles while using any street
for the purpose of travel.
“Traffic Control Signal”: Any device using colored lights, or words, or any combination thereof, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
“Vehicle”: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a public highway, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
10-1-2 Police to Direct Traffic
It shall be the duty of the Police Department of this City to enforce the provisions of this title. Officers of the Police Department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic, either in person or by means of visible or audible signal, in conformance with the provisions of this title: provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of the Police or Fire Department may direct traffic, as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this title.
10-1-3 Chief of Police Authorized to Adopt Emergency Regulations
The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to make and enforce regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this title and to make temporary regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions; provided that any such regulations are not inconsistent with the provisions of this title.
10-1-4 Obedience to Police
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer.
10-1-5 Public Employees to Obey Traffic Regulations
A. The provisions of this title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the U.S. Government, this State, County or City and it shall be unlawful for any such operator to violate any of the provisions of this title, except as otherwise permitted in this title.
B. The provisions of this title regulating the movement, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles as defined in this title, while the operator of such vehicle is operating the same in an emergency in the necessary performance of public duties. This exemption shall not, however, protect the driver
122
of any such vehicle from the consequences of a reckless disregard for the safety of others.
10-1-6 Persons Propelling Push-Carts or Riding Bicycles or Animals Shall Obey Traffic Regulations
Any person propelling any push-cart or riding a bicycle or an animal upon a roadway and every person driving any animal, shall be subject to the provisions of this title applicable to the operator of any vehicle, except those provisions of this title with reference to the equipment of vehicles and except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application.
Chapter 10-2 Operation of Vehicles
10-2-1 Driver’s Permit Required
It shall be unlawful for any person who is a resident of this State to drive or operate upon any of the streets or highways within the City of Mobridge any motor vehicle without first having secured and having in his/her possession a permit to do so issued by the State of South Dakota under the provisions of SDCL 32-12 or any acts amendable there to.
10-2-2 Age of Operator
No person under the age of fourteen years shall operate a motor vehicle upon the streets of the City of Mobridge unless such person is accompanied by the owner of the motor vehicle being operated.
10-2-3 Permitting Minor Under 14 to Operate Vehicle
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any motor vehicle to permit any person under the age of fourteen years to operate such motor vehicle unless such person is accompanied by the owner of said vehicle of has secured a learner’s permit or a limited license from the Department of Motor Vehicles.
10-2-4 Drive on Right Side of Street
Upon all streets, except one-way streets, the operator of a vehicle shall operate the same upon the right half of the street and shall drive a slow moving vehicle as closely as possible to the right-hand edge or curb of a street unless it is impracticable to travel on such side of the street and except when overtaking and passing another vehicle subject to the limitations applicable to overtaking and passing set forth in this title.
The foregoing provision of this section shall not be deemed to prevent the marking of lanes for traffic upon any street and the allocation of designated lanes to traffic moving in particular direction or at designated speeds.
10-2-5 Overtaking
The operator of any vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass at a safe distance to the left thereof, but only when such left side is clearly visible and is free from oncoming traffic for sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and
123
passing to be made in safety and shall not cut in front of the overtaken vehicle until safely clear of the same; except that this provision shall not apply to highways which have been laned for travel.
10-2-6 Limitations on Privileges of Overtaking and Passing
The operator of a vehicle shall not drive to the left side of a centerline of the traversable roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be made in safety.
The operator of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction at any intersection of streets, expect that this provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or by police officers.
The operator of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction on any curve.
The operator shall not overtake any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction in any "no passing zone" and the Chief of Police is hereby authorized to designate such no-passing zones by the painting of or placing of double lines in the center of said street and any zone or any street in the City of Mobridge where double lines, or lanes have been painted or placed in the center of such street, shall be and is hereby designated as no-passing zones and no operator of any vehicle shall pass any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction, in said zone.
10-2-7 Operator To Give Way to Overtaking Vehicle
The operator of a vehicle on a street shall not deviate form his/her direct line of travel without ascertaining that such movement can be made with safety to other vehicles approaching from the rear and about to overtake and pass such first-mentioned vehicle.
The operator of a vehicle upon a street about to be overtaken and passed by another vehicle approaching form the rear shall give way consistent with safety upon suitable and audible signal being given by the operator of the overtaking vehicle, and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
10-2-8 General Provisions for the Safe Operation of Motor Vehicles
1. The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon, and condition of, the highway.
2. The operator of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway.
3. Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle or vehicles giving audible signals by bell, siren or exhaust whistle, the operator of every other vehicle shall immediately drive the same to a position as near as possible and parallel to the right hand edge or curb of the street, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in
124
such position until the authorized emergency vehicle or vehicles shall have passed, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
4. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than the one on official business, to follow closer than 500 hundred feet of fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm, or to drive into or stop any vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
5. No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow such a vehicle to stand on any street unattended without first setting the brakes thereon and stopping the motor of said vehicle.
6. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession while they are in motion. This provision shall not apply to intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or police officers.
7. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to back such vehicle around a corner at an intersection, or into an intersection of public streets.
8. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive the same when there are in the front seat of such vehicle more than three adult persons or when in any other manner it is so loaded so as to obstruct the view of the operator to the front or sides or to interfere with the operator's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
9. No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire Department when laid on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Chief or Fire Department official in command.
10-2-9 Irresponsible Driving
Any person who drives any vehicle within the city limits of Mobridge, or the adjoining jurisdictional area in a reckless or careless manner endangering or likely to endanger any person or property is guilty of violating this ordinance.
Any person who drives a vehicle in such a manner that creates or causes unnecessary engine noise, tire squeal, skid or slide upon acceleration or stopping, simulates a temporary race, or that causes a vehicle to unnecessarily turn abruptly or sway, or shall unnecessarily block or hinder the free travel of other vehicles shall be guilty of exhibition driving.
Driving in a careless or reckless manner, or exhibition driving, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less that $100 or more than $200, or imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than ten days, or both a fine and imprisonment.
10-2-10 Keep to the Right in Crossing Intersection of Railroads
In crossing an intersection of highways or the intersection of a highway by a railroad right-of-way, except upon a one-way street, the operator of a vehicle shall at all times cause such vehicle to travel on the right half of the highway unless such right half is obstructed or impassable.
125
10-2-11 Meeting of Vehicles
Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite direction shall pass each other to the right, each giving to the other at least one half of the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic the following rules in addition to all others consistent herewith shall apply.
A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
10-2-12 Driving on Divided Highways
Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be driven over, across, or within any such dividing space, barrier or section, except through an opening in such physical barrier or dividing section or space or at a crossover or intersection established by public authority.
10-2-13 Right-of-Way at Intersection
Subject to the exceptions stated in the next succeeding section, the right-of-way rule as between vehicles at intersections is hereby declared as follows:
A. The operator of a vehicle approaching the intersection shall yield the right-of- way to a vehicle which has fully entered the intersection.
B. When two vehicles approach an intersection at approximately the same time, the operator of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
C. The operator of any vehicle traveling at an unlawful speed shall forfeit any right-of-way, which he may otherwise have hereunder.
10-2-14 Right-of-Way, Left Turn
The Driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, but said driver having so yielded and having given a signal with and as required, may make such left turn and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from said opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn.
10-2-15 Exceptions to Right-of-Way Rule
The operator of a vehicle entering a public street shall yield the right-of-way to authorized emergency vehicles when the latter are operated upon official business and the operators thereof sound audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle. This provision shall
126
not relieve the operator of an emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the street, nor shall it protect the operator of any such vehicle from the consequence of an arbitrary exercise of such right-of-way.
10-2-16 Stop – Alley or Private Driveway
The operator of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk area extending across any alleyway.
10-2-17 Stop – Through Streets
Every operator of a vehicle or other conveyance traversing any street intersecting any through street as designated by Ordinance, shall bring such vehicle or conveyance to a full stop at the place within fifteen feet where such street meets the prolongation of the nearest property line of such through street, subject, however, to the direction of any traffic control signs or signal or any police officer at such intersection.
The vehicle entering a through highway where there is a stop sign must yield at the right-of-way to all vehicles which are either within the intersection, or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and required to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained on each and every street intersecting a through street designated above, and at or near the property line of the through street, appropriate signs upon the street, and in addition there to, may place and maintain any appropriate devices or marks in the roadway, such signs, devices or marks to bear the word “Stop” and to be located in such a position and to be provided with letters of a size to be clearly legible from a distance of at least 100 feet along the street intersecting the through street. All such signs shall be illuminated t night or so placed as to be illuminated by streetlights or by the headlights of approaching motor vehicles.
10-2-18 Signs at Other Intersections
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to place and maintain or caused to be placed and maintained at the intersection of any street or alley with any other street where in his/her discretion traffic conditions justify such action; appropriate signs bearing the word” Stop”, “Yield”, or other appropriate sign. Said sign shall be located in such a manner and be of such a size as to be clearly legible from a distance of 100 feet along said street or alley intersecting such stop street and shall illuminate at night or shall be placed so as to be illuminated by street lights or headlights of approaching vehicles.
10-2-19 Stopping at Railroad Stop Signs or Signals
All automatic or manually operated traffic signs at railway crossings in the City of Mobridge are hereby adopted as official traffic signs or signals. The operator of any vehicle shall heed the sign. A stop sign shall constitute the vehicle operator to make a full and complete stop.
Should a crossing become dangerous, signs placed by the Chief of Police shall be heeded, being it a stop or caution sign. Should the crossing sign be a stop sign, it shall be
127
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to fail to stop within fifty feet, but not less than ten feet from such crossing.
10-2-20 Turning at Intersections
A. Right Turn: The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the right at an intersection or into an alley or driveway shall approach the point of turning in the line of traffic nearest the right-hand edge or curb of the street, and in turning shall keep as closely as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the street.
B. Turning Left: The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left at an intersection or into a driveway shall approach the point of turning lane of traffic to the right of and next to the center of the roadway, and unless otherwise directly by ‘turning markers” the operator of a vehicle in turning left at an intersection shall pass to the right of the center of the intersection before turning. Upon streets laned for traffic and upon on –way streets, a left turn shall be made only from the left lane of traffic
C. Turning Markers: The Police Chief is hereby authorized to place turning; markers within or at the entrance of intersections, directing that traffic turning left shall follow a line of travel other than as directed in Subdivision B of this section. Whenever turning markers have been placed as herein provided, traffic turning left shall follow the line as directed by such markers.
D. Turning left on “Go” Signal: The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left at an intersection where traffic is controlled by traffic control signals or by police officer, shall proceed to make such left turn with proper care to avoid accident and upon the green or “Go” signal, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
10-2-21 U-Turn at Intersections
At any intersection where traffic is controlled by a traffic control signal or a police officer, or where warned by an official traffic control sign displaying the words” No U-turn” or “No Left Turn”, it shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to turn such vehicle at the intersection in a complete circle, or so as to proceed in the opposite direction or to make a left turn unless:
A. An official traffic control sign displaying the words “U TURN ALLOWED” is displayed at the intersection, in which case a U-turn shall be allowed to traffic which is facing the sign to allow said traffic to complete a circle and proceed in the direction opposite from facing the sign.
10-2-22 Turning Around in Midblock Prohibited
The operator of a vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction except at an intersection.
10-2-23 Turning Movements and Required Signals
A. No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway as required in Section 10-2-35 of this chapter, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct
128
course or move right or left upon a road unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person shall so turn any vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the hereinafter provided in the event any other traffic may be affected by such movement.
B. A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet of travel by the vehicle before turning.
C. No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal.
D. The driver of any vehicle which is stopped as close as practicable at the entrance to a crosswalk and to the far right side of the roadway, then at the entrance to the intersection in obedience to a red or stop signal, may make a right turn but shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian and other traffic proceeding as directed by the signal at the intersection.
10-2-24 Signals By Hand and Arm or Signal Device
Any stop or turn signal when required shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or standard approved mechanical signal device, but when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded that a hand-and-arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of such vehicle then said signals must be given by such signal device.
10-2-25 Method of Giving Hand-Arm Signals
All signals herein required given by hand-and-arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall indicate as follows:
1. Left Turn – Hand and arm extended
2. Right Turn – Hand and arm extended upward
3. Stop or decrease speed – hand and arm extended downward
10-2-26 City Council May Prohibit Use of Certain Streets
A. That Grand Crossing Boulevard, Railroad Street, First Avenue East from railroad Street to Grand Crossing Boulevard and all of Fourth Avenue East; and First Avenue West from Railroad Street to Grand Crossing Boulevard and Sixth and Seventh Avenues West from Railroad Street to Grand Crossing Boulevard are hereby designated as truck routes, being public streets and right of way upon which truck traffic is permitted.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a truck tractor and trailer, upon any of the public streets within the corporate limits of the City of Mobridge, SD, not designated as a truck route under Section A, except for the delivery or picking up of merchandise within said area, and he/she shall then drive to the point of delivery or pickup by the shortest and most accessible route. (822ORD2005)
C. The City Council by motion duly passed and adopted may fix temporary or
129
permanent load limits upon any street, alley or public right of way within the
corporate limits of the City of Mobridge and upon the posting thereof it shall be unlawful for any truck, truck tractor or other vehicle to travel upon said street, alley or public right of way in excess of the load limit as posted.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a truck, truck tractor, truck tractor and trailer or any other vehicle having a rating of one ton or more upon any street, alley or public right of way not designated as a truck route under Section A of this ordinance except for such time as maybe reasonably necessary to load or unload merchandise hauled into or removed from such area, streets and/or alleys or other public rights of way, and to conduct the necessary business in connection therewith. Off street parking of such vehicles in said area may be permitted by special permit issued by the Chief of Police. (822ORD2005)
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorized vehicle on the walking trail adjacent to Lake Oahe. (822ORD2005)
F. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this Section shall be deemed Guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of $200.00 or imprisonment in the County Jail not to exceed 30 days, or by such fine and imprisonment. Each and every violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. (822ORD2005)
10-2-27 - Dynamic braking prohibited:
a) Defined. Dynamic braking device (commonly referred to as Jacobs Brakes, engine retarders, or Jake Brakes)
means a device used primarily on trucks for the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheel brakes.
(b) Dynamic braking devices prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or be in actual physical control of any motor vehicle with a dynamic braking device engaged except for the aversion of imminent danger.
(c) Public emergency response vehicles exception. Any public emergency response vehicle equipped with a dynamic braking device will be allowed to use such device during a response to an emergency situation.
(d) Violations. Any violation shall be subject to the general penalty set forth in Section 13-1-1. (2004ORD804)
CHAPTER 10-3 – PARKING LOTS
10-3-1 Parking Lots – Municipal
A. No vehicle shall be parked for a longer period of time than twenty-four hours at any one location in any public parking lot owned, operated or under the control of the City.
B. All vehicles parked in said public parking lots shall be parked at an angle to the curb in said lots as indicated by marks, signs or lines placed in said lots, with the front wheel touching the curb.
130
C. No truck, wagon, automobile, or other vehicle of a greater over-all length of more than twenty feet or eight feet in width shall at any time be parked in any of said parking lots except Wrigley Square.
D. No person shall sell or offer for sale from wagons, automobiles, trucks, or other vehicles or from stands, within any of said parking lots, any fruits, vegetables, produce, goods, ware or merchandise of any kind or character.
E. Any vehicle parked in violation of the provisions of this chapter may be removed from said parking lot by the Police Department and placed in public storage, and the owner thereof, in addition to the fines and penalties provided by this chapter, shall pay the charges for towing and storage of said vehicle so removed by the Police Department.
10-3-2 Parking Lots- Meters
The City Council may place parking meters of such type as they may determine in any parking lots owned, operated or under the control of the City, and the City Council may by resolution provide for a schedule of fees to be charged for parking automobiles or other vehicles upon any parking lot owned, operated or under the control of the City of Mobridge and may by such resolution make regulations relative to the use of such parking lot.
10-3-3 Parking-Private Property
No person shall, without permission of the owner or lessee of any private property, leave or park any motor vehicle thereon if there is in plain view on such property a sign stating "No Parking".
If on any private property there is displayed a sign or signs restricting parking thereon to certain classes of persons or restricting the length of time for which a motor vehicle may be there parked, or stating restrictions both as to length of time for parking and classes of persons who may park, no person without specific permission of the owner or lessee of such property shall leave or park any motor vehicle thereon for a longer time than stated in such sign not unless the operator of such motor vehicle fall within the classification to which parking is permitted by such sign.
Any violation of the above provisions shall constitute illegal parking and upon being notified of such illegal parking by the owner or lessee of such property, the Police Department may remove from said private property and place in public storage such illegally parked vehicles and the owner thereof shall pay the charges for towing and storage of said vehicle so removed by the Police Department in like manner as provided by this Ordinance.
10-3-4 Penalty
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon first conviction thereof be punished by a fine set by the court, or be imprisoned for a term not exceeding thirty (30) days in a place provided by the municipality for detention of prisoners, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and each such illegal parking shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
131
CHAPTER 10-4- PARKING, STOPPING
10-4-1 Parking and Stopping Prohibited in Certain Places
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park such a vehicle on any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal.
1. Within an intersection
2. On a crosswalk
3. Within fifteen feet of inside boundary line of the sidewalk is in place, within twenty-five feet of the intersecting roadway, but this provision shall not apply to alleys.
4. Within fifteen feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station, or directly across the street from such entrance
5. Within fifteen feet of a fire hydrant
6. In front of a private driveway
7. On a sidewalk
8. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping,
standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
9. Against direction of traffic
10. In such a manner or under such conditions as leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic except that this provision shall not apply to the operator of a vehicle stopping momentarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers if such stopping does not actually impede traffic.
10-4-2 Parking-Limited Time
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to designate certain spaces adjacent to any government, state, municipal, or other public building or any space in the business zone, not metered, as either ten or fifteen minute parking zones, and It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in any such zone so designated for a longer period than indicated by the signs, and it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to erect and maintain at the ends of such zones adequate sign indicating the limitation for parking accordance with the provisions of the section.
10-4-3 Loading Zones
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to designate a certain space or zone in each block and area or on any street in the City of Mobridge not exceeding 72 feet in any one block to be known as a passenger or loading or unloading zone in which zone so designated it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle, except for the purpose of loading or unloading zone in which zone so designated it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle, except for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or passengers between the hours of 9:00 o'clock a.m. and 6:00 o'clock p.m. on any day excepting Sundays and holidays and it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to erect and maintain at the ends of each zone appropriate signs with the words "Loading or passenger Zone" "No Parking between the hours of 9:00 O'clock a.m. and 6:00 o'clock p.m. excepting Sundays and holidays"
132
10-4-4 Taxicab Stands, Bus Stands
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to designate at such places as he deems proper cab or bus stands and shall erect in such zones or stands adequate signs indicating the extent of such zone, and it shall be unlawful for any vehicle other than a licensed taxicab or bus to park in any such area.
10-4-5 No Parking and Time Restricted Parking Zones
(a) The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to establish no parking or time restricted parking zones or areas upon one or both sides of any street or avenue when parking in such zones or areas would, in his or her opinion, interfere with traffic, create a hazardous condition, or be contrary to the public interest.
(b) Any permanent No Parking zones or areas shall be indicated by either painting the curb adjacent thereto with a solid yellow stripe or by posting signs along such zones indicating “No Parking or No Parking This Side of Street” or similar language and no parking shall be allowed at those areas at any time.
(c) Any time restricted zones or areas shall be indicated by adequate signs indicating the time limitation for parking and shall be placed at the ends of each such time restricted area or zones and no parking shall be allowed in those areas during the times designated by said signs.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any vehicle park or remain parked on a street or avenue which has been identified as no parking or time restricted parking as set forth herein and may be removed by the Police Department or the Street Department and the owner thereof, in addition to the other penalties prescribed for the violation of a city ordinance, shall be required to pay the cost of towing, removal and storage of said vehicle.
10-4-6- Alleys
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in any public alley within the zone of the fire limits of the City of Mobridge, as may now or may hereafter be fixed by ordinance of the City of Mobridge except that trucks and other vehicles may stop in such alleys for the purpose of erecting and maintaining signs at the entrance of such alleys, where parking is prohibited as designated by the provisions of this section.
10-4-7 Parking –Theaters
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in that portion of the street immediately adjacent to and in front of any theater or moving picture house and the extent of such restricted parking area shall be marked out by the Chief of Police and he shall erect and maintain “No Parking” signs at the ends of such restricted areas.
10-4-8 Parking-Double Parking
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle on the roadway side of any other vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of the curb of a street except temporarily engaged in the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
133
10-4-9 Parking – Snow Removal
In order that the Street Department may efficiently clean the streets and avenues in the City of Mobridge, it shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on the following streets after a snowfall of three inches or more until the City has plowed the streets:
1: 10th Ave. West north from US 12 (Grand Crossing) to 20th Street.;
2: 12th St from the east City limits to 10th Ave. West.;
3. Railroad Street from the west City limits to 7th Ave. East.;
4. 8th Street east from 10th Ave. West. to east City limits;
5. Main Street from Railroad St. north to US12 (Grand Crossing)
6. 4th Ave. East from south City limits to north City limits;
7. 7th Ave. East. from south City limits to US12 (Grand Crossing).
It shall also be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or allow any vehicle to remain on any roadway designated as an avenue of the City during the A.M. within 2 hours after a snow alert is issued by the Chief of Police which is first announced and broadcast on the KOLY radio station, until such time as the City has plowed the snow from said avenue.
It shall also be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or allow any vehicle to remain on any roadway designated as a street of the City during the P.M. within 2 hours after a snow alert is issued by the Chief of Police which is first announced and broadcast on the on KOLY radio station, until such time as the City has plowed the snow from said street.
Any vehicle parked in violation of any of the provisions of this section may be removed by the Police Department or the Street Department and the owner thereof, in addition to the other penalties prescribed for the violation of a city ordinance, shall be required to pay the cost of towing, removal and storage of said vehicle.
For the purpose of this section, the term vehicle shall include all motorized vehicles and all boats, trailers and campers.
10-4-10 Snow Removal – Obstruction of View
No person shall pile, accumulate, or permit snow piles or other objects to obstruct the view of a public street within any of the following areas:
1. Between a public street and the adjacent sidewalk.
2. The area between a public street and 13 feet back from the public street.
3. Within 25 feet from the corner of any intersecting streets or alleys.
For the purpose of this ordinance, accumulations of snow in excess of 4 feet high shall be deemed obstructing the view of a public street. Any violation of this ordinance shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in these ordinances, and in addition shall be deemed a continuing nuisance and shall be abated by the City and the cost of such abatement shall be assessed to the abutting lot, piece, or parcel of land. (1996 ORD 730; 9.0206)
134
10-4-11 Parallel and Diagonal Parking
No vehicle shall be parked on any street unless such vehicle be parked parallel to the curb headed in the direction of the traffic, with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches of the curb and no closer than four feet to any other vehicle, front or rear, except upon those streets designated or marked for angle parking where vehicles shall be parked at an angle to the curb indicated by such marks or signs, with the front wheel touching the curb.
10-4-12 Removal of Cars Illegally Parked
Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter may be removed from the streets by the police Department and placed in public storage, and the owner thereof, in addition to the fines and penalties provided in this title, shall pay the charges for towing and storage of said vehicle so removed. All money so collected by the Police Department shall be immediately deposited with the City Finance Officer. Neither the City of Mobridge nor any person shall have any liability for any damage, which may be done to any motor vehicle, or other vehicle so removed, as long as reasonable care is used in removing such motor vehicle.
The Police Department may issue a tag for violation in lieu of removal of the said vehicle, and such offense shall constitute a misdemeanor under these ordinances. (2001 ORD 774)
10-4-13 Unloading of Merchandise – Permits
A. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to issue, to any owner of a vehicle used to transport merchandise or materials, a special permit, renewable annually, and to state therein the terms and conditions thereof, allowing the operator of such vehicle the privilege of loading or unloading while the vehicle is backed against the curb if in the opinion of the Chief of Police such privilege is reasonably necessary to conduct of the owner’s business and will not seriously interfere with traffic.
B. In places where, and at hours when, stopping for the loading or unloading of
merchandise or materials is permitted, vehicles used for the transportation of merchandise or materials may back into the curb to take on or discharge loads, when the owner of such vehicle holds a permit granting him such special privilege, and provided further that such permit shall be either in the possession of the operator or on the vehicle at the tome such vehicle is backed against the curb to take on or discharge a load, and it shall be unlawful for any owner or operator to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such special permit.
CHAPTER 10-5 – SIGNS AND SIGNALS
10-5-1 Signs and Signals – Type
A. The city Council shall by resolution determine and designate the character or type of all official traffic signs and signals; provided, that all traffic signs and signals now erected and in operation are hereby designated official traffic signs and signals. Subject to this selection, the Chief of Police is hereby authorized, and as to those signs and signals required hereunder, it shall be his or her duty, to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained all official traffic signs and signals. All
135
signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall be as approved by the City Council and as far as practicable, standard throughout the City.
B. No provisions of this title for which signs are required shall be enforceable against an alleged violator is, at the time and place of the alleged violation, the sign herein required is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
10-5-2 Obedience to Traffic Signs and Signals
It shall be unlawful for any operator to disobey the instructions of any official traffic sign or signal upon the street placed in accordance with the provisions of this title, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
10-5-3 Traffic Control Signals
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting successively one at a time, the color green for go, yellow or amber for caution, red for stop, or flashing signals, traffic shall be regulated and controlled thereby as follows:
A. Green means go. Vehicular traffic facing a green signal may proceed straight through or may turn right or left if said traffic control signal is at an intersection, unless such turn at such place be otherwise prohibited, but vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and pedestrians, lawfully within the roadway intersection or facing the green signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
B. Yellow, or Amber, when used following the green signal means caution. Vehicular traffic facing yellow or amber signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk, except that if such stop cannot be made in safety, a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the roadway, intersection or crosswalk controlled by said signal. Pedestrians facing the yellow or amber signal are thereby advised that there is not enough time to cross the roadway and they shall remain on the curb line and not proceed across the roadway controlled by said signal until the next green signal appears.
C. Red means stop. Vehicular traffic facing the red signal shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, and shall remain standing and shall not enter the intersection or roadway to the front until the green signal is shown. Pedestrians facing the red signal shall not proceed across the roadway to the front until the next green signal appears.
D. A flashing red signal means stop. Vehicular traffic facing the flashing red signal shall first stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, and then proceed with caution and with regard to the rules of right-of-way.
E. A flashing yellow or amber signal means caution. Vehicular traffic facing the flashing yellow or amber signal may proceed through the intersection or pass such signal only with caution.
136
10-5-4 Display of Unauthorized Signs and Signals Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain or to display upon or in view of any street any unofficial sign, signal or device which purports to regulate or to curtail parking or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or for any person to paint marking or legends upon any curb or curbing, purporting to indicate a restricted or limited parking zone and every such prohibited sign, signal, device or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the Chief of Police is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice.
10-5-5 Interference with Signs and Signals Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully deface, injure, move, obstruct or interfere with any official traffic sign or signal.
10-5-6 City Council Authorized to Designate Crosswalks
The City Council is hereby authorized and empowered to establish and to designate and shall thereafter maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks approximately equal in width to the adjacent sidewalk at all intersections where in its opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway.
10-5-7 City Council Authorized to Designate Safety Zones and Lanes for Traffic
A. The City Council is hereby empowered to establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places, as it may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
B. The City Council is also authorized to mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as it may deem advisable, consistent with the provisions of this title.
C. The City Council is authorized to make handicapped parking spaces available on any public street.
10-5-8 Curb Markings – Solid Yellow
Wherever in any street or avenue the curb is painted with a solid yellow stripe by or under the direction of the Chief of Police, such stripe or marking shall indicate a “No Parking” area or zone, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle adjacent to such marking.
10-5-9 Curb Markings – Broken Yellow
Wherever in any street or avenue the curb is painted with a solid yellow stripe by or under the direction of the Chief of Police, such broken stripe or marking shall indicate a limited parking area or zone, the extent of such limitation to be indicated by signs at the end of each such limited area or zone and it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle adjacent to such limited parking zone for a longer period than indicated upon said signs.
137
10-5-10 No Left-Turn Signs
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to place or have placed under his direction at any intersection and at such hours as he deems proper, signs indicating no left turn, and it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to make a left turn at such intersection when such signs are in place.
CHAPTER 10-6 – PEDESTRIANS
10-6-1 Pedestrian’s Right-of Way
A. The operator of any vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing roadway within any marked cross walk or within any unmarked crosswalk at the end of a block, except at intersections where the movement of traffic is being regulated by police officers or traffic control signals.
B. Whenever any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross a roadway, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any other vehicle approaching from the rear to overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
10-6-2 Crossing Streets
It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to cross a roadway at any point other than within a marked or unmarked crosswalk in the business district as defined in this title or on any federal highway.
10-6-3 Pedestrians Rights and Duties at Controlled Intersections
Whenever stop signals or flashing red signals are in place at an intersection or a marked crosswalk between intersections the pedestrians shall have the right-of-way over drivers of vehicles and at such marked places drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk and any pedestrian within or entering the crosswalk at either edge of the roadway shall have the right-of-way over any vehicle so stopped.
The driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering any crosswalk when any vehicle proceeding in the same direction is stopped at such crosswalk for a purpose of permitting a pedestrian to cross.
10-6-4 Pedestrians to Obey Traffic Signals
At intersections where traffic is directed by a policeman or stop-and-go signals, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross the roadway other than with released traffic and pedestrians shall obey all traffic signals and directions.
10-6-5 Boarding or Alighting from Vehicles
It shall be unlawful for any person to board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion.
138
CHAPTER 10-7 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
10-7-1 Railway Crossing - Blocking Streets
It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railway train or car to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time no longer than five minutes, except this provision shall not apply to trains or cars in continuous motion.
10-7-2 Accident Reports - Personal Injury
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene or such accident or as close thereto as possible but shall then forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of the accident until he has fulfilled the requirements of Section 10-9-4. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary.
10-7-3 Accident Reports - Property Damage
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in vehicle damage only shall immediately stop at the scene and report such incident to the police. The driver shall remain at the scene until they have fulfilled the requirements of section 10-7-4. Every stop shall be made without obstructing traffic as much as possible.
10-7-4 Accidents - Duty to Give Information
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall give his or her name, address and the registration number of the vehicle he or she is driving, and shall upon request and if available, exhibit his or her operator's or chauffeur's license to the person struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with, and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonably assistance, including the carrying, or the making of arrangements for the carrying of such person to a physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured person.
10-7-5 Accident - Unattended Vehicle
The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop and shall then locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle striking the unattended vehicle or shall leave in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a written notice giving name and address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking and a statement of the circumstances thereof. Police are to be notified of any and all accidents taking place within the City limits of Mobridge.
10-7-6 Accident - Duty Upon Striking Fixtures
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to fixtures or other property legally upon or adjacent to a street shall take reasonable steps to locate and
139
notify the owner or person in charge of such property of such fact and of his name and address and of the registration number of the vehicle he is driving and shall upon request and if available exhibit his operator's license and shall make report of such accident when and as required by ordinance or statute.
10-7-7 Immediate Notice of Accident
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or property damage to an apparent extent of $10.00 or more shall immediately by the quickest means of communication give notice of such accident to the police department.
10-7-8 Garage Keeper to Report Damaged Vehicles
The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any motor vehicle which shows evidence of having been involved in a serious accident or struck by any bullet shall report to the Police Department of the City within twenty-four hours after such motor vehicle is received, giving the engine number and the name and address of the owner or operator of such vehicle.
10-7-9 Evidence of Traffic Violations
In any proceeding for violations of the provisions of this Title relating to the operation or parking of motor vehicles, the registration plate displayed on such motor vehicle shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the owner of such motor vehicle was the person who was operating or parked such vehicle at the point where such violation occurred.
CHAPTER 10-8 SNOWMOBILES
10-8-1 Designation of Through and Access Routes That all snowmobiles operated and driven within the limits of the City of Mobridge, SD shall be driven and operated as herein provided. The following public streets, alleys and rights of way are hereby designated as snowmobile through, access, and entrance and exit routes in the City of Mobridge, SD.
(A) Through Routes: 1. Railroad Street from the West City limits to the East City limits. 2. Twelfth Street from the East City limits to the West City limits. 3. Seventh Avenue East from East Railroad Street North to Second Street East thence East on Second Street East to the East City Limits. (B) Access Routes: All North-South Public alleys for use only by an owner, lessee or operator of a snowmobile to travel to or from his residence, business or snowmobile center and to the most accessible through route when leaving or returning to the City.
10-8-2 Unlawful Place of Travel - Emergencies It shall be unlawful to operate or drive a snowmobile on or upon any public street, alley or right of way in the City of Mobridge, SD except designated snowmobile through and/or access streets and alleys as herein designated under this Chapter; except, for emergency use in major use in major snowstorms, blizzards or other emergency conditions for required
140
protection of the health and welfare of the City residents. All emergency use shall be under the direct supervision and control of the Chief of Police, Civil Defense Director, and/or other designated official and/or officer. Emergency use and operation and use shall terminate as of the time designated by the officer in control, during such emergency operation. 10-8-3 Emergency Snowmobiles All snowmobiles used in emergency operations under this Chapter shall be equipped with headlights and taillights and the driver/operator shall have a valid South Dakota driver's license. 10-8-4 Travel Prohibited on Public Streets, Alleys and Rights-of-Way A snowmobile shall not be driven or operated upon the public streets or alleys of the City of Mobridge, except the streets and alleys herein designated as through routes and access routes. Travel on designated through routes and access routes may only be had by the operator of a snowmobile when necessary to travel, and then only by the shortest and most accessible route, to and from his residence, his business, a snowmobile service center or to and from the City limits. Snowmobiles may not be operated or driven upon any public street or alley including designated through and access routes, or upon any private or public property within the City limits of the City of Mobridge, between the hours of 11:00 o'clock p.m. and 7:00 o'clock a.m. the following day, except in the case of emergencies as herein provided.
10-8-5 General Provisions for Snowmobiles A. A snowmobile shall at no time be operated or driven within the City of Mobridge at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hours.
B. Snowmobiles shall at all times abide by all traffic laws, rules and regulations for the travel of motor vehicles; and in addition thereto, must stop before entering or crossing any public street, alley, or street and alley intersection whether or not stop signs or electric controlled signs, shall be posted at said intersection. C. It shall be unlawful to drive or operate a snowmobile upon any City, School, or other public or private property at any time, with or without the permission of the owner, unless the operator shall first secure permission from the Chief of Police. D. It shall be unlawful to drive or operate a snowmobile upon any sidewalk or designated sidewalk space public or private, except for necessary crossing, in traveling through and access routes or in gaining access to and from the owner, or operator's residence, business or a snowmobile service center, or the City limits. E. It shall be unlawful to drive or operate a snowmobile in a careless or reckless manner, or in such a manner as to constitute exhibition driving, or in such a manner or at such a speed as would endanger other persons or property.
F. It shall be unlawful to drive or operate a snowmobile while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any other exhilarating or stupefying drug.
141
G. It shall be unlawful to drive or operate a snowmobile carrying a gun or any other firearm or firearms, either in or upon the snowmobile, or upon the person of any operator or any other persons riding therein. H. It shall be unlawful to tow any person or objects, except a disabled snowmobile, or in the case of an emergency, and in such event the driver-operator, shall at all times use due care and caution for the safety of the person and/or object being towed, and in due regard of the rights and safety of other persons and property. I. All snowmobiles operated within the City limits shall be equipped with and have in operation at all times while being driven within the City limits, mufflers, brakes, a dead-man throttle and at least one headlight and taillight on. J. All snowmobiles being driven and operated on designated snowmobile through routes and access routes shall be required to display a red or orange pennant flag on a flexile antenna, or red antenna extending not less than five feet above the ground, to be mounted at the rear of said snowmobile. The flag or pennant displayed shall be not less than six inches by nine inches and attached to the top of the antenna or rod. K. It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a snowmobile to leave the same unattended while the motor is running and/or to leave the keys for starting the snowmobile in the ignition.
10-8-6 Registration and Licensing All snowmobiles operated within the City of Mobridge shall have attached thereto a state license, and all owners of snowmobiles living within the City of Mobridge, shall, before operating said snowmobile within the City limits of said City, register the same with the Chief of Police.
10-8-7 Drivers License
No person shall be permitted to drive or operate a snowmobile within the City of Mobridge, South Dakota without having upon his person and in his possession a valid South Dakota motor vehicle driver’s license.
10-8-8 Declaring Emergencies
The Chief of Police, and/or mayor, shall, at all times have power and authority to declare an emergency and grant supervised emergency operation of snowmobiles as herein provided; and shall determine when such emergency terminates.
10-8-9 Special Permits
The City Council, by official action, taken at any regular or special meeting, may grant special permits for special use or operation of snowmobiles for any specific purpose or occasion, or upon any specific public property, or with the permission of the owner of private property, which special permit shall temporarily suspend the requirements of this Ordinance in so far as the privileges granted therein; and as the same shall relate to operation of snowmobiles by persons referred to in the permit.
142
10-8-10 Copies of Ordinance and Regulations
It shall be the duty of the City Finance Officer and Chief of Police to have available for distribution to all persons requesting same, printed copies of this Ordinance or any addition or amendment thereto; the Chief of Police shall deliver copies thereof to all snowmobile sales and service centers in the City of Mobridge, who shall deliver copies thereof to all purchasers and/or lessees of snowmobiles at the time of purchasing or leasing, and delivery of said machine to said purchaser or lesser.
10-8-11 Penalty for Violation
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance or failing to comply with the provisions thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00, or both such fine and imprisonment, and, the Court at its discretion may suspend the driving and operating of a snowmobile privilege of said person in the City of Mobridge, for a period of time not to exceed 60 days.
CHAPTER 10-9 SPEED
10-9-1 General Restrictions
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on a street or highway at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing or at a speed in excess of those fixed by this chapter or established by the City Council as hereinafter set forth. (1998 ORD 749)
10-9-2 Speed Zones- Establishment
A. The City Council is authorized and empowered to determine and establish upon any street or highway within the City or any part thereof, limited speed zones which speed limit shall constitute the maximum speed at which any person may drive or operate any vehicle upon zone, street or highway or portion thereof so zoned, and on which highway the maximum speed permissible in said zone has been conspicuously posted by signs adopted by the City Council.
B. The beginning and end of such limited speed zones shall be indicated by signs showing the speed limit.
The City Council may change the speed limit or the extent of any such limited speed zone at any time they may deem necessary. (1998 ORD 749)
10-9-3 Speed- Limitations
Where no special hazard exists on any section of a street or highway which section is not zoned and posted as hereinbefore provided, the following speeds shall be lawful, but any speed in excess of said limits shall be unlawful and shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent
143
A. Fifteen miles an hour when approaching within fifty feet of any railway when the driver’s view is obstructed. A driver’s view shall be deemed to be obstructed when at any time during the last two hundred feet of his approach to such crossing he does not have a clear and uninterrupted view of such railway for a distance of four hundred feet in each direction of such crossing.
B. Fifteen miles an hour when passing a school house or grounds during recess or while children are going to or leaving school during opening or closing hours.
C. Fifteen miles an hour when approaching within fifty feet and in traversing an intersection of highways when the driver’s view is obstructed. A driver’s view shall be deemed to be obstructed when at any time during the last fifty feet of his approach to such intersection, he does not have a clear and uninterrupted view of such intersection and of the traffic upon all of the highways entering such intersection for a distance of two hundred feet from such intersection; provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply to through streets where intersection stop signs are posted.
D. Fifteen miles an hour in any public park; provided, that the Park Board or other local authority may, by duly posted notices, fix a lower rate, in which case such rate of speed as so posted shall not be exceeded.
E. Twenty miles an hour on any street or highway, either in the business or residential district, except as may be herein increased or modified, provided, that the City Council may, by duly posted notices, fix a lower rate, in which case such rate of speed as so posted shall not be exceeded. Five miles an hour on any alley. (2007 ORD849) (2006 ORD 837)
F. It shall be prima facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the foregoing speed limitations except that the City Council is hereby authorized in its discretion to increase the speed which shall be prima facie lawful upon certain portions of federal highways as required by federal regulations, provided that there shall be placed adequate signs giving notice of such special regulations.
G. The speed limits set out in this section shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles when responding to emergency calls provided that the driver thereof shall sound audible signals by siren or horn. This provision shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the street. (1998 ORD 749)
CHAPTER 10-10 CONDITION OF VEHICLES
10-10-1 Muffler Cutouts Regulated
A. No person shall drive a motor vehicle on a highway unless such motor vehicle is equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke. The use of “Smitty” or “Hollywood” mufflers or other devices of like character which make loud noises or explosions are hereby declared unlawful.
B. It shall be unlawful to use a muffler “cutout” on any motor vehicle on a highway.
(1998 ORD 749)
144
10-10-2 Brakes
Every motor vehicle operated or driven upon any of the streets, alleys or avenues of this city shall be provided with adequate brakes in good working order sufficient to control such motor vehicle at all times when the same is in use. (1998 ORD 749)
10-10-3 Lights
Every motor vehicle operated or driven in the City of Mobridge shall, during the period of from one hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, display lighted lamps as required by SDCL § 32-17-1. (1998 ORD 749)
10-10-4 Horns
Every motor vehicle operated or driven in the City of Mobridge shall be provided with a suitable or adequate horn or other device for signaling which shall be in good working order at all times said vehicle is operated on the streets of the City of Mobridge. (1998 ORD 749)
10-10-5 Flags or Light at End of Load
Whenever the load on any vehicle shall extend more than four feet beyond the rear of the bed or body thereof, there shall be displayed at the end of such load in such as to be cleanly visible at all times from the rear of such vehicle a red flag not less then twelve inches both in length and width, except at between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise there shall be displayed at the end of such load a yellow or red light plainly visible under normal atmospheric conditions at least two hundred feet from the rear of such vehicle. (1998 ORD 749)
10-10-6 License Plates
No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle within the City of Mobridge without having conspicuously displayed thereon number plates or plate as required by the statutes of the State of South Dakota, securely fastened, and shall be kept free from mud, dirt, or other obstruction so that said number plate or plates shall be clearly legible by other persons upon said highway. (1998 ORD 749)
10-10-7 Windows and Windshields-Obstructions
The windshield and the front side windows of any vehicle operated on the streets of the city of Mobridge shall at all times be free and clear of any ice, frost, snow, stickers, signs, placards or anything else which would in any manner tend to obstruct or hinder the view of the driver. (1998 ORD 749)
TITLE 11 – WATER AND SEWERS
CHAPTER 11.1 – WATER
CHAPTER 11.2 – WATER RATES
CHAPTER 11.3 – SEWER AND WATER CONNECTIONS – SPECIAL FEES
145
CHAPTER 11.4 – SEWERS
Chapter 11-1 Water
11-1-1 Installation of Meters
The City of Mobridge, through the Water Department, shall have the right to at any time install a meter on any service connected with the City Water mains and from the time of such installations the meter rates established by the Ordinance of said City shall affect and apply to water delivered through such service; provided, that if the water rates for such premises shall have been paid in advance at existing flat rates, a credit for the expired time for such advance payment in proportion to the whole time thereof, shall be allowed upon meter rates.
Water meters up to and including three quarter inch shall be furnished and installed by the City, free of charge to the consumer, but any meters larger than a full three quarter inch meter, shall be furnished and paid for by the user and installed by the City; provided, however, that any meters so furnished by the users shall be of such kind and quality as specified and approved by the Water Department of the City of Mobridge.
A. The City shall charge a consumer service fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council for turning water on and/or off during business and non-business hours. Where only a meter reading is required on a new service because the water was not previously turned off, the City shall charge the consumer a fee set by resolution of the City Council for doing so during business hours and a fee set by resolution of the City Council for doing so during non-business hours.
11-1-2 Duty and Responsibility of Owner or Occupant
A suitable place, safe from frost or other damage and accessible for examination must be provided for said meter at the expense of the owner or occupant, and in all cases where the meter is injured by freezing or were it is otherwise damaged by the act or neglect of the owner or occupant of the premises or of his/her agent or servants, the cost of repairing or replacing the same shall be paid by the owner or occupant, and in case of neglect or refusal to pay the same on demand, the water supply may be turned off and shall not be again turned on until such consumer service fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council for turning water on and/or off during business and non-business hours is paid to the City of Mobridge.
11-1-3 Each Building to Have Separate Cut-Off
Every separate building must have its own separate cut-off placed at the outside edge of the sidewalk or in the alley; provided, that when two or more buildings are already supplied through one service connection and one cut-off, such service may be continued until separate services and cut-offs are ordered, but if the water rates for any of said buildings shall become delinquent and so remain for a period of fifteen days, the water supply may be cut off from all of said buildings and shall not be again turned on until such delinquent rates and a consumer service fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council for turning water on and/or off during business and non/business hours are paid. The Water Department may order separate service connection for any such buildings so already supplied through one service if or whenever the City main has been laid in the street adjacent to said building.
146
11-1-4 One Meter
The supply of water through each separate service must be recorded by one meter only, for which only one bill will be rendered by the City. If additional or auxiliary meters are desired for recording the subdivision of such supply, they must be furnished and set by the owner or consumer at their own expense and they must assume all responsibility of maintaining and reading the same.
11-1-5 Notice
In case of the breakage or stoppage or any other irregularity in the meter installed by the City, the owner or consumer is to immediately notify the Water Department and any necessary repairs will be made under its supervision.
11-1-6 Testing Meters on Request of Consumer.
Upon the written request of any owner or consumer, the Water Department will test the meter supplying the premises. The owner or consumer may, if desired, be present when the test is made. The result of the test will in all cases be reported to the owner or consumer requesting the test. If the test of the meters shows that it fails to register correctly within two percent on a flow equal to one-eighth of the diameter of the service, the water department shall make a charge or allow a credit in proportion to the error for all water registered in excess of the minimum amount allowed by the established rates.
11-1-7 Protection of Meter
Where a meter has been placed on a pipe connected to a boiler or other hot water apparatus, a check valve must be placed between such meter and the boiler or hot water apparatus which shall protect such meter from back pressure of steam or hot water. In case the meter shall be damaged by hot water or steam, the owner or occupant of the premises shall pay for such damages.
11-1-8 City Not Liable for Damages
The City of Mobridge will not be responsible for damages caused by the breaking of a meter or from any accidents resulting from variation in water pressure or the ram of the water in the mains.
11-1-9 Penalty for Interference
Every Person who shall break or deface the seal of any water meter, or who shall obstruct, alter, injure or prevent the action of any water meter, or who shall make any connection by means of a pipe or otherwise with any main or pipe used for the delivery of water to a consumer in such manner as to take water from said main or pipe used for the delivery of water to a meter, or who shall use any water so obtained, or who shall with intent to defraud, make any connection or reconnection with such main or pipe, or turn it on or off or in any manner interfere with any valve, stop cock or other appliance connected therewith, shall upon conviction thereof be fined not less than $75.00 not more than $100.00 or be imprisoned not more than thirty days, or be subjected to both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Court.
147
11-1-10 Permits
No person, firm or corporation shall make any extension to or alteration of any water tap, main pipe or other fixture without first having obtained a written permit so to do, and a full report of such work must be made within 24 hours after the completion of said work.
The Owners of property desirous of using water from the municipal disturbing pipes shall make application in writing, either by themselves or their authorized agents, to the Superintendent of Waterworks. The applicant to state the size of the tap, kind of service pipe to be used and the description of the premises and name of the owner.
Such application to be accompanied by the connection or tapping fee in the sum of One Hundred Thirty-Five Dollars ($135.00) for a three quarter (3/4) inch tap; the sum of Two Hundred Seventy-Five Dollars ($275.00) for a one inch tap. (2005ORD820) (2002 ORD 791)
11-1-11 Depth of Service Pipes
Within the limits of the street, service pipes shall in no case be laid at a depth less than six feet below the lowest part of the gutter. The water and sewer lines may be in the same trench if kept 12" apart per the National Plumbing Code (10-6).
11-1-12 Curb-Stop and Shut-Off Valve
There shall be a brass curb-stop in each service pipe under the exclusive control of the City. Said curb-stop shall be placed in the pipe under the boulevard at the outer side of the sidewalk area, just inside the curb or at the alley line, and only persons authorized by the Water Superintendent shall open or close or otherwise interfere with said curb-stop. Such curb-stop shall be provided with a box or tube of approved pattern, and the top of each box or tube shall be placed on the level with the grade of the sidewalk or alley, and no premises shall be supplied water services without said box being in good order.
Each service pipe must be furnished with a shut-off valve, approved by the Water Department, situated below the action of the frost so that the water can be conveniently shut off. There shall also be a shut-off valve in every attachment located at the first suitable point beyond the street or alley limits to enable consumers to turn the water off in case of accident to the pipes on the premises.
It shall be the obligation of the owner of the property which will receive the water services to install, repair and replace the curb-stop and shut-off valve(s). In case of neglect or refusal of the owner to provide or repair the curb-stop within a reasonable time after being notified, the Water Department shall cause it to be done and charge the expense as a special assessment against the premises to be served by the water line.
In case of neglect or refusal of the owner to provide or repair the shut-off valve(s) within a reasonable time after being notified, the Water Department shall cause water service to the premises to be terminated until such time as the replacement or repair has been completed and the shut off and turn on fees have been paid.
11-1-13 Guarding Excavations
No evacuation in any street or public place shall be left open over night, except in cases of necessity in which the Water Department must maintain suitable barriers and signals of warning during the night.
148
11-1-14 Return of Plumber
All plumbers shall make full returns of the ordinary and special uses to which water is designated to be applied under any permit granted by the City, with a description of all apparatus and arrangements for using the water in every case. This return is to be made by the plumber who does the work, within fort-eight hours after the completion of said work, to the City Water Department. For any misrepresentations or omissions in the statement of the work done, or appurtenance set, through which there may be water used, the plumber may be suspended or his license may be revoked.
11-1-15 Penalties
Any person who shall lay any water service pipe or introduce into or about any building or on any grounds, any water pipes, or do any plumbing work in any building or on any grounds for the purpose of connecting such pipes or plumbing with the pipes of the City Waterworks, or preparing them for such connection with a view of leaving such premises supplies with water by such water-works, or who shall make any addition to or alterations of any water pipes, water closet, stop-cock or other fixtures or apparatus for the supply of any premises with water without first having obtained a permit in writing for doing such work from the Water Department in the City of Mobridge, shall be subject to fine as provided in this Ordinance.
11-1-16 Rent Must Be Paid Before Water Turned On
The water will not be turned on in any house or private service pipe, until the applicant shall have paid the rent due and shall exhibit his receipt therefore.
11-1-17 Right of Access to Premises for Inspection
The Chief of Police or such other person as he or she may direct shall be authorized to enter and have free access at all reasonable hours to premises, to ascertain the location or condition of all hydrants, pipes or other fixtures attached to the waterworks; and in case he or she finds waste on account of negligence or want of repairs, and if such waste is not immediately remedied, the water leading to such premises shall be turned off. It shall be the duty of said officers, in case they discover any defect in the private service pipe or in the street, to give notice in writing to be left at the premises, and if necessary repairs are not made within twenty-four hours thereafter, the water shall be turned off, and shall not be turned on again until a consumer service fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council for turning water on and/or off during business and non/business hours has been paid to the Finance Officer of the City of Mobridge.
11-1-18 Must Repair Connections
Persons taking water from the distributing pipe must keep their service and fixtures connected therewith in good repair and protected from frost at their own expense, and must prevent all unnecessary waste, or the water will be shut off. No abatement shall be allowed from the price charged or agreed upon by reason of the breaking, nor will the City of Mobridge, its Mayor or City Council, in any case be liable or responsible for any damage growing out of the stoppage of such water or any insufficient supply of the same as the quality
149
or quantity. All persons using water from the waterworks for any purpose whatever will do so at their own risk.
11-1-19 Notice to Discontinue
Any person desirous of discontinuing the use of water must give notice in writing to the Water Department, on or before the day to which the rent has been paid, or they will be charged with water rent to the next rent day.
11-1-20 Service Pipes Supplying More Than One
Service pipes intended to supply two or more distant premises must be provided with separate curb-cocks and shut-off boxes for each premises on the outside of the lot line, or when only one curb-cock is used, the person or persons controlling the same must pay the water rent of the parties who are thus supplied, as separate water rates will not be made without separate curb-cocks.
11-1-21 Laying Larger Pipes for Fire Protection
When proprietors of lumber yards, manufacturers, halls, stores, hotels or public buildings, regular customers from the waterworks, wish to lay larger pipes with hydrants and hose coupling, to be used only in case of fire, they will be permitted to connect with the street main at their own expense, upon application for permit to the City Water Department, and under the direction of the City Council, will be allowed to use the water, for fire purposes only, free of charge. No standpipe will be allowed on the premises where water is not taken for other than fire purposes.
11-1-22 Unnecessary Waste of Water
Hydrants, taps, hose, water closets, urinals, bath and other fixtures will not be permitted to be kept running when not in use, and it is hereby made the duty of the Water Department to enforce this section, and also to notify the consumers of the unnecessary waste of water on their premises. If within forty-eight hours after being so notified that water is being wasted, the necessary repairs are not made, the Water Department shall forthwith shut off the water on the premises and before it shall be turned on, the consumer shall pay the fine as provided in this Ordinance.
11-1-23 City May Shut Off Water for Repairs
The City reserves the right at any time to shut off the water on the main pipe for the
purpose of repairing the same, making connection, or extension to the same, or for the purpose of cleaning the same, and it is expressly understood that no claim shall be made against the City by reason of the breaking of the service pipe or service curb-cock, or from any damage arising from shutting off the supply for repairing, laying or relaying main, hydrants or other connections. It is hereby made the duty of the Water Department to give such reasonable notice as shall be practicable.
11-1-24 Changing Pipes to Conform with Ordinance
Pipes and appurtenances already put in which are not put in accordance with the
150
provisions of this chapter must be made to comply with the rules laid down in this chapter, and if not complied with in a reasonable time, the water supply will be cut off.
11-1-25 Public Hydrants
All hydrants located in the City of Mobridge for the purpose of extinguishing fires in said City, are hereby declared to be public hydrants, and no person or persons, other than members of the Fire Department of said City, for the use and purposes of said Department, and those especially authorized by the Water Department, shall draw water from the same, or in any manner interfere with or injure any of said hydrants. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a Class 2 Misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00 or imprisonment in the County Jail not to exceed 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (2003ORD802)
11-1-26 Enforcement of Rules
It shall be the duty of the water department, Chief of Fire Department and all persons in the employ of the City having police papers to enforce the foregoing rules by making prompt complaint before the City Council against all persons violating said rules.
11-1-27 Water Department – Definition – Duties
The term “Water Department” when used in this Ordinance, shall be constructed to mean that department of the city government having charge and control of the municipal waterworks, and any and all property pertaining thereto, of the City of Mobridge; and it shall be the duty of said department to see that the same is protected from unnecessary damage and loss, and to keep said waterworks in good running order and repair and said department shall make a monthly report of its activities, etc., to the City Council or more often if requested, of all its acts and doings in and about the same, and a record shall be kept of all matters which will show at all times the true state and condition of said office.
11-1-28 Removing or Disturbing Covers of Meters-Penalty
Plumbers and other persons are prohibited from removing, disturbing, uncovering or in any way exposing meters for the purpose of making repairs, thawing pipes, or any other purpose, whether owned by the City of Mobridge or by the owners or consumers, and any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this section shall upon conviction thereof be fined in a sum not exceeding $100.00, and liable for any loss or damage occurring by reason of such violation.
11-1-29 Regulations for Openings
In case any person, firm or corporation, owning property fronting upon any of the streets, alleys or avenues mentioned in this Ordinance, shall show to the Water superintendent that they have failed to install water, sewer and gas connections prior to the laying of the pavement, in said streets, alleys and avenues through any sufficient cause, or that the sewer, water and gas mains already installed on said streets, alleys or avenues have become defective and in need of repair, or in case any public service corporation shall desire to open said pavement for the laying of mains or conduits, they shall make application for permit for such excavation as provided in this Ordinance; provided, that if such excavation
151
contemplates installation of water or sewer services, the water department shall be notified of such application by applicant prior to the granting of such permit.
11-1-30 Restrictions- Sprinkling- Air Conditioning
All water used for air-cooling systems, lawn or garden sprinkling is subordinate to domestic use or fire protections and may be restricted by the City Council at any time, shall scarcity of water or an emergency of any kind so require. Such restrictions shall be imposed by resolution of the City Council, and notice thereof given the public by publication of such restrictions and the extent thereof, in the official newspaper, and if possible, by radio announcement at least twenty-four hours before the effective date of such restrictions, and it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use City water in the manner or at the times restricted by such resolution.
11-1-31 Installation of Underground Sprinkling Systems
The following rules and regulations are established for the installation of underground sprinkling systems:
1. A building permit shall be obtained by any person from the Building and Zoning Officer prior to installation of a sprinkling system.
2. All installations shall comply with the requirement of the National Standard Plumbing code, 1990 Edition and amendments thereto in the future.
3. All connections to the City water system or private wells shall be inspected by a licensed plumber prior to use.
4. All sprinkler systems installed shall have back flow preventers and safety valves properly installed as to not allow any water to drain back into a well or city water system. If such appurtenances are found to be missing from a system, the system will be shut down until such time as the system needs compliance.
5. Enforcement of these provisions shall be in accordance with this Ordinance.
CHAPTER 11-2-WATER RATES
11-2-1 Water Rates for Business and Commercial Uses Within the City Limits
All owners and occupants of premises used for business or commercial purposes located in the City limits and connected with the municipal system, including individuals, partnerships, corporations, associations, schools and any and all other benevolent charitable and nonprofit corporations, associations or organizations shall pay for the water consumed upon its premises, and for availability of water service, an amount set by resolution of the City Council.
11-2-2 Water Rates for Metered Residential Uses-Including Trailer Courts Within the City Limits
All owners and occupants of residential premises and churches located within the city limits which are connected to the municipal water system and have a water meter, shall pay for water consumed thereon and for the availability of water service, an amount set by resolution of the City Council.
152
11-2-3 Water Rates for Un-metered Residences and Lots Within the City Limits
(A) All owners and occupants of residential premises or lots located within the City limits which do not have a water meter and which said residential premises are connected with the municipal water system shall pay for the water consumed thereon, and for the availability of water service an amount set by resolution of the City Council.
(B) All owners of residential and commercial premises or lots located within the City limits upon which there is located a Structure as defined in the Mobridge City Zoning Ordinances and which have water or sewer lines onto the property which are turned off and are not providing water services to the property during periods of 45 continuous days or more, shall be assessed a monthly charge to be set by resolution for the availability of the water and sewer services, which charges shall also include a surcharge and a Water and Sewer extension charge. Said charges shall continue for each month thereafter in which the water service to said premises is disconnected at the street connection. The service availability rates as stated herein shall become effective immediately for those properties which meet the above conditions and shall become effective for other properties (excluding new residential construction) 45 days after the City has received notification by the property owner to disconnect the water service. The service availability rate as stated herein shall become effective for properties upon which new residential construction is commenced one (1) year after the building permit for said construction is issued. All charges as set forth herein shall be billed at the time of the next water billing cycle after said charges become effective. The service availability rates as stated in this section shall not apply to vacant lots upon which no Structure is located. Failure to pay the charges as stated herein shall cause a lien upon the premises so effected and the City shall not reconnect water services to the premises until all such charges are paid in full unless the City Council shall waive some or all of said delinquent charges.
11-2-4 Reserved.
11-2-5 Water Rates for All Business-Commercial- Residential and Trailer Court Purposes Outside the City Limits
Water rates for all business, commercial, residential and trailer court purposes outside the city limits; connected with the municipal water system for the consumption of water and for the availability of water service for said purpose is fixed at the same Rate as within the City limits, except that the minimum monthly or quarterly Rate for such as therein provided shall be an amount set by resolution of the City Council. All excess water used over the minimum shall be at the same Rate as provided within the City limits.
11-2-6 Fixing Special Rates
Wherever, by reason of special circumstances, the City Council finds the foregoing rates for any user or purpose, and whether within or without the City limits, are unjust or inequitable as applied to certain premises, said rates, if in the opinion of the City Council, be either too high or too low the City Council, by resolution, may fix and establish a fair and equitable Rate for such premises during the period of such special circumstances, or may authorize the Mayor to enter into a contract for the sale of water at a fixed Rate as provided in said contract for such use.
153
11-2-7 Meter Reading and Billing
All meters for residential, commercial uses and trailer courts within and without the City limits shall be billed on a monthly basis.
11-2-8 Special Fund
In addition to the quarterly water statements for water used during said period at the rates herein fixed there shall be billed and collected from each water user the sum of $0.50 per month, which sum is set aside in a special fund for sanitary purposes, repair, maintenance and extension of water and sewer mains. If such water user is connected to the City of Mobridge sanitary sewer, whether it be billed and collected with each quarterly billing, the sum of $20.00 per month, except in the case of multiple users additional sewer rental shall be billed and collected as provided by Ordinance. All sums collected as sewer rental shall be set aside in a special fund for disbursement as provided in Ordinance No. 564 and as provided by Ordinance No. 577 and 706 as to:
11-2-9 Annexation - Termination
That any water services serving property outside the corporate limits of the City of Mobridge on or after October 6, 1975 shall be continued in accordance with existing ordinances and/or as per contract between such water user and the city of Mobridge. In the event the property receiving water services shall refuse or neglect to petition for annexation to the City of Mobridge, after notice in writing by mailing is given, said water services shall be terminated 90 days after mailing of said notice unless said property is annexed within that period of time.
11-2-10 Special Rates for Specific Water Users
All Owners or occupants of premises outside the city limits located on the trunk water main installed in 1965 form Mobridge Rodeo, Inc., Rodeo Grounds, to the Mobridge Municipal airport and Armory and through, over and across which premises said trunk water main is laid, and through, over and across which premises, or a part thereof, and easement has been given the City of Mobridge for the installation, maintenance, use and upkeep of said trunk water main; and, who shall have paid the City of Mobridge, the front foot cost of said truck water main shall pay for the water consumed upon said premises, and for the availability or water services the same minimum and over minimum Rate per month as shall be charged owners or occupants of premises located within the City limits of the city of Mobridge, SD, connected with the water system.
11-2-11 Special Water Main Tapping Fees for Lands Abutting on Armory Water Main Extension Project No. 64-8; and Providing for Collection and Disposition of Fees Collected
Whereas, the City of Mobridge has paid all of the cost for the construction of a trunk water main as described and located in Armory Water Main Extension, Project No. 64-8, generally described as located in the first 15 feet of the land adjacent to U.S. Highway No. 12 commencing at a point within said 15 feet, 596 feet West of the East boundary line of Lot B in the SW1/4SW1/4 of Section 20, Township 124 North, Range 79, Walworth County, South Dakota, owned on the date of the adoption hereof by Mobridge Rodeo, Inc.; thence east to the section line between section 20 and 21; thence North 1950 feet on said section line right-of-
154
way to a point 1950 feet north of the said trunk water main as laid in the front 15 feet of Lot 1, Block 1 of James L. Jackson plat of Block 1, 2 and 3 in the SE1/4 Section 21, Township 124, Range 79, and which point is west of the Mobridge Municipal Airport where said trunk water main under said Armory Water Main Extension Project No. 64-8 leaves the Section line right-of-way and extends East into the Mobridge Municipal Airport and Armory grounds; and
Whereas, the contract cost of installing said trunk water main was $2.10 per lineal foot,
Whereas, all land abutting thereon is benefited thereby; and
Whereas, it is the general policy of the City of Mobridge to charge the cost of Trunk Water Mains to abutting properties benefited thereby and making use thereof in a sum equal to the cost of the installation thereof;
Now thereof, be it ordained that in addition to all other tapping fees provided by ordinance, there shall be charged to abutting property from said Trunk Water Main the sum of $2.10 per front foot, according to the number of front feet in each plated tract, lot or area abutting upon said water main as follows:
(1) the east 596 feet of Tract B in SW1/4SW1/4 Section 20, Twp. 124, Rge. 79.
(2) 155.5 feet, Lot 1 in SW1/4SE1/4 Section 20, Twp. 124, Rge. 79.
(3) 145 feet, Lot 9 in W1/2E1/2SE1/4 Section 20, Twp. 124, Rge. 79.
(4) 46.2 feet in each of lots 3,4,5,6,7 and 8, in W1/2E1/2SE1/4 Section 20, Twp. 124, Rge. 79.
(5) 52.75 feet, Lot2 in W1/2E1/2SE1/4 Section 20, Twp. 124, Rge. 79.
(6) 66 feet, lot 1 in W1/2E1/2SE1/4 Section 20, Twp. 124, Rge. 79.
(7) 0.5 feet each, Lot 1,2,3 and 4, in Block 1 James L. Jackson plat SE1/4SE1/4 Section 20, Twp. 124, Rge. 79.
Property on both sides of the Trunk Water Main Located in the section line right of way between Sections 20 and 21 receive equal benefits by the construction and installation thereof, the cost of installation $2.10 per foot shall be divided equally by property on each side thereof, or at the Rate of $1.05 per front foot, as to the following lots, tracts and lands as now plated.
(1) 150 feet, Lot 1, Block 2, James L. Jackson Plat in SE1/4Se1/4 Section 20, Twp. 124, Rge. 79.
(2) 56.1 feet, Lot 1, Block 3, James L. Jackson Plat in Se1/4, Section 20, Twp. 124, Rge 79.
(3) 50 feet each, Lots 2 to 18, both inclusive, Block 3, James L. Jackson plat SE1/4, Section 20, Twp. 124, Rge. 79.
(4) 630 feet in the SE1/4 Section 20, Twp. 124, Rge. 79 North of and abutting Block 3, James L. Jackson Plat of Blocks 1,2 and 3 in SE1/4, Section 20, Twp. 124, Rge. 79.
(5) 1950 feet front on section line between Sections 20 and 21 in Twp. 124, Rge 79 commencing at the SW corner of the SW1/4 of said Section 21, thence extending North along said section line right of way a distance of 1950 feet.
It is further provided that if any of said lots, tracts or parcels of land shall be officially subdivided, platted or replatted, and such subdivision, plat or replat, or part of parcel thereof abutting said trunk water main, and desire to tap into same, the special tapping fee herein provided shall be at the same Rate as the lot, tract or parcel of land from which said
155
subdivision, plat or replat was made and according to the number of front feet abutting upon said trunk water main of the lot or tract requesting tapping privileges and benefits.
The special tapping fee herein provided shall be paid to the City Finance Officer by the owner or owners of such property abutting upon said trunk water main before said trunk water main shall be tapped to serve said lot, tract or area shall receive benefits and the use thereof. All special tapping fees paid hereunder shall be deposited in the general fund of the City.
11-2-12 Special Areas
That in addition to all water rates as provided by Ordinance all persons, firms, or corporations tapped into and receiving water from the trunk water main east of the booster pressure water pump located at the quarter line – Section 21 on US Highway and extending to the Indian Creek Campground shall pay to the City of Mobridge the cost for all electrical energy to operate said booster pump. The cost to be prorated to each user according to the gallon usage of each user as the same relates to the total gallons used by all users tapped into said trunk water main. The cost thereof shall be billed to each water user with the regular water billing as provided by Ordinance and shall be collected by the City Finance Officer in the same manner as all other water bills.
11-2-13 Delinquent Water Rents
All water accounts inside or outside the City limits of Mobridge, shall be payable at the office of the City Finance Office, and if not paid within fifteen (15) days after the same becomes due, shall become delinquent and a penalty of 5% shall be added to said bill. If the water bill and penalty are not paid within five (5) days after becoming delinquent, the water shall not be turned on again until all back rents and penalty, together with a consumer service fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council for turning water on and/or off during business and non/business hours is paid. No notice shall be required when water rents will become due or delinquent. The City Council shall have the right at any time to adopt rules and regulations governing the use of water furnished by the City.
11-2-14 Leaks and Waste
No allowance will be made on water bills for the excessive use occasioned by leaks or waste within the premises of the consumer.
11-2-15 Owner – Lessee Liable
The owner of private property, which property has upon it pipes connected with the City waterworks to convey water upon such property shall, as well as the lessee or occupant of the premises, be liable to the City of Mobridge for the rents or rates of all water from said waterworks used upon said premises, which may be recovered in an action against such owner, lessee or occupant or against any or all of them.
11-2-16 Section 1 – Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance shall be to generate sufficient revenue to pay all costs for the operation and maintenance of the water treatment plant waste disposal system. The costs shall be distributed to all users to the water treatment plant waste disposal system in
156
proportion to each user’s water usage to insure a proportional distribution of operation and maintenance costs to each user.
11-2-16 A Section 2 – Determining the Total Annual Cost of Operation and Maintenance
The City of Mobridge shall determine the total annual costs of operation and maintenance of the water treatment plant waste disposal system, which are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance, during the service life of the treatment works, for which such works were designed and constructed. The total annual cost of operation and maintenance shall include but need not be limited to labor, repairs, equipment replacement, maintenance, necessary modifications, power and a reasonable contingency fund.
11-2-16 B Section 3 – Determining Each User’s Service Charge for the Water Treatment Plant Waste Disposal System
Each user’s water treatment plant waste disposal system cost contributions shall be determined by the total water usage of the individual user which shall determine the user’s annual service charge each user’s water treatment plant waste disposal system cost contribution will be assessed in accordance with the following Rate schedule:
A. Estimated Total Annual Operation and Maintenance Costs Bi-Annually
Administration (815)
Billing – 1/10 Salary of Water
Billing Clerk $1400.00
Water-Waste Water Supt. – 1/10 of
Salary of Supt. 30000.00
Power & Pumping (812)
Electrical Power 375.00
Water Plant (811)
Salaries – ¼ of total salaries of water treatment plant operators estimated to be
spent on waste disposal system of water treatment plant. This includes time to empty lime sludge from one decant pond per year. No equipment cost because City owns necessary equipment.
Repairs – Supplies 200.00
Contingencies 400.00
TOTAL $20,244.00
B. Current Annual Town Water Usage
Approximate 1979 water gallonage billed – 204,700,000 gallons – 204,700 M. Gal.
157
C. Rate Schedule
Cost/M Gal. = $20,244.00 = $0.099 + $0.10/M. Gal.
204,700 M. Gal.
Note: A minimum charge for the minimum gallons used may be charge such as:
a. 2000 gal. Or less/month = $0.10 x 2 = $0.20
b. Un-metered residence $67.50/quarter = 6,000 gsl./2 quarter = $0.10 x 6 =
$0.60
c. etc.
11-2-16C Section 4 - Payment of User's Water Treatment plant Service Charge and Penalties
The City shall submit a monthly, quarterly, or annual statement to the user for the user's current water treatment plant waste disposal system service charge and it will be included with the regular water and/or waste water utility billing. The City shall add a penalty of 5 percent per user service charge and penalty within two months of the due date, the City may stop the water service to the property.
11-2-16D Section 5 – Review of Each User’s Water Treatment Plant Service Charge
The City shall review the total annual cost of operation and maintenance as well as each user’s Water Treatment Plant Contribution Percentage not less often than every two years and will revise the system as necessary to assure equity of the service charge system established herein and to assure that sufficient funds are obtained to adequately operate and maintain the treatment works.
11-2-16E Section 6 - Notifications
Each user will be notified, annually, with publication in the local newspaper, of the Rate and that portion of the user charges, which are attributable to the water treatment plant services.
11-2-17 Section 1
The City of Mobridge shall fence the waste disposal lagoons at the Waste Water Treatment Plant and lagoons located on the real estate described as Tracts A and B in the Northeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter (NE1/4NE1/4) of Section Thirteen (13) in Township One Hundred Twenty Four (124) North, Range Eighty (80), West of the 5th P.M., Walworth County, South Dakota located outside the City limits of Mobridge and shall affix no trespassing signs on all fences.
11-2-17A Section 2
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person or persons to enter upon or cause any damage to Waste Water Treatment Plant, waste disposal lagoons, structures, buildings or fences belonging to the City of Mobridge located on the above described land.
158
11-2-17B Section 3
Any person violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a Class 2 Misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00 or imprisonment in the County Jail not to exceed 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
CHAPTER 11-3 SEWER AND WATER CONNECTIONS – SPECIAL RATES
11-3-1 Special Tapping Fees in Lieu of Special Assessments
In addition to the regular tapping fees for water and sewer provided in Chapters 11-1 and/or 11-2, the following tapping fees for connections of property to sewer and water mains as established by special Ordinance Nos. are hereby continued and the charges set forth in said Ordinances shall remain in full force and effect.
Lot No. Addition Amount Water Main
15A 3 Eklos 3rd 30.60 30.60
25B Eklos 3rd 106.95 106.95
(1) Water Mains, Trunk, Tapping
In addition to all other tapping provided by Ordinance there shall be assessed and collected against all lots or parts of lots within the City limits of the City of Mobridge making application for tapping on the trunk water mains extending from the City Water Treatment plant to the City elevated water storage tanks a front footage fee equal to the cost per front foot of laying six inch water main in the City of Mobridge on the date of such application as shall be determined by the City Council by the cost of all labor and material per foot for laying such six inch water main by the City at the last date next preceding such application, when the City shall have laid six inch water main.
A regular tapping fee as provided by Ordinance together with a front footage fee equal to the cost per foot of all labor and materials for laying seventy five (75) feet of six inch water main, on the date of the application for such tapping, as shall be determined by the City Council by the cost per foot for laying such six inch water main the City at the last date next preceding such application when the City shall have laid six inch water main, shall be charged each dwelling house or individual not in the City limits of the City of Mobridge for The privilege of tapping any of the trunk water mains extending from the City Water Treatment plant to the City elevated storage tanks.
(2) Mobridge Community Hospital
Mobridge Regional Hospital, fka Mobridge Community Hospital, having paid for the installation of sewer mains in Mobridge sewer district No. 5 of the Tenth Avenue West from Tenth Street to Fourteenth Street, that in addition to all other tapping fees as provided by Ordinance, a special tapping fee of $1.369 per foot be paid by all abutting property owners, for each contiguous front foot of said owners property abutting upon said street or public highway for tapping into said sewer main, and that in addition to all other tapping fees as provided by Ordinance, a special tapping fee of $2.219 per foot be paid by all abutting property owners, for each contiguous foot of said owners property abutting upon said public highway for tapping into said water main.
159
The above special tapping fee shall be paid to the City Finance Officer by the owner or owners of any such property abutting upon said avenue and public road before the sewer and/or water main shall be tapped for the use and benefit of such abutting property or property owner; and, the City Finance Officer shall forthwith pay and deliver all monies received under this Ordinance to the Mobridge Regional Hospital.
(3) Eklos Addition, Rinehart Addition, Larson's Rearrangement, and Goodman Quality Hill Addition
The City of Mobridge having installed trunk sewer mains in the public streets upon which the hereinafter described City lots abut, and having paid for same from City general funds, and not having collected special assessments from said abutting property pursuant to the general policy of said City for the construction of said trunk sewer mains; and it having been determined that the actual cost thereof is $1.00 per front per foot, there is hereby levied against each of the hereinafter described lots, or parts of lot, a special sewer tapping fee of $1 per front foot, to-wit:
Eklo's First Addition:
Lots 3B, 3C, 4A, 4b, 4C and 5
Eklo's Third Addition:
Lots 3B, 4B, W 1/2 5, along the side W 1/2 5, along the side E1/2 5, E 140' lot 32 and lot 33A, 15B, 20, 21A, 22, 29B long side, 29C long side and 29D
Rinehart Addition: Lots 16, and 17
Larson's Rearrangement: Lots 1, 2, 3, 8, 9, 10 and 11
Goodman Quality Hill Addition: Lots 12 and 13, Block 2
The above special water and/or taping fees shall be paid in addition to all other tapping fees provided by City Ordinance and shall be paid to the City Finance Officer by the owner or owners of any such abutting lots before the sewer and/or water main shall be tapped for the use and benefit of such abutting property or property owner; and, the City Finance Officer shall pay said money as received by him under this Ordinance to the City Water and Sewer Extension fund.
(4) Main Street from Fourteenth to Fifteenth
Leo Bell of Mobridge, South Dakota, having paid for the installation of sewer mains, consisting of a trunk line sewer, on Main Street from Fourteenth Street north to Fifteenth Street the cost therefore being $2.00 per foot; and, said trunk sewer mains having been installed in the City trunk sewer mains; that in addition to all other tapping fees as provided by Ordinance, a special tapping fee of $1.00 per foot be aid by all abutting property owners, for each contiguous front foot of said owner's property abutting upon said public street for tapping into the said sewer main.
The above special tapping fee shall be paid to the City Finance Officer by the owner or owners of any such property abutting upon said street before the sewer main shall be tapped for the use and benefit of such abutting property or property owner; and, the City Finance Officer shall forthwith pay and deliver all monies received under this Ordinance to the said Leo Bell of Mobridge, South Dakota.
160
(5) Shor Acres Addition & Bell Aire Addition
That in addition to all other tapping fees provided by Ordinance there shall be charged to and collected form the hereinafter described lots in Shot Acres Addition and in Bell Aire Addition to the City of Mobridge the following special trunk water main tapping fee and the following trunk sewer line tapping fee for and at the time of tapping into and using said trunk water main and/or said trunk water sewer line. The amount of said special tapping fee being determined by the total cost of all labor and material for the installation of said trunk water main and the cost of all labor and material for the installation of said trunk sewer line as hereinbefore stated divided by the abutting property on both sides and the number of front footage of each lot or tract abutting thereon, as follows:
SHOR ACRES (1/2 of $3.65 per foot (1/2 of $3.35 per foot
or 1.825 per foot) or 1.675 per foot)
LOTS FOOTAGE WATER FOOTAGE 8" SEWER
105 117.18 213.86 117.18 196.28
104 150 273.75 150 251.25
103 124.62 227.43 417.48 208.75
102 149.90 273.57 149.90 251.09
BELL AIRE ADDITION - BLOCK 2
12 70 127.75 70 117.25
13 70 127.75 70 117.25
14 70 127.75 70 117.25
15 70 127.75 70 117.25
16 82.5 150.57 82.5 138.19
In any of said lots, tracts of parcels of land shall be subdivided, platted or replatted and the owner thereof shall make application to tap into said trunk water main or trunk sewer line the special tapping fee Rate herein provided shall be chargeable against said tract according to the number of front feet in said tract abutting on the trunk water main and/or trunk sewer line.
The special tapping fee herein provided shall be paid to the City Finance Officer by the owner or owners of said property abutting upon said trunk water main and/or trunk sewer line before said trunk water main and/or before said lot, tract or area shall receive the benefits and use thereof.
All special tapping fees paid under this Ordinance shall be deposited in the General Fund of the City of Mobridge.
(6) Thompson's Out lots 1, 2, 23 and 24
Henry Krebs of Hosmer, South Dakota has paid for the installation of trunk line water mains and sewer mains in 13th Street from the west boundary line of Thompson's Out lots 1 (northside) and 24 (southside) to the East boundary line of Thompson's Out lots 2 and 23; and,
161
Said trunk sewer and water mains upon attachment to the City of Mobridge sewer and water system and become a part thereof under the management and supervision of the City of Mobridge, South Dakota, and the abutting property owners to said trunk line water and sewer have not paid their proportionate share for the installation thereof.
That in addition to all other tapping fees as provided by Ordinance there is hereby levied and established a special tapping fee against that portion of lots 1, 2, 23, and 24 in Thompson's Out lots Addition of $2.10 per front foot for tapping trunk water main; and $1.85 per front foot for tapping sewer trunk main lying in that part of 13th Street between the West boundary line of Lots 1 and 24, Thompson's Out lots Addition and the East boundary and the line of Lots 2 and 23, Thompson's Out lots Addition.
The tapping fee herein provided shall be paid to the City Finance Officer of the City of Mobridge, South Dakota prior to the approval of the application of the owners of any of the abutting property to tap said trunk water main and/or sewer main for private water and/or sewer connection for the use and benefit of the abutting lots or parts of lots. That upon receipt thereof the City Finance Officer shall pay such special tapping fee to Henry Krebs of Hosmer, South Dakota, his heirs or assigns.
(7) Thompson's Out lot Addition (westside) - Lot 24
Lawrence G. Schaefbauer and Bonnie Schaefbauer, Mobridge, South Dakota, have paid in full all cost of labor and materials for the installation of a trunk water main in Third Avenue West from the center of the Thirteenth Street Intersection extending north a distance of 180 feet; and, the actual cost of labor and material for the installation thereof was $5.20 per lineal foot and no special assessment has been collected from abutting property pursuant to the general policy of the City of Mobridge for the construction of water mains. Therefore, there is hereby levied against all property abutting on both sides of said water main a special water-tapping fee of $2.60 per front foot.
The property abutting said trunk water main and the front footage thereof upon said which special tapping fee is levied is as follows:
THOMPSON'S OUT LOTS ADDITION
Lot 24 - South 150 Feet
The above special water tapping fee shall be paid in addition to all other tapping fees provided by City Ordinance and shall be paid to the City Finance Officer by the owner or owners of any such abutting lots before the trunk water main shall be tapped for the use and benefit of such abutting property or property owner; and the City Finance Officer shall forthwith pay and deliver all monies received as a special tapping fee under this Ordinance to the said Lawrence G. Schaefbauer and Bonnie Shaefbauer as reimbursement to them for the actual cost of all labor and material for the installation of said trunk water main.
(8) SHOR ACRES
That in addition to all other tapping fees provided by Ordinance, there shall be charged to abutting property a special tapping fee for tapping into and using water from said trunk
162
water main the sum of $2.20 per front foot; and for tapping or connecting to and using the trunk sewer main, the sum of $3.00 per front foot; according to the number of front feet in each plotted tract, lot of area abutting upon said water main, and sewer main, being the following described real property: Lots One, Two, Three, Twenty-one, Twenty-two, Twenty-three, Forty, Forty-one, Forty-two, Forty-three, Forty-four, Forty-five, Forty-six, Forty-seven, Forty-eight, Forty-nine, One Hundred Fifteen, One Hundred Thirty-one, One Hundred Thirty-two, One Hundred Thirty-three, One Hundred Thirty-four, One Hundred Thirty-five, One Hundred Thirty-six, One Hundred Thirty-seven, One Hundred Thirty-eight, A, B, C, and D, Shor Acres Addition to the City of Mobridge South Dakota.
Property abutting on both sides of the trunk water main and trunk sewer main in said project No. 67-1 receive equal benefits by the construction and installation thereof, the cost of installation of water main at $2.20 per lineal foot and the cost of said sewer main at $3.00 per lineal foot shall be divided equally and chargeable to the property on each side thereof at the Rate of $1.10 per lineal foot for water main and $1.50 per lineal foot for sewer main.
It is further provided that if any of said lots, tracts or parcels of land shall be officially subdivided, plotted, or replotted, and such subdivision, plat or replat shall be filed of record, any such subdivision, plat or replat or part or parcel thereof abutting said water main and said sewer main which shall request to tap into same, the special tapping fee herein provided shall be at the same Rate as the lot, tract or parcel of land from which said subdivision, plat or replat was made and according to the number of front feet abutting upon said trunk water main and said trunk sewer main of the latter parcel requesting tapping privileges and benefits.
The special tapping fee herein provided shall be paid to the City Finance Officer by the owner or owners of such property abutting upon said trunk water main and said trunk sewer main before any trunk water main shall be tapped or said trunk sewer main shall be tapped to service said lot, tract, or parcel of land, and/or before said tract of parcel of land shall receive benefits from the use thereof.
All special tapping fees paid hereunder shall be deposited in the General Fund of the City of Mobridge, South Dakota.
(9) Indian Creek Project
For subdivisions, then and in that event, the special tapping fees shall be for seventy five (75) foot frontage and shall service no more than one water user thereon.
If it is further provided that if any of said rural lands, tracts or parcels of land shall be officially subdivided, plotted or replotted and such subdivision, plat or replat or part or parcel thereof abutting said trunk water main, and making application for tapping said trunk water main the special tapping fee herein provided shall be at the Rate of $2.40 per front foot, fronting and abutting upon the right of way wherein said trunk water main has been laid; and no more than one water user shall at any time take water from such tap.
The special tapping fee herein provided shall be paid to the City Finance Officer by the owner or owners of such property abutting upon said trunk water main before said trunk water main shall be tapped to service said land, lot, tract or area, and/or before said land, lot, tract or area shall receive benefits from the use thereof.
163
All special tapping fees paid hereunder shall be deposited in the general find of the City of Mobridge.
(10) Shor Acres Addition
The City of Mobridge, South Dakota having installed trunk water mains in the public streets upon which the hereinafter described City lots abut, and having paid for same from City general funds, and not having collected special assessments from said abutting property pursuant to the general policy of said City for the construction of trunk water mains; and it having been determined that the actual cost thereof is $2.40, per front foot, there is hereby levied and assessed against each of the hereinafter described lots, or parts of lots, a special water tapping fee of $2.40, per front foot, to-wit:
Shor Acres Addition to the City of Mobridge, South Dakota
Lot Number Abutting Front Feet Amount
109 150 $360.00
110 150 $360.00
111 150 $360.00
112 150 $360.00
113 140 $336.00
114 138 $331.00
115 162 $390.00
116 145 $348.00
117 145 $348.00
118 145 $348.00
119 145 $348.00
120 145 $348.00
131 110 $264.00
“D” 167.5 $882.00
That said special water tapping fee shall be paid in addition to all other tapping fees provided by the City Ordinance, and shall be paid to the City Finance Officer by the owner or owners of any such abutting lots before the water main shall be tapped for use and benefit of such abutting property owner; and, the City Finance Officer shall pay said money as received by him under this or Finance, to the City Water Extension Fund.
(11) Northwest Townsite Co.'s Second Addition Blocks 20 and 21
That there is hereby levied and assessed against each of the hereinafter described lots or parts of lots a special water tapping fee of $1.10 per front foot. Add ordinance 456
That said special water tapping fee shall be paid in addition to all other tapping fees provided by City Ordinance, and shall be paid to the City Finance Officer by the owner or owners of any such abutting lots before the water main shall be tapped for use and benefit of such abutting property owner; and, the City Finance Officer shall pay said money as received by him under this Ordinance to Eugene Kraft, for reimbursement for the cost of said trunk water main.
164
(12) Northwest Townsite Co's Third Addition Blocks 37 and 38
The City of Mobridge having installed trunked sewer mains in the public streets upon which the hereinafter described city lots about, and having paid for same from City General Funds, and not having collected special assessments from said abutting property pursuant to the general policy of said City for the construction of said trunk sewer mains; and, it having been determined that the actual cost thereof is $2.75, per front foot, there is hereby levied against each of the following described lots, or parts of lots, a special sewer tapping fee of $1.38 per front foot;
Northwest Townsite Company's Third Addition - Block 37:
LOT NUMBER FRONT FEET UNIT PRICE TOTAL
1 50 1.38 $69.00
2 50 1.38 $69.00
3 50 1.38 $69.00
Northwest Townsite Company’s Third Addition – Block 38:
LOT NUMBER FRONT FEET UNIT PRICE TOTAL
10 50 1.38 $69.00
11 50 1.38 $69.00
12 50 1.38 $69.00
The City of Mobridge having installed trunk water mains in the public streets upon which the hereinafter described city lots abut, and having paid for same, from the City General Fund, and not having collected special assessments from said abutting property pursuant to the general policy of said City for the construction of such trunk water main, and it having been determined that the actual cost thereof is $2.60, per foot, there is hereby levied against each of the hereinafter described lots, or parts of lots, a special water tapping fee of $1.30, per front foot;
Northwest Townsite Company’s Third Addition – Block 37:
LOT NUMBER FRONT FEET UNIT PRICE TOTAL
1 50 1.30 $65.00
2 50 1.30 $65.00
3 50 1.30 $65.00
4 50 1.30 $65.00
5 50 1.30 $65.00
Northwest Township Company’s Third Addition – Block 38:
LOT NUMBER FRONT FEET UIT PRICE TOTAL
7 50 1.30 $65.00
8 50 1.30 $65.00
9 50 1.30 $65.00
10 50 1.30 $65.00
11 50 1.30 $65.00
12 50 1.30 $65.00
165
The above special water and/or sewer tapping fees shall be paid in addition to all other tapping fees provided by City Ordinance and shall be paid to the City Finance Officer by the owner or owners of any such abutting lots before the sewer and/or water main shall be tapped to said trunk line sewer and/or water main for the use and benefit of such abutting property or property owner; and, the City Finance Officer shall pay all money received by him under this special tapping fee Ordinance, to the City of Mobridge General Fund.
(13) Third Avenue West
Whereas, by request of Q.P. Coleman, the City of Mobridge has laid an eight inch trunk water main in the public right of way extended Third Avenue West North of the City limits from 20th Street to 18th Street known as Q.P. Coleman Extension No. 1 and from 18th Street to 17th Street known as Q.P. Coleman Extension No. 2; and,
Whereas, it was agreed between the City of Mobridge and the said Q.P. Coleman that Q.P. Coleman would pay the City of Mobridge that part of the cost of said trunk water main as would be the cost of a six inch water main laid in said right of way, excluding projected intersections and cost of fire hydrants; and,
Whereas, the City of Mobridge further agreed to protect the said Q.P. Coleman for his expense in the payment of the laying of said trunk water main by adopting a special tapping fee ordinance as to all abutting property tapping into said water main; and
Whereas, the cost to Q.P. Coleman of a six inch water main on Third Avenue West from projected 20th Street to 18th Street, being Q.P. Coleman Extension No. 1 is $2.20, per foot; and,
Whereas, the cost to Q.P. Coleman of a six-inch water main on Third Avenue West from projected 18th Street to 17th Street, being Q.P. Coleman Extension No. 2 is $2.95, per foot;
Now, therefore, be it ordained by the Common Council of the City Of Mobridge, South Dakota;
That in lieu of special assessments being levied in payment of the trunk water main laid in Third Avenue West from projected 20th Street to 17th Street, in addition to the regular tapping fees provided by these Chapters, all property abutting on Third Avenue West from projected 20th Street to 18th Street, being in Q.P. Coleman Trunk Water Extension No 1 shall pay a special tapping fee of $1.10, per foot of property fronting on said Third Avenue West owned by the person requesting to tap the trunk water main; and , in addition to the regular tapping fees provided by these chapters, all property abutting on Third Avenue West from projected 18th Street to 17th Street, being in Q.P. Coleman Trunk Extension No.2, shall pay a special tapping fee of $1.48, per foot of property on said Third Avenue as owned by the person requesting to tap said trunk water main.
The above special tapping fee shall be paid to the City Finance Officer by the owner or owners of each or any said tracts of land abutting upon said trunk water main, extensions; and all sums received from said special tapping fee shall be paid by the City Finance Officer to Q.P. Coleman or his assigns. All fees to be paid before tapping.
(14) Eleventh Avenue East Between Second Street and Third Street East
166
That in lieu of special assessments being levied in payment of the trunk water main laid in 11th Avenue East from Second Street to Third Street in addition to the regular tapping fees provided by Chapter 11-1 and Chapter 11-2 of the 1967 Revised Ordinances of the City of Mobridge, South Dakota as amended, all property abutting on Eleventh Avenue East between Second Street and Third Street being Lots One (1),Two (2), Three (3), Four (4), Five (5), and Six (6) in Block Twelve (12), and Lots One (1), Two (2), Three (3), Four (4), Five (5), and Six (6) in Block Eleven (11) of C.A. Draeger's Addition to the City of Mobridge, South Dakota, shall pay a special tapping fee of $1.50 per front foot of property fronting on said Eleventh Avenue East as owned by the person requesting to tap said trunk water main.
The above special tapping fee shall be paid to the City Finance Officer by the owner or owners of each or any of said tracts of land abutting upon said trunk water main extension prior to the tapping therein; and all sums received from said special tapping fee shall be paid by the City of Treasure to Erhart Rohrbach, his successors of or assigns.
(15) Special Water Main and Special Sewer Main Tapping Fees
Be it ordained by the Common Council of City of Mobridge, South Dakota:
(1) That in addition to all other tapping fees provided by Ordinance, a special trunk sewer main tapping fee of $1.50, per front foot is hereby levied against the following lots located in Eklo's Second Addition to the City of Mobridge, South Dakota, to-wit:
Lots 10F, 10E, 10D and 9F
In payment of the pro-rata share of the cost to said lots for the installation of six inch trunk sewer main adjacent to said real property.
The special tapping fee herein provided shall be paid to the City Finance Officer by the owner or owners of any such property abutting upon said trunk sewer main before the sewer main shall be tapped for the use and benefit of such abutting property or property owner; and, the City Finance Officer shall forthwith pay and deliver all monies received as such tapping fee to William W. Bosch of Mobridge, South Dakota, who has advanced the full cost of the installation of said trunk sewer main.
(2) That in addition to all other tapping fees provided by the Ordinance, a special trunk water main tapping fee of $1.75, per front foot, and a special trunk sewer main tapping fee of $1.75 per front foot is hereby levied against the following lots located in Belle Aire Addition to City of Mobridge, SD, to-wit: Lot 8 in Block 2
In payment of pro-rata share of cost to said lots for the installation of six inch trunk water main and the eight inch trunk sewer main adjacent to and servicing said lots.
The special water main tapping fee and sewer main tapping fee herein provided shall be paid to the City Treasurer by the owner or owners of any such property abutting upon said trunk water main and said trunk sewer main before the water and/or sewer main shall be tapped for the
use and benefit of such abutting property owner; and, the City Finance Officer shall forthwith pay and deliver all monies received under this Ordinance to Willis Sackreiter, who has hereto for paid the full amount of the cost of installation of said trunk water main and trunk sewer main.
167
(3) That in addition to all other tapping fees provided by Ordinance, a special trunk sewer main tapping fee of $1.50, per from foot is hereby levied against the following lots located in East Side Addition to the City of Mobridge, SD, to-wit: Lots 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15
In payment of the pro-rata share of the cost to said lots for the installation of the six-inch sewer main abutting said lots.
The special sewer tapping fee herein provided shall be paid to the City Finance Officer by the owner or owners of said property abutting upon said trunk sewer main before the sewer main shall be tapped for the use and benefit of such abutting property or property owner; and, the City Finance Officer shall forthwith pay and deliver all monies received under this special tapping fee to Gary Jensen of Mobridge, South Dakota, who had advanced the full amount of the cost of said trunk sewer main.
(4) That in addition to all other tapping fees provided by Ordinance, a special trunk water main tapping fee of $1.75, per front foot, and a special trunk sewer main tapping fee of $1.75, per front foot is hereby levied against the following lots located in Shor Acres Addition to the City of Mobridge, SD, to-wit: Lots 81, 82, 107 and 108
In payment of the pro-rata share of the cost of said lots for the installation of the six-inch trunk water main and the eight-inch trunk sewer main adjacent to said lots.
The special trunk water main tapping fee and the special trunk sewer main tapping fee shall be paid to the City Finance Officer by the owner or owners of such lots before the water main and/or sewer main shall be tapped for the use and benefit of said abutting property or property owner; and, the City Finance Officer shall forthwith pay and deliver all monies received from such tapping fees to Darrel Bender of Mobridge, South Dakota, who has heretofore advanced the full amount of the cost of installation of said trunk water main and trunk sewer main.
(16) Lots Abutting on Both Sides of Third Avenue West from the Man Hole at Thirteenth Street and Extending north 1100 Feet
Be it ordained by the Common Council of the City of Mobridge, South Dakota:
Whereas, Lyle B. LaFromboise and Karen J. LaFromboise of Part A, Pierre, South Dakota, have paid in full all cost of labor and materials for the installation of a trunk sewer main in Third Avenue West from the Thirteenth Street intersection man hole extending north a distance of 1100 feet; and,
Whereas the actual cost of all labor and material for the installation thereof was $5.115, per lineal foot and no special assessment has been collect from abutting property pursuant to the general policy of the City of Mobridge for the construction of trunk sewer mains;
Now, therefore, there is hereby levied against all property abutting on both sides of said trunk sewer main a special sewer-tapping fee of $2.558, per front foot.
The property abutting said trunk sewer main and the front footage thereof upon which said special tapping fee is levied is as follows:
168
THOMPSON'S OUT LOTS ADDITION:
Lot 24 -264 feet
Lot 25-264 feet
BELL AIRE SECOND ADDITION, FIRST SUBDIVISION:
Lot 7-50 feet
S. 20 feet of Lot 8-20 feet
N.40 feet of Lot 8-40 feet
S. 45 feet of Lot 9-45 feet
N.15 feet of Lot 9-15 feet
Lot 10-60 feet
Lot 11-60 feet
Lot 12-60 feet
Lot 20-395.88 feet
PRESENT EXISTING PLATTED LOTS ABUTTING THIRD AVENUE WEST NORTH OF THE MOBRIDGE CITY LIMITS:
Lot 1-117 feet
Lot 2-117 feet
Lot 3-117 feet
Lot 4-138.88 feet
Lot 5-165.38 feet
Lot 6-324.33 feet
The above special sewer tapping fee shall be paid in addition to all other tapping fees provided by City Ordinance and shall be paid to the City Finance Officer by the owner or owners of any such abutting lots before the trunk sewer main shall be tapped for the use and benefit of such abutting property of property owner; and the City Finance Officer shall forthwith pay and deliver all monies received as a special tapping fee under this Ordinance to the said Lyle B. LaFromboise or Karen J. LaFromboise as reimbursement to them for the actual cost of all labor and material for the installation of said trunk sewer main.
(17) Skyline and Fairview Addition
(1) That in addition to all other tapping fees provided by Ordinance, a special trunk water main tapping fee of $2.75 per foot is hereby levied against the following described lots located in the following additions to the City of Mobridge, South Dakota, to-wit:
Skyline Addition:
Lots Five (5), Six (6), vacated Ninth Street of 66 feet, Eleven (11), Twelve (12), Thirteen (13) and Fourteen (14) in Block One (1)
Fairview Addition:
Lots Five (5), Six (60, Seven (7) and Eight (8) in Block One (1)
Lots Nine (9), Ten (10), Eleven (11), Twelve (12) and Thirteen (13) in Block Two (2)
169
In payment of pro Rata share of the cost of said lots for the installation of the six-inch trunk water main adjacent to and servicing said lots.
The special tapping fee herein provided shall be paid to the City Finance Officer by the owner or owners of any such property abutting upon said trunk water main before the water main shall be tapped for the use and benefit of such abutting property or property owners; and the City Finance Officer shall forthwith pay and deliver all monies received as such tapping fee to Francis A. Johnson of Mobridge, South Dakota, who has advanced the full cost of the installation of said trunk water main.
(2) That in addition to all other tapping fees provided by Ordinance, a special trunk sewer main tapping fee of $2.50 per front foot is hereby levied against the following lots located in the following additions to the City of Mobridge, South Dakota, to- wit:
Skyline Addition to the City of Mobridge:
Lots Five (5), Six (6), vacated Ninth Street of 66 Feet, Eleven (11), Twelve (12), Thirteen (13), Fourteen (14) and vacated Ninth Street 66 Feet in Block One (1)
Fairview Addition to the City of Mobridge:
Lots Four (4) and Five (5), Block One (1), Lots Twelve (12) and Thirteen (13), Block Two (2)
In payment of the pro rata share of the cost of said lots for the installation of the eight-inch trunk sewer main adjacent to and servicing said lots.
The special sewer tapping fee herein provided shall be paid to the City Finance Officer by the owner or owners of said property abutting upon said trunk sewer main before the sewer main shall be tapped for the use and benefit of said abutting property or property owners; and, the City Finance Officer shall forthwith pay and deliver all monies received under this Ordinance to Francis A. Johnson, who has paid heretofore the full amount of the cost of installation of said trunk sewer main.
(18) GREENWOOD CEMETERY
By request of Jerome T. Feist and Janice A. Feist, husband and wife that they be allowed to install a six inch water main in accordance with City specifications, along the south side of Greenwood Cemetery extending east from the present City of Mobridge main a distance of 1,000 feet, and, at their expense, excluding costs of fire hydrants; and,
The City of Mobridge has agreed to protect said Jerome T. Feist and Janice A Feist their expanse in the payment of the laying of said water main by adopting a special tapping fee ordinance as to all abutting property tapping into said trunk water main, expect the City of Mobridge; and,
The Cost of Jerome T. Feist and Janice A Feist of the 1,000 feet of six inch water main is $5.00 per foot; and,
170
The City of Mobridge shall control all tapping of said six inch main and no tapping is to be done of the six inch main line or any line tapped into said sic inch line without the consent of the City of Mobridge; and,
The City of Mobridge shall have no responsibility for maintenance of said line and further makes no guarantee of water pressure in said line; and,
Jerome T Fiest and Janice A. Fiest shall consent to the annexation of their property to the City of Mobridge whenever the City decides to annex said territory.
Now therefore, be it ordained by the Common Council of the City of Mobridge,
South Dakota;
That in lieu of special assessments being levied in payment of the trunk water main laid along the south side of the Greenwood Cemetery extending East from the present City water main a distance of 1,000 feet, in addition to the regular tapping fees provided by Chapter 11-1 and 11-2 of the Revised Ordinances of the City of Mobridge, South Dakota, 1967, as amended, all property, except the City of Mobridge property, abutting the water main projected East along the south side of the Greenwood Cemetery, being Feist trunk water main extension #1, shall pay a special tapping fee of $2,500 per front foot of property fronting on said line owned by the person requesting to tap the trunk water main.
The above special tapping fee shall be paid to the City Finance Officer by the owners of each or any of the said tracts of land abutting upon said trunk main extension; and all sums received from said special tapping fee shall be paid by the City Finance Officer to Jerome T. Feist and Janice A. Feist or their assigns. All fees to be paid before tapping.
That the City of Mobridge shall control all tapping of said six inch main and no tapping is to be done on the six-inch main or any time tapped into said six-inch line without the consent of the City of Mobridge. That the City of Mobridge shall have no responsibility for the maintenance of said six-inch line installed by Jerome T. Feist and Janice A. Feist and further the City makes no guarantee of water pressure in said line.
That Jerome T. Feist and Janice A. Feist consent to the annexation of their property described as Tract One (1) of Neumeyer’s Addition to Walworth County, South Dakota, located in the Southwest Quarter of the Southwest Quarter (SW ¼ SW ¼) of Section Seventeen (17) in Township One Hundred Twenty-four (124) North, Range Seventy-nine (79), West of the Fifth Principal Meridian, containing 8.14 acres, more or less at such time as the governing body of the City by resolution shall deem it to the best interest of the municipality that said territory be annexed to said City limits.
11-3-2 Supplemental Appropriation
The City of Mobridge in its 1974 Annual Appropriation Ordinance did not provide funds with which to purchase a capital investment in the Water Department of the City of Mobridge, SD consisting of an eight inch trunk water main from the municipal water treatment plant to the Montana Dakota Utilities Company elevated steel water storage tank, and all easements relating thereto, the MDU settling basin and pumps located in the municipal water treatment plant and the MDU 51 percent ownership of the water well in which municipality owns the
171
other 49 percent interest, for the sum of $15,000.00, payable in three annual installments of $5,000.00, each.
Now therefore, this Supplemental Appropriation Ordinance in the sum or $5,000.00, to be used as part payment in the purchase of the Montana Dakota Utilities Company eight inch trunk water main extending from the municipal water treatment plant to the Montana Dakota Utilities Co. elevated steel water tank together with assignments of easements, if any, in connection therewith, the Montana Dakota Utilities Company settling basin and pumps located in the municipal water treatment plant and the Montana Dakota Utilities Company 51 percent ownership of the water well in which the City of Mobridge now owns a 49 percent interest. Revenue in payment of said Supplemental Appropriation Ordinance is to be appropriated from Revenue Sharing funds heretofore received by the municipality.
CHAPTER 11-4 – SEWERS
11-4-1 Definitions
As used in this Ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires.
A. “City” means the City of Mobridge or its officers or employees authorized to perform the functions to which there is reference.
B. “Sewage” means water-carried wastes from residences, institutions, business buildings and other establishments.
C. “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
D. “Public Sewer” means a sewer common to the public and which is controlled by public authority.
E. “Municipal sewage system” or “System” means the entire sewage system of the City including the collection of sewage and industrial wastes, treatment and disposal thereof.
F. “Sanitary Sewer” means a sewer carrying sewage and to which storm, surface and ground water is not intentionally admitted.
G. “Industrial waste” means the liquid wastes resulting from any commercial manufacturing or industrial operation as distinct from sewage.
H. “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system, which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the building and conveys it outside the inner face of the building wall.
I. “Building sewer” means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.
J. “Person” means an individual, corporation (public or private), partnership or association.
172
K. “User” means the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises connected to the municipal sewage collection system.
L. “Service” means connection to the municipal sewage collection system and the right to the use of its facilities whether or not the facilities are in fact used.
M. “Notice” means a notice in writing directed to the owner or other person affected for the time specified by this Ordinance, stating briefly the condition, which is the reason for the notice and the consequences, which would result upon failure to comply with the terms of the notice. A notice shall be deemed given when either it is personally served on the person to whom it is directed or is mailed to him at his last known address. If the owner cannot be reached by mail so addressed, service may be made upon the occupant.
11-4-2 Use of the Municipal Sewer System Required
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the City, or in any area under its jurisdiction, any sewage or industrial wastes.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or any area under the city’s jurisdiction, any sewage or industrial waste unless it has been suitably treated as provided hereinafter.
C. Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, septic tank, cesspool or such facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
D. The owner of every residence, business or industrial building in the City abutting upon any street or alley in which public sewers are maintained, shall at his own expense install a sewer to dispose of all sewage and industrial wastes from the premises and connect it with the public sewer within 30 days after notice to do so, provided the public sewer is within 100 feet of his property line. If such owner fails to provide for such sewer after notice to do so, the City shall provide for the installation of such sewer and charge the cost against the property as a special assessment.
E. So long as a public sewer is not available under paragraph (d) above, the building sewer shall be connected to a private disposal system complying with other ordinances of the City and with all requirements of the Department of Public Health of the State of South Dakota. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to the property, the building sewer shall be connected to it and use of any septic tank, cesspool or other private disposal facility shall cease.
F. Any privy, septic tank, cesspool or other such facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage which is constructed or maintained in violation of any of the provisions of the Ordinance is declared to be a public nuisance and the City may abate the same in the manner provided by law.
11-4-3 Building Sewer and Connections and Street Excavations Relating Thereto
173
A. No building sewer shall be built, repaired, extended or connected with the public sewer without a permit.
B. All applications for sewer permits shall be made to the Water Superintendent by the person employed to do the work. The application shall be accompanied by a plan and drawings showing the proposed work.
C. Before permit is given on the application, the City may inspect the premises and the proposed installation to ascertain if the installation is proper and in compliance with local and state laws ordinances and regulations, and that the statements in the application are true. After the application has been approved by the Common Council and the applicant has paid to the City Finance Officer a permit or regular tap fee, or if special tapping fee Ordinance shall affect said property permit the amount of said special tapping fee, the City Finance Officer shall issue the permit.
D. Upon issuance of the permit, the person to whom it is granted may proceed with the work in accordance with the permit granted, at any time within six months after date of the granting thereof. The applicant shall notify the Water Superintendent of the progress of the work at such stages during the construction as the City may direct and in particular shall notify the Water Superintendent when the building sewer is complete and ready for connection with the public sewer, which shall not be later than one year from the date of the issuing of said permit. The City shall be given an opportunity to inspect the work after it is completed.
E. All connections with the public sewer shall be made with cast iron, vitrified clay tile, P.V.C. or A.B.S. plastic pipe, and shall comply with plumbing standards, if any, provided by the City Ordinance or laws or regulations of the State of South Dakota. All joints and connections shall be gas and watertight. The size, slope and depth of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the City, but in no event shall the internal diameter be less than four inches, and a slope of one-quarter inch to the foot shall be used wherever practical. The connections of the building sewer with the public sewer shall be made with an approved tapping saddle.
F. Each building shall be separately and independently connected with the public sewer.
G. All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights and other appropriate warning devices so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City.
H. The applicant shall indemnify and save harmless the City from any claims of injury, loss or damage to third parties arising out of the construction work; this provision is a condition to issuance of the permit, require the applicant to file a corporate surety bond for a period of two years.
11-4-4 Service Charges
(A) All owners and occupants of residential, apartments, mobile homes, hotel and Motels with and without combined apartments and sleeping rooms and business connections and Commercial connections to the Mobridge City municipal sewer system
174
shall, on a monthly basis, pay for the use thereof and for the availability of the sewer service an amount set by resolution of the City Council.
B) Wherever, by reason of special circumstances, the City Council finds the foregoing rates for any user or purpose, and whether within or without the City limits, are unjust or inequitable as applied to certain premises, said rates, if in the opinion of the City Council, be either too high or too low the City Council, by resolution, may fix and establish a fair and equitable Rate for such premises during the period of such special circumstances, which may be established by Resolution.
Surcharge Fees:
Out of the fees set forth above, there shall be removed and placed in a separate segregated account the monthly sum of $2.80 for each sewer connection which amount shall be deemed a surcharge for the sole purposes of repayment of the Clean Water State Revolving Fund loan C461016-04 all as set forth in the Resolution NO. 13-03. The $2.80 surcharge shall remain and continue to be placed in the separate segregated account until the Revenue Bonds for the Clean Water State Revolving Fund loan C461016-04 are fully paid.
11-4-5 Use of the Public Sewers
a. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial waters to any sanitary sewer.
b. Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the Superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet.
c. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers.
(1) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(2) Any waste waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in Sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two mg/1 as CN in wastes as discharged to the public sewer.
(3) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
(4) Solid or viscous substances in quantities of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, tags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, underground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshing, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc. either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
175
d. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the Superintendent that such waste can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his or her opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plan and other pertinent factors.
The substances prohibited are:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees F (65 degrees C).
(2) Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/1 or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees F (0 and 65 degrees C).
(3) Any garbage that has not been properly shred. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the (Superintendent).
(4) Any waters or waste containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated planting solutions whether neutralized or not.
(5) Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirements to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for such materials.
(6) Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the State, Federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
(7) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.
(8) Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
(9) Materials which exert or cause:
(a) Unusual concentrations of inert suspend solids (such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, lime residues) or of dissolved solids ( such as, but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate.)
176
(b) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetables tanning solutions.)
(c) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such
quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works.
(d) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting “slugs” as defined herein.
(10) Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
e. If any water or wastes are discharged or proposed to be discharged to the
Public sewers which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in paragraph D of this Section and within the judgment of the Superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance the Superintendent may:
(1) Reject the waters;
(2) Require the pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers.
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or,
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of paragraph J of this section.
If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
f. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the
Superintendent they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
g. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters
or wastes they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
h. When required by the Superintendent the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer
to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole,
177
when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the (Superintendent). The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
i. All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this Ordinance shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of “Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater” published by the American Public Health Association and shall be determined at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty-four (24) hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples.
j. No Statement contained in this section shall be construed as any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial concern whereby and industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the City for treatment subject to payment therefore by the industrial concern.
11-4-6 Guidelines to Establish an Equitable Sewer Users Fee
1. Sewer users Rate to be determined by prorating the total costs incurred among the users.
2. Sewer users charges to be based on quantity and quality.
3. Sewer user’s classification:
(a) Within the corporation limits:
1. Domestic
2. Institutional
3. Commercial
4. Industrial
(b) Outside corporate limits:
1. Domestic
2. Institutional
3. Industrial
4. Recreational
4. Definitions:
178
(a) Total cost:
1. Operation and maintenance costs derived form historical data plus estimated plant replacement costs to be determined form the previous year’s records and any anticipated cost changes must be reconciled to the estimated annual total costs which shall be the hydraulic unit cost.
2. The total cost as determined above shall be divided by the total flow in gallons as recorded by the flow meter at the waste treatment plant.
(b) Quality standards:
1. The annual average BOD suspended solids pH and colaform count as determined by weekly sample analysis of the plant influent.
2. Average sample of plant organic, chemical equilibrium shall be excluded from the average.
3. The source of plant influent detrimental to the operation of the plant shall be determined by available methods.
(c) Quality evaluations:
1. Sewer charges shall be based on the quantity of water used as determined by water meter readings modified to exclude flows not directed into sewage system.
2. Contributors to the City sewage system who may obtain part or all of their supply from sources other than the Mobridge water system shall install and maintain such measuring and recording devices in their sewer discharge as may be required by the City Council.
(d) Rate evaluation:
1. Unit rates shall be established for the various user classifications based on a predetermined average quality and quantity for each class considered and their relations to the community.
(e) Pretreatment requirements:
1. Sewer users contributing unacceptable flows in the sewage system shall be required to construct, operate and maintain, at their expense, such pretreatment sampling and measuring plant as shall be required by the City Council.
(f) References:
Federal Guideline
Equitable Recovery of Industrial Waste Treatment Costs in
Municipal Systems, October 1971 or as subsequently amended
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Office of Water Program
Washington, D.C. 20460
179
Pages 1 through 9, inclusive
11-4-7 Other provisions
a. Any duty or authority imposed on or given to the City Finance Officer may be performed and exercised by any employee of the City, designated by resolution of the common Council, which resolution of the common Council, which resolutions shall specify the duties and authority of the employee and to that extent the City Finance Officer will be relieved of his/her obligations herein.
b. The City Finance Officer and other duly authorized employees and agents of the City shall be permitted to enter upon any premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspection, measurement and testing and performing such other functions as may be required under the provisions of this Ordinance.
c. Nothing in this Ordinance shall contractually bind the City.
d. All ordinances, resolutions or motions or parts thereof in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this Ordinance shall not affect the validity of any other part of this Ordinance that can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
11-4-8 Penalties
Violation of any of the provisions of 11-4-2, 11-4-3 and 11-4-5 of this Ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor and any violator shall be fined not in excess of $ 200.00. Conviction shall not preclude civil liability to the City for any damage caused the City by the illegal act.
11-4-9 Establishing Fees and Regulations for Sewer Usage Outside the City Limits
a. Each owner or occupant of premises located outside the City limits of the City of Mobridge, South Dakota, connected to and using the City of Mobridge truck sewer system and facilities, shall pay a monthly sewer fee of two times the monthly sewer rental charge set for a similar user within the City limits of Mobridge, South Dakota.
b. All other parts of this chapter where applicable shall apply to sewer users outside the City limits of the City of Mobridge, South Dakota.
11-4-10 National Plumbing Code to Govern
All provisions of the National Plumbing Code adopted in this Ordinance, insofar as said Code relates to sewers, shall govern and take precedence over this chapter, and in the event that any provisions of this chapter conflict with said National Plumbing Code, the provisions of said Code shall govern.
11-4-11 Cesspools, Septic Tanks and Drainage Fields
That all applications for construction of dwelling, business or commercial improvements where no direct sanitary sewer connection is available and cesspools, septic tanks and drainage fields are to be constructed shall require full compliance with all rules,
180
regulations and requirements of the State of South Dakota Environmental Protection Agency under Chapter 34-4-1 of the South Dakota Compiled Laws of 1967 as amended effective march 1, 1975 and no application shall be approved by the Common Council except that the same shall be subject to said regulations and subject to inspection during construction for proof of compliance therewith.
Upon completion before such cesspool, septic tank and drainage field is put into use and operated the owner shall obtain a certificate from the City of Mobridge Zoning Officer.
11-4-12 Annexation – Termination
That any sewer services serving property outside the corporate limits of the City of Mobridge on the effective date shall be continued in accordance with existing Ordinances and/or as per contract between such sewer user and the City of Mobridge. In the event the property receiving sewer services shall refuse or neglect to petition for annexation to the City of Mobridge, after notice in writing by mailing is given, said sewer services shall be terminated 90 days after mailing of said notice unless said property is annexed within that period of time.
TITLE 12 – FRANCHISES AND EASEMENTS
CHAPTER 12-1 – MDU
CHAPTER 12-2.1 – CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
CHAPTER 12-1 – MDU
12-1-1 Section I
For convenience, herein, said municipal corporation is designated and referred to as “Municipality” and Montana-Dakota Utilities Co. is designated and referred to as “Grantee”. Any reference to either includes their respective successors and assigns.
12-1-2 Section II
There is hereby granted to Montana-Dakota Utilities Co., a corporation, Grantee, its successors and assigns, subject to the limitations herein stated, the right and franchise to occupy and use the streets, alleys, and public grounds of the municipality as now, or hereafter constituted, for the purpose of constructing, maintaining, and operating, within, upon, in and under the same, an electric distribution system for transmitting and distributing electric energy for all public and private uses.
181
12-1-3 Section lll
Grantee shall maintain an efficient distribution system for furnishing electric energy for public and private use during twenty-four (24) hours of each day.
12-1-4 Section VI
This franchise shall not be exclusive and shall not be construed to prevent the Municipality from granting to any other party the right to use the streets, alleys and public grounds of the Municipality for like purpose.
12-1-5 Section V
The Municipality reserves the right it may have, under its police power, or otherwise, to control or regulate the use of said streets, alleys and public grounds by Grantee.
12-1-6 Section Vl
Grantee shall indemnify and save and hold the Municipality harmless from any loss or damage due to the construction, installation, and maintenance of the distribution system, and its use of the streets, alleys and public grounds of the Municipality.
12-1-7 Section Vll
Grantee shall have the right to assign this franchise to any part, or corporation, but all obligations of the grantee hereunder shall be binding upon its successors and assigns.
12-1-8 Section Vlll
Within thirty (30) days after passage and final approval of this Ordinance, Grantee shall file with the Clerk or Finance Officer of the Municipality, its written acceptance of this franchise.
12-1-9 Section IX
The franchise shall continue and remain in full force and effect for a period of twenty (20) years from the date of its final passage by the governing body of the Municipality.
CHAPTER 12-2 – MOBRIDGE CABLE TV
Repealed. (2005ORD815) (1998ORD746) (1972ORD485)
CHAPTER 12-2.1 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
12-2.1-1. SHORT TITLE AND DEFINITIONS
Short Title. This Franchise Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Cable Communications Ordinance.
Definitions. For the purposes of this Franchise, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context,
182
words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The word "may" is directory and discretionary and not mandatory.
"Basic Cable Service" means any service tier which includes the lawful retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any public, educational, and governmental access programming required by the franchise to be carried on the basic tier. Basic Cable Service as defined herein shall not be inconsistent with 47 U.S.C. § 543(b)(7) (1993).
"Cable Programming Service" means any Video Programming provided over a Cable System, regardless of service tier, including installation or rental of equipment used for the receipt of such Video Programming, other than:
Video Programming carried on the Basic Service Tier;
Video Programming offered on a pay-per-channel or pay-per-program basis; or
A combination of multiple channels of pay-per-channel or pay-per-program Video Programming offered on a multiplexed or time-shifted basis so long as the combined service:
consists of commonly-identified Video Programming; and
is not bundled with any regulated tier of service.
Cable Programming Service as defined herein shall not be inconsistent with the definition as set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 543(l)(2) (1993) and 47 C.F.R. 76.901(b) (1993).
"Cable Service" means the one-way transmission to Subscribers of Video Programming, or other programming service, and Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such Video Programming or other programming service.
"Cable System" or "System" means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide Cable Service which includes Video Programming and which is provided to multiple Subscribers within a community, but such term does not include:
a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations;
a facility that serves Subscribers without using any public right-of-way;
a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of 47 U.S.C. §§ 201 et seq., except that such facility shall be considered a Cable System (other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C. § 541 (c) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of Video Programming directly to Subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services;
an open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. § 653; or
any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems.
"City" means City of Mobridge, a municipal corporation, in the State of South Dakota, acting by and through its City Council.
"City Council" means the Mobridge, South Dakota City Council.
"Drop" means the cable that connects the ground block on the Subscriber's residence to the nearest feeder cable of the System.
"FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed, designated or elected agent or successor.
“Franchise” means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof (including a renewal of an authorization which has been granted subject to 47 U.S.C. § 546) issued by a franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a Cable System.
"Grantee" is Midcontinent Communications, G.P., its agents and employees, lawful successors, transferees or assignees.
"Installation" means the connection of the System from feeder cable to the point of connection, including Standard Installations and custom installations.
183
(l) "Lockout Device" means an optional mechanical or electrical accessory to a Subscriber's terminal which inhibits the viewing of a certain program, certain channel, or certain channels provided by way of the Cable Communication System.
(m) Open Video Services or OVS means any video programming Services provided to any person by a Franchisee certified by the FCC to operate an Open Video System pursuant to Section 47 U.S.C. 573, as may be amended, regardless of the Facilities used.
(n) "Pay Television" means the delivery over the System of pay-per-channel or pay-per-program audio-visual signals to Subscribers for a fee or charge, in addition to the charge for Basic Cable Service or Cable Programming Services.
(o) "Person" is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or other legal entity.
(p) “Standard Installation” means any residential installation which can be completed using a Drop of one hundred fifty (150) feet or less.
(q) "Street" means the surface of, and the space above and below, any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, path, court, sidewalk, parkway, or drive, or any easement or right-of-way now or hereafter held by City.
(r) "Subscriber" means any Person who lawfully receives Cable Television Service.
(s) “Video Programming” means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station. (2005ORD815)
184
12-2.1-2 GRANT OF AUTHORITY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
Franchise Required. It shall be unlawful for any Person to construct, operate or maintain a Cable Communications System or Open Video System or other multichannel video service in City unless such Person or the Person for whom such action is being taken shall have first obtained and shall currently hold a valid Franchise Ordinance. It shall also be unlawful for any Person to provide OVS Service or Cable Service in City unless such Person shall have first obtained and shall currently hold a valid Franchise.
Grant of Franchise. This Franchise is granted pursuant to the terms and conditions contained herein.
Grant of Nonexclusive Authority.
The Grantee shall have the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate, and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the Streets, alleys, public ways and public places now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto in City, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in City of a Cable Communications System as herein defined.
This Franchise shall be nonexclusive, and City reserves the right to grant a similar use of said Streets, alleys, public ways and places, to any Person at any time during the period of this Franchise, provided, however, that any additional Cable Franchise grants shall be under the same substantive terms and conditions as this Franchise.
Grantee shall have the authority to use City easements, public rights-of-way, Streets and other conduits for the distribution of Grantee's System. The City shall require all developers of future subdivisions to allow and accommodate the construction of the System as part of any provisions for utilities to serve such subdivisions.
Franchise Term.
(a) This Franchise shall be in effect for a period of fifteen (15) years from the date of acceptance by Grantee (“Effective Date”), unless renewed, revoked or terminated sooner as herein provided. City may conduct a review of Grantee’s performance at the fifth and tenth anniversary of the Effective Date.
Previous Franchises. Upon acceptance by Grantee as required by Section 12 herein, this Franchise shall supersede and replace any previous Ordinance or Agreement granting a Franchise to Grantee to own, operate and maintain a Cable Communications System within City. Ordinance No. 681 is hereby expressly repealed.
Rules of Grantee. The Grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable said Grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligation under this Franchise.
Territorial Area Involved. This Franchise is granted for the corporate boundaries of City, as it exists from time to time. In the event of annexation by City, or as development occurs, any new territory shall become part of the area covered, provided, however, that Grantee shall not be required to extend service beyond its present System boundaries unless there is a minimum of ten (10) homes per quarter cable mile as measured from the last fiber node or terminating amplifier. Access to Cable Service shall not be denied to any group of potential residential cable Subscribers because of the income of the residents of the area in which such group resides. Grantee shall be given a reasonable period of time to construct and activate cable plant to service annexed or newly developed areas.
Written Notice. All notices, reports, or demands required to be given in writing under this Franchise shall be deemed to be given when delivered personally to any officer of Grantee or City's Administrator of this Franchise or forty-eight (48) hours after it is deposited in the United
185
States mail in a sealed envelope, with registered or certified mail postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the party to whom notice is being given, as follows:
If to City: City of Mobridge
114 1st Ave. E.
Mobridge, South Dakota 57601-2692
Attn: City Administrator
If to Grantee: Midcontinent
Communications, G.P.
5001 W. 41st Street
Sioux Falls, SD 57106-1424
Attn: W. Tom Simmons
Such addresses may be changed by either party upon notice to the other party given as provided in this Section.
Drops to Public Buildings. Grantee shall provide Standard Installation of one (1) cable Drop, one (1) cable outlet, and monthly Basic Cable Service without charge to two (2) City-owned building chosen by the City and located in the City within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the System, excluding airports, nursing homes, hotels, residences of any kind, or other such public-use facilities. Grantee will also provide Standard Installation of one (1) cable Drop, one (1) cable outlet, and monthly Basic Cable Service without charge to all public and private elementary and secondary schools, excluding home schools, located in the City within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the System, upon request of the school system. No redistribution of the free Basic Cable Service provided pursuant to this Section shall be allowed. Additional Drops and/or outlets in any of the above locations will be provided by Grantee at the cost of Grantee's time and material. Alternatively, at the institution's request, said institution may add outlets at its own expense, as long as such installation meets Grantee's standards and provided that any fees for Cable Communications Services are paid. Nothing herein shall be construed as requiring Grantee to extend the System to serve additional institutions as may be designated by City. Grantee shall have one (1) year from the date of City Council designation of additional institution(s) to complete construction of the Drop and outlet. (2005ORD815)
12-2.1-3 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
1.) Construction Codes and Permits.
Grantee shall obtain all required permits from City before commencing any construction upgrade or extension of the System, including the opening or disturbance of any Street, or private or public property within City.
The City shall impose no permit fees upon Grantee given that Grantee pays Franchise Fees pursuant to this Franchise.
The City shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work performed pursuant to the provisions of the Franchise and to make such tests at its own expense as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of the Franchise and applicable provisions of local, state and federal law.
2.) Repair of Streets and Property. Any and all Streets or public property or private property, which are disturbed or damaged during the construction, repair, replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance or reconstruction of the System shall be promptly and fully restored by Grantee, at its expense, to a condition as good as that prevailing prior to Grantee's work.
186
3.) Conditions on Street Use.
(a) If at any time during the period of this Franchise City shall elect to alter, or change the grade or location of any Street, alley or other public way, the Grantee shall, at its own expense, upon reasonable notice by City, remove and relocate its poles, wires, cables, conduits, manholes and other fixtures of the System, and in each instance comply with the standards and specifications of City. If City reimburses other occupants of the Street, Grantee shall be likewise reimbursed.
(b) The Grantee shall, on request of any Person holding a moving permit issued by City, temporarily move its wires or fixtures to permit the moving of buildings with the expense of such temporary removal to be paid by the Person requesting the same, and the Grantee shall be given not less than ten (10) days advance notice to arrange for such temporary changes.
(c) The Grantee shall have the authority to trim any trees upon and overhanging the Streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public easements of City so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the Grantee.
Nothing contained in this Franchise shall relieve any Person from liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid injuring Grantee's facilities.
4.) Undergrounding of Cable.
(a) In all areas of City where all other utility lines are placed underground, Grantee shall construct and install its cables, wires and other facilities underground.
(b) In any area of City where one or more public utilities are aerial, Grantee may construct and install its cables, wires and other facilities from the same pole with the consent of the owner of the pole.
5,) Safety Requirements. The Grantee shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care and shall install and maintain in use nothing less than commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. (2005ORD815)
12-2.1-4 DESIGN PROVISIONS
Operation and Maintenance of System. The Grantee shall render effective service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruption, to the extent feasible, shall be preceded by notice in accordance with Section 2.8 herein and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the System.
Technical Standards. The technical standards used in the operation of the System shall comply, at minimum, with the technical standards promulgated by the FCC relating to cable communications systems pursuant to the Federal Communications Commission's rules and regulations and found in Title 47, Section 76.601 to 76.617, as may be amended or modified from time to time.
Lockout Device. Upon the request of a Subscriber, Grantee shall provide by sale or lease a Lockout Device. (2005ORD815)
12-2.1-5 SERVICES PROVISIONS
Subscriber Inquiry and Complaint Procedures. Grantee shall have a publicly listed toll-free telephone number and be operated so as to receive Subscriber complaints and requests on a twenty-four (24) hour-a-day, seven (7) days-a-week basis.
187
Refund Policy. In the event a Subscriber established or terminates service and receives less than a full month's service, Grantee shall prorate the monthly rate on the basis of the number of days in the period for which service was rendered to the number of days in the billing. (2005ORD815)
12-2.1-6 EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS
Grantee shall dedicate two (2) channels for Educational and Governmental use (“EG Access”) to the City for public noncommercial, noncompetitive uses. Grantee shall have the right to use any portion of said channels that is not being used by the City.
All residential Subscribers who receive all or any part of the total services offered on the System shall be eligible to receive said access channel at no additional charge. (2005ORD815)
12-2.1-7 OPERATION AND ADMINISTRATION PROVISIONS
Indemnification of City.
City, its officers, boards, committees, commissions, elected officials, employees and agents shall not be liable for any loss or damage to any real or personal property of any Person, or for any injury to or death of any Person, arising out of or in connection with the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of, or other action or event with respect to the System.
Grantee shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless City, its officers, boards, committees, commissions, elected officials, employees and agents, from and against all liability, damages, and penalties which they may legally be required to pay as a result of the exercise of the Franchise, except claims because of EG programming or, the City’s operation, administration, promotion or management of the EG access channel(s) or any use of Internet
Services in public institutions.
Nothing in this Franchise relieves a Person from liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid injuring the Grantee's facilities while performing work connected with grading, regarding, or changing the line of a Street or public place or with the construction or reconstruction of a sewer or water system.
In order for City to assert is rights to be indemnified, defended, and held harmless, City must with respect to each claim:
Promptly notify Grantee in writing of any claim or legal proceeding which gives rise to such right;
Afford Grantee the opportunity to participate in and fully control any compromise, settlement or other resolution or disposition of any claim or proceeding; and
Fully cooperate with reasonable requests of Grantee, at Grantee's expense, in its participation in, and control, compromise, settlement or resolution or other disposition of such claim or proceeding subject to paragraph two (2) above.
Insurance.
As a part of the indemnification provided in Section 7.1, but without limiting the foregoing, Grantee shall file with its acceptance of this Franchise, and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect at its sole expense, a comprehensive general liability insurance policy, including contractual liability coverage, in protection of City in its capacity as such. The policies of insurance shall be in the sum of not less than Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($500,000) for personal injury or death of any one Person, and One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) for personal injury or death of two or more Persons in any one occurrence, Five Hundred
188
Thousand Dollars ($500,000) for property damage to any one Person and One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) for property damage resulting from any one act or occurrence.
The policy or policies of insurance shall be maintained by Grantee in full force and effect during the entire term of the Franchise. Each policy of insurance shall contain a statement on its face that the insurer will not cancel the policy or fail to renew the policy, whether for nonpayment of premium, or otherwise, and whether at the request of Grantee or for other reasons, except after thirty (30) days' advance written notice have been provided to City.
Franchise Fee.
Grantee shall pay to City a franchise fee of three percent (3%) of revenue for Basic Cable Service. The fee shall be payable monthly and shall be accompanied by a brief report showing the basis for the computation of the fee. (2005ORD815)
12-2.1-8 REVOCATION, ABANDONMENT, AND SALE OR TRANSFER
1.) City's Right to Revoke. In addition to all other rights which City has pursuant to law or equity, City reserves the right to revoke, terminate or cancel this Franchise, and all rights and privileges pertaining thereto, if after the hearing required by Section 8.2(b) herein, it is determined that Grantee has violated any material provision of this Franchise.
2.) Procedures for Revocation.
(a) City shall provide Grantee with written notice of a cause for revocation and the intent to revoke and shall allow Grantee sixty (60) days subsequent to receipt of the notice in which to correct the violation or to provide adequate assurance of performance in compliance with the Franchise. Together with the notice required herein, City shall provide Grantee with written findings of fact which are the basis of the revocation.
(b) Grantee shall be provided the right to a public hearing affording due process before the City Council prior to revocation, which public hearing shall follow the sixty (60) day notice provided in paragraph (a) above. City shall provide Grantee with written notice of its decision together with written findings of fact supplementing said decision.
After the public hearing and upon written determination by City to revoke the Franchise, Grantee may appeal said decision with an appropriate state or federal court or agency.
During the appeal period, the Franchise shall remain in full force and effect unless the term thereof sooner expires.
3.) Upon satisfactory correction by Grantee of the violation upon which said notice was given, the initial notice shall become void.
Abandonment of Service. Grantee may not abandon the System or any portion thereof without having first given three (3) months written notice to City.
4.) Sale or Transfer of Franchise. No sale or transfer of this Franchise shall take place without the written approval of the City, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. All of the rights, privileges, obligations, duties, and liabilities created by this Franchise shall pass to and be binding upon the successor or assign of Grantee. Said approval shall not be required where Grantee grants a security interest in its Franchise and assets to secure an indebtedness. (2005ORD815)
12-2.1-9 PROTECTION OF INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS
Discriminatory Practices Prohibited. Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against Subscribers or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex or age. Grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state, and city laws, and all executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination.
189
Subscriber Privacy. Grantee shall comply with the terms of 47 U.S.C. § 551 relating to the protection of Subscriber privacy. (2005ORD815)
12-2.1-10 UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
1.) Unauthorized Connections or Modifications Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any firm, Person, group, company, corporation, or governmental body or agency, without the express consent of the Grantee, to make or possess, or assist anybody in making or possessing, any connection, extension, or division, whether physically, acoustically, inductively, electronically or otherwise, with or to any segment of the System.
2.) Removal or Destruction Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any firm, Person, group, company, corporation, or government body or agency to willfully interfere, tamper, remove, obstruct, or damage, or assist thereof, any part or segment of the System for any purpose whatsoever.
Penalty.
Any firm, Person, group, company, corporation or government body or agency found guilty of violating this Section may be fined not less than Twenty Dollars ($20.00) and the costs of the action nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) and the costs of the action for each and every subsequent offense. Each continuing day of the violation shall be considered a separate occurrence. (2005ORD815)
12-2.1-11 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Franchise Renewal.
Any renewal of this Franchise shall be done in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.
Amendment of Franchise Ordinance.
Grantee and City may agree, from time to time, to amend this Franchise. Such written amendments may be made at any time if City and Grantee agree that such an amendment will be in the public interest or if such an amendment is required due to changes in federal, state or local laws. City shall act pursuant to local law pertaining to the ordinance amendment process. (2005ORD815)
12-2.1-12 PUBLICATION, EFFECTIVE DATE AND ACCEPTANCE
1.) Publication; Effective Date. This Franchise shall be published in accordance with applicable South Dakota law. The effective date of this Franchise shall be the date of acceptance by Grantee in accordance with the provisions of Section 12.2. The Grantee shall assume the cost of publication of this franchise as such publication is required by law and such is payable upon the Grantee’s filing of acceptance of this Franchise.
2.) Acceptance. Grantee shall accept this Franchise by executing same. Such acceptance by the Grantee shall be deemed the grant of this Franchise for all purposes.
Upon acceptance of this Franchise, Grantee shall be bound by all the terms and conditions contained herein.
Grantee shall accept this Franchise in the following manner:
This Franchise will be properly executed and acknowledged by Grantee and delivered to City. With its acceptance, Grantee shall also deliver any insurance certificates required herein that have not previously been delivered. (2005ORD815)
190
12-2.1-13 ORDINANCE REPEALED
All ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed. (2005ORD815)
TITLE 13-GENERAL PENALTY REPEALING CLAUSE
CHAPTER 13-1- GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 13-2- REPEALING CLAUSE
CHAPTER 13-1- GENERAL PENALTY
13-1-1 General Penalty
Except as in this Ordinance otherwise specifically provided, any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance or failing to comply with any of the provisions thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine and/or jail not exceeding the penalty set by SDCL 22-6-2. (2006ORD842)
CHAPTER 13-2- REPEALING CLAUSE
13-2-1 Conflicting Ordinances Repealed
All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance or relating to the subject matter of this Ordinance and not re-enacted as part of this Ordinance, except as stated in this chapter, are hereby repealed; provided however, that nothing herein shall be construed as repealing any special Ordinances, appropriation ordinances, franchise ordinances, levying ordinances for the issuance of bonds or special ordinances for the issuance of bonds or special ordinances of like character, nor shall this ordinance repeal or modify the provisions of any zoning ordinances or other ordinances requiring a special method of adoption, nor shall this Ordinance repeal or modify the provisions of any resolution heretofore adopted by the City of Mobridge unless the provisions of this Ordinance either modify, repeal or amend such resolution; and all such Ordinances and resolutions shall remain in full force and effect.
13-2-2 Publication and Effect
This Ordinance shall be printed or photocopied as may be directed by the City Council and shall take effect immediately upon its adoption and the completed publication of notice as provided SDCL 9-19-17 and all acts amendable.
13-2-3 Validity
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder of this Ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
191
TITLE 14 TAXATION
CHAPTER 14-1 - SALES, SERVICE AND USE TAX - REPEALED
CHAPTER 14-2 - ADDITIONAL ONE PERCENT RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE TAX AND USE TAX - REPEALED
CHAPTER 14-3 MUNICIPAL SALES AND SERVICE TAX AND USE TAX
CHAPTER 14-4 GROSS RECEIPTS TAX
CHAPTER 14-1 SALES, SERVICE AND USE TAX -Repealed
CHAPTER 14-2 ADDITIONAL ONE PERCENT RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE TAX AND USE TAX - Repealed
14-3-1 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide additional needed revenue for the Municipality Mobridge, Walworth County, South Dakota, by imposing a municipal retail sale and use tax pursuant to the powers granted to the municipality by the State of South Dakota, by SDCL 10-52 entitled Uniform Municipal Non-Ad Valorem Tax Law, and acts amendatory thereto. (2003 ORD 799)
14-3-2 EFFECTIVE DATE AND ENACTMENT OF TAX.
From and after the first day of January, 2006, there is hereby imposed as a municipal retail occupational sales and service tax upon the privilege of engaging in business a tax measured by two percent (2%) on the gross receipts of all persons engaged in business within the jurisdiction of the Municipality of Mobridge, Walworth County, South Dakota, who are subject to the South Dakota Retail Occupational Sales and Service Tax, SDCL 10-45 and acts amendatory thereto. (2003 ORD 799) (2005 ORD 818)
14-3-3 USE TAX.
In addition, there is hereby imposed an excise tax on the privilege of use, storage and consumption within the jurisdiction of the municipality of tangible personal property or services purchased from and after the first of January, 2004, at the same rate as the municipal sales and service tax upon all transactions or use, storage and consumption which are subject to the South Dakota Use Tax Act, SDCL 10-46, and acts amendatory thereto. (2003 ORD 799)
14-3-4 COLLECTION.
Such tax is levied pursuant to authorization granted by SDCL 10-52 and acts amendatory thereto, and shall be collected by the South Dakota Department of Revenue and Regulation in accordance with the same rules and regulations applicable to the State Sales Tax and under such additional rules and regulations as the Secretary of Revenue and Regulation of the State of South Dakota shall lawfully prescribe. (2003 ORD 799)
14-3-5 INTERPRETATION.
192
It is declared to be the intention of this ordinance and the taxes levied hereunder that the same shall be interpreted and construed in the same manner as all sections of the South Dakota Retail Occupational Sales and Service Act, SDCL 10-45 and acts amendatory thereto and the South Dakota Use Tax, SDCL 10-46 and acts amendatory hereto, and that this shall be considered a similar tax except for the rate thereof to that tax. (2003 ORD 799)
14-3-6 PENALTY.
Any person failing or refusing to make reports or payments prescribed by this ordinance and the rules and regulations relating to the ascertainment and collection of the tax herein levied shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not more than $200 or imprisoned in the municipal jail for thirty (30) days or both such fine and imprisonment. In addition, all such collection remedies authorized by SDCL 10-45, and acts amendatory thereto, and SDCL 10-46, and acts amendatory thereto are hereby authorized for the collection of these excise taxes by the Department of Revenue and Regulation. (2003 ORD 799)
14-3-7 SEPARABILITY.
If any provision of this ordinance is declared unconstitutional or the application thereof to any person or circumstances held invalid the constitutionality of the remainder of the ordinance and applicability thereof to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (2003 ORD 799)
14-3-8 ADMINISTRATIVE ACT.
This ordinance is adopted to amend the existing sales tax ordinances in order to comply with House Bill 1002 and Senate Bill 76 passed during the 2003 South Dakota Legislative Session. Any changes to the existing sales tax ordinance are administrative and therefore not subject to referendum. (2003 ORD 799)
14-3-9 REPEAL.
Effective January 1, 2004, Chapter 14-1 Sales, Service and Use Tax and Chapter 14-2, Additional One Percent Retail Sales and Service Tax and Use Tax are hereby repealed. Any ordinance inconsistent with or in conflict with this ordinance is hereby repealed. (2003 ORD 799; 2000 ORD 767; 1999 ORD 757; 1995 ORD 725; 1988 ORD 666)
CHAPTER 14-4 GROSS RECEIPTS TAX
14-4-1. PURPOSE.
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide additional needed revenue for the Municipality of Mobridge, Walworth County, South Dakota, by imposing a municipal gross receipts tax pursuant to the powers granted to the municipality by the State of South Dakota, by SDCL 10-52A, and acts amendatory thereto.
193
14-4-2. EFFECTIVE DATE AND ENACTMENT OF TAX.
From and after June 30, 2014, there is hereby imposed a municipal gross receipts tax of One Percent (1%) upon the gross receipts from the sale of leases or rentals of hotel, motel, campsites or other lodging accommodations within the municipality for periods of less than twenty-eight (28) consecutive days, the sale of alcoholic beverages as defined in SDCL 35-1-1, or establishments where the public is invited to eat, dine or purchase and carry out prepared food for immediate consumption. The tax applied to the gross receipts of all persons engaged in business within the jurisdiction of the Municipality of Mobridge, Walworth County, South Dakota, who are subject to the South Dakota Retail Occupational Sales and Service Tax, SDCL 10-45 and acts amendatory thereto.
14-4-3. COLLECTION.
Such tax is levied pursuant to authorization granted by SDCL 10-52A and acts amendatory thereto, and shall be collected by the South Dakota Department of Revenue in accordance with the same rules and regulations applicable to the State Sales Tax and under such additional rules and regulations as the Secretary of Revenue of the State of South Dakota shall lawfully prescribe.
14-4-4. INTERPRETATION.
It is declared to be the intention of this ordinance and the taxes levied hereunder that the same shall be interpreted and construed in the same manner as all sections of the South Dakota Retail Occupational Sales and Service Act, SDCL 10-45 and acts amendatory thereto, and that this shall be considered a similar tax except for the rate thereof to that tax.
14-4-5. USE OF REVENUE.
Any revenues received under this ordinance may be used for the purposes of land acquisition, architectural fees, construction costs, payments for civic center, auditorium, or athletic facility buildings, including the maintenance, staffing, and operations of such facilities and the promotion and advertising of the city, its facilities, attractions, and activities. Unless and until hereafter modified, the proceeds of this tax shall be used and distributed as follows:
1. The first $2,083.33 of the revenues per month from the tax shall be held in a special fund and applied to reduce the indebtedness incurred for the construction costs of the new Mobridge Swimming pool until the indebtedness is fully paid.
2. The remaining revenues from the tax each month shall be distributed to the Mobridge Chamber of Commerce for administration of which 60% of the revenue shall be used by the Mobridge Chamber of Commerce and 30% shall be used by the North Central South Dakota Economic Development committee of the Mobridge Chamber of Commerce and the remaining 10% of the revenues shall be retained by the Mobridge Chamber of Commerce and used exclusively for the operation of the visitor center including salaries and administrative expenses.
14-4-6. PENALTY.
Any person failing or refusing to make reports or payments prescribed by this ordinance and the rules and regulations relating to the ascertainment and collection of the tax herein levied
194
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not more than $200.00 or imprisoned in the municipal jail for thirty (30) days or both such fine and imprisonment. In addition, all such collection remedies authorized by SDCL 10-45, and acts amendatory thereto, are hereby authorized for the collection of these excise taxes by the Department of Revenue.
14-4-7. SEPARABILITY.
If any provision of this ordinance is declared unconstitutional or the application thereof to any person or circumstances held invalid the constitutionality of the remainder of the ordinance and applicability thereof of other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
195
ORDINANCE NO. 932
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF MOBRIDGE, SOUTH
DAKOTA ADOPTING THE 2012 EDITION OF THE INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
BE IT ORDAINED by the City of Mobridge, South Dakota:
Section 1. That a certain document, a copy of which are on file in the office of the Finance Officer of the City of Mobridge, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Mobridge, in the State of South Dakota for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each of all the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the City of Mobridge are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 2 of this ordinance.
Section 2. The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. CITY OF MOBRIDGE, SOUTH DAKOTA
Section 103.5 “actual cost to City”
Section 112.4 “actual cost to City”
Section 302.4 10 INCHES
Section 304.14
Section 602.3
Section 602.4 January 1 to December 1
Section 3. That the 2006 International Property Code and all other ordinances or parts of laws in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
Section 4. That if any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this legislation is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. The City of Mobridge hereby declares that it would have passed this law, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact the any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional.
Section 5. That nothing in this legislation or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect and suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in Section 3 of this law; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affection by this legislation.
Section 6. That the Finance Officer is hereby ordered and directed to cause this legislation to be published.
196
Section 7. That this law and the rules, regulations, provisions, requirements, orders and matters established and adopted hereby shall take effect and be in full force and effect twenty days from and after the date of its final passage, adoption and publication.
1
City of Mobridge
2020
Revised Zoning Ordinances
of the City of Mobridge, South Dakota
Zoning Regulations
Subdivision Regulations
Effective: August 19, 2020
2
2020 REVISED ZONING ORDINANCES
CITY OF MOBRIDGE
SOUTH DAKOTA
CITY COMMISSIONERS:
Gene Cox – Mayor
Heather Beck – City Administrator
Heather Beck – Finance Officer
Jeff Landreaux – Council Member
Curtis Reichert – Council Member
Jade Mound – Council Member
Kyle Jensen – Council Member
Tony Yellowboy – Council Member
Randy Carlson – Council Member
Austin Hoffman – City Attorney
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
Jacqueline Rawstern – Zoning Administrator
3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1 SHORT TITLE ..................................................................................8
2 PURPOSE AND JURISDICTION .....................................8
2.01 Purpose
2.02 Area of Jurisdiction
3 LEGAL PROVISIONS........................................................9
3.01 Minimum Requirements and Conflict
3.02 Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances
3.03 Separablility
3.04 Conformance Required
3.05 Pending Applications
3.06 Effective Date
3.07 Violations, Penalties
3.08 Remedies
4 DEFINITIONS.....................................................................11
4.01 Definitions
4.02 STORAGE CONTAINERS
5 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS AND
OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICT MAP.............................34
5.01 Zoning Districts
5.02 Zoning District Map
5.03 Zoning District Boundaries
5.04 Zoning Map Change
5.05 Zoning Map Replacement
6 GENERAL ZONING DISTRICT PROVISIONS……….37
6.01 General
6.02 Zoning Affects Every Building and Use
6.03 Required Lot Area or other Open Space Cannot be Used
6.04 Obstruction to Vision at Street Intersection Prohibited
7 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES.........38
7.01 Intent
7.02 Non-Conforming Uses
7.03 Non-Conforming Structures
7.04 Repairing Damaged Building
4
8 AGRICULTURE DISTRICT (AG)...................................40
8.01 Statement of Purpose
8.02 Permitted Uses
8.03 Prohibited Uses
8.04 Area and Dimensional Standards
8.05 Dwellings on Farms
8.06 Requirements for Accessory Structures
9 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-1) ......... 42
9.01 Statement of Purpose
9.02 Permitted Uses
9.03 Prohibited Uses
9.04 Area of Dimensional Standards
9.05 Requirements for Accessory Structures
10 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-2) .....................................45
10.01 Statement of Purpose
10.02 Permitted Uses
10.03 Prohibited Uses
10.04 Area of Dimensional Standards
10.05 Requirements for Accessory Structures
11 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL AND
MOBILE HOME DISTRICT (R-3) .....................................48
11.01 Statement of Purpose
11.02 Permitted Uses
11.03 Prohibited Uses
11.04 Area of Dimensional Standards
11.05 Requirements for Accessory Structures
12 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (GC).................51
12.01 Statement of Purpose
12.02 Permitted Uses
12.03 Prohibited Uses
12.04 Area and Dimensional Standards
13 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (HC)................54
13.01 Statement of Purpose
13.02 Permitted Uses
13.03 Prohibited Uses
13.04 Area and Dimensional Standards
5
14 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-1) ...........................56
14.01 Statement of Purpose
14.02 Permitted Uses
14.03 Area of Dimensional Standards
15 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-2) .........................59
15.01 Statement of Purpose
15.02 Permitted Uses
15.03 Area and Dimensional Standards
16 CONSERVATION DISTRICT (CN) ................................61
16.01 Statement of Purpose
16.02 Permitted Uses
16.03 Prohibited Uses
16.04 Area and Dimensional Standards
16.05 Development Standards in Designated Flood Plain Areas
16.06 Establishment of Boundaries in Flood Plain Areas
16.07 Warning and Disclaimer of Responsibility
17 SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS………………………….....64
17.01 General Provisions
17.02 Signs in the “R-1”, “R-2”, “R-3”, and “CN” Districts
17.03 Signs in the “GC” district
17.04 Signs in the “HC”, “I-1”, “I-2”, and “AG” Districts
17.05 Billboard Signs
17.06 Sign as Obstruction/Deception
17.07 Sign Responsibility, Maintenance, and Removal
17.08 Nonconforming Signs
18SPECIAL USE REGULATIONS......................................68
18.01 Exceptions to Applications
18.02 Home Occupations
18.03 Group Housing Planned Unit Development
18.04 Mobile Home Parks
18.05 Mineral Exploration, Extraction Storage and Processing
18.06 Off-Street Parking and Loading Standards
18.07 Airport Standards
6
19 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE AND ENFORCEMENT...................................................................78
19.01 Zoning Administrator
19.02 Building Permits Required
19.03 Application for Building Permits
19.04 Construction and Use to be provided in Applications and Permits
19.05 Obtaining a Building Permit
19.06 Fee for Building Permit
20 CITY PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION ........82
20.01 Organization
20.02 Proceedings of the City Planning and Zoning Commission
20.03 Hearings, Appeals, and Notices
21 ADMINISTRATION.........................................................84
21.01 Administrative Review
21.02 Conditional Uses; Conditions Governing Applications; Procedures
21.03 Variances, Conditions Governing Applications; Procedures
21.04 City Planning and Zoning Commission has Powers of Zoning Administrator on Appeals; Reversing Decision of Zoning Administrator
21.05 Vacated Public Ways
21.06 Power and Duties
22APPEALS ........................................................................................87
22.01 Duties of Zoning Administrator, City Planning and Zoning Commission, Board of Adjustment, and Courts on Matters of Appeal
22.02 Stay of Proceedings
22.03 Appeals from the City Planning and Zoning Commission; Procedures of Appeal
23 SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES, AND EXPENSES………..88
23.01 Schedule of Fees, Charges, and Expenses
24 AMENDMENTS ............................................................................89
24.01 Amendments
25 VIOLATIONS, COMPLAINTS, PENALTIES, AND
REMEDIES ADMINISTRATION......................................................90
25.01 Building Permit Violations
25.02 Violation of Ordinance
26 LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS...................................................91
26.01 Separability
26.02 Purpose of Catch Heads
26.03 Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances
26.04 Effective Date
7
APPENDIXES
APPENDIX A ......... Modular, Manufactured, and Mobile Home Standards
APPENDIX B ..........................................Industrial Performance Standards
APPENDIX C ................Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation (CAFO)
APPENDIX D ........................................................ Subdivision Regulations
APPENDIX E ...................................................Procedure Re-Platting Land
APPENDIX F .....................................Procedure for Municipal Annexation
APPENDIX G ......................................................... Procedure for Rezoning
APPENDIX H ...................................................Lot Terms and Descriptions
APPENDIX I ..........................................................Official Zoning Map(s)
APPENDIX J……………………..Vehicle Storage Yard Requirements
APPENDIX K…………………Vehicle Repair Business Requirements
8
TITLE 1 – SHORT TITLE
1.01 Title. This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited and referred to as “Code of Zoning Ordinances of 2013” or the “Mobridge City Zoning Ordinances” or the “Mobridge Zoning Code.”
TITLE 2 – PURPOSE AND JURISDICTION
2.01 Purpose. This Ordinance is adopted for the below listed purposes, all in accordance with the Mobridge City Comprehensive Plan as permitted by the provisions of Chapter 11-6, South Dakota Codified Laws.
1. To promote the public health, safety, comfort and general welfare of the citizens of the City.
2. To encourage the use of lands and natural resources in the City in "accordance with its character, adaptability, and suitability for particular purposes.
3. To promote orderly and beneficial development within the City in furtherance of the comprehensive plan.
4. To protect the character and stability of agricultural, residential, commercial, industrial and public areas.
5. To prevent excessive concentration of population, and to avoid or lessen congestion on the streets and highways of the City.
6. To facilitate adequate provision of streets and highways, sewage facilities, drainage systems, water supply and distribution, fire protection, police protection, educational and other public services.
7. To provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to property.
2.02 Area of Jurisdiction. Pursuant to SDCL 11-6-11, the provisions of this Ordinance shall apply within the corporate limits of the City of Mobridge, South Dakota, and within the territory beyond said corporate limits as now or hereafter fixed, for a distance of three (3) miles in all directions, as established on the map entitled "The Official Zoning Map of the City of South Dakota," as the same may be amended by subsequent annexation. Pursuant to SDCL 11-4, whereas the City of Mobridge has assumed zoning jurisdiction in an area outside of its corporate
limits, the Walworth County Planning Commission shall sit with the City Planning Commission on all matters pertaining to the planning and regulation of such area and no zoning powers provided by this Ordinance shall be effective in any such area unless approved by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members of each of the Commissions, unless waived by the county.
TITLE 3 – LEGAL PROVISIONS 3.01 Minimum Requirements and Conflict. In the interpretation of the provisions of this Ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience, prosperity and general welfare. When a provision of this Ordinance differs or conflicts with the provisions of any other Ordinance, resolution, statute, law or regulation, the most restrictive requirement shall apply. 3.02 Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances. All Ordinances or resolutions, or parts of ordinances or resolutions, in conflict with this Zoning Ordinance, or inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this Ordinance full force and effect. 3.03 Separability. If, in the event, any article, section, clause, or provision of this Ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 3.04 Conformance Required. Except as hereinafter provided, no land, building, structure or premises shall hereafter be used, and no building or structure or part thereof shall be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the District in which it is located. 3.05 Pending Applications. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the plans, construction, size, or designated use of any development, building, structure or part thereof, for which a required building permit has been granted, or based upon a pending application duly filed lawfully, could have been granted, before the effective date of this Ordinance, provided that construction is begun no later than six (6) months after the effective date of this Ordinance and is carried on to completion in a reasonable manner and without unnecessary delay. 3.06 Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force after its passage and publication according to law. 3.07 Violations, Penalties. It shall be unlawful to locate, erect, construct, reconstruct, enlarge, change, maintain, or use any building or land in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto. Any violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall subject the owner or any person who has assisted in the commission of such violation, or who uses or maintains any building or premises in which such violation exists, to a fine of not more than two hundred ($200.00) dollars. Each day that violation is permitted to exist may constitute a separate offense. 3.08 Remedies. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is used in violation of SDCL 11-4 as amended, or this Ordinance, the Zoning Enforcement Officer or other 9
10
appropriate authorities of the City may take appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
11
TITLE 4 - DEFINITIONS
4.01 Definitions. For the purposes of this Ordinance and in order to carry out the provisions and intentions as set forth herein, certain words, terms, and phrases are to be used and interpreted as defined hereinafter. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tenses; words in the singular number include the plural and words in the plural number include the singular; the word “person” includes a firm, partnership or corporation as well as an individual; the word "lot" includes the word "plot" or “parcel”, the word "building" includes the word "structure", the term "shall" is always mandatory and not directory; and the word "may" is permissive. The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." The following words, terms and phrases are hereby defined and shall be interpreted as such throughout this Ordinance. Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them.
Accessory Building. A subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to that of a main building located on the same lot therewith.
Accessory Agricultural Structure. A structure customarily incidental and necessary to farming and the raising of animals including barns and other animal shelters, corrals and fences, silos, and storage sheds for machinery and crops.
Accessory Use. A use customarily incidental, appropriate, and subordinate to the principal use of land or buildings and located upon the same lot therewith.
Actual Construction. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially commenced, preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be carried on diligently.
Advertising. Includes any writing, printing, painting, display, emblem, drawing, sign, or other device designed, used or intended for advertising whether placed on the ground, rocks, trees, tree-stumps, or other natural structures or on a building, structure, milestone, signboard, billboard, wallboard, roof-board, frame, support, fence, or other manmade structure, and any such advertising is a structure within the meaning of the word "structure" as used in this Ordinance.
Advertising Sign or Structure. See Sign
Agriculture. The use of land for agricultural purposes, including the production of field crops, dairying, pasturage, farm woodlots, horticulture, apiculture, animal and poultry husbandry and the normal processing and sale of agricultural products, but not including specialized animal raising except as an accessory to other agriculture activities.
Agriculture Product Processing Facility. A business activity customarily designed to process raw agricultural products into value added products. Agricultural processing facilities include, but are not limited to; feed mills, ethanol plants, and soy bean processing facilities.
12
Alley. A minor right-of-way, dedicated to public use, which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes.
Alterations, Structural. See structural alterations.
Amendment. A change in the wording or substance of this ordinance or a change in the boundaries or classifications upon the official zoning map.
Amusement and Recreation Establishments. Businesses whose primary function is entertainment, such as theaters, billiard halls, etc.
Animal Feeding Operation. An animal feeding operation is a facility where more than one thousand (1,000) animal units are confined, stabled, fed, or maintained in either an open or housed lot for a total of 45 days of more in any 12-month period. The open lot does not sustain crops, vegetation, forage growth, or post-harvest residues in the normal growing season. Two or more facilities under common ownership are a single animal operation if they adjoin each other (within one mile), or if they use a common area or system for the disposal of manure.
Animal Raising, Specialized. The use of land and buildings for the commercial raising, care and sale of fur-bearing animals such as foxes, mink, rabbits, dogs and domestic pets; also the stabling or care of horses and other animals and birds as an enterprise other than an accessory to agricultural use, as herein defined.
Animal Units – A unit of measure for livestock equated as follows; one animal unit is equivalent to:
1 Cow, feeder, or slaughter beef animal, excluding calves under 300 pounds;
0.5 Horse;
0.7 Mature dairy cattle, excluding dairy calves under 300 pounds;
0.27 Farrow-to-finish sows;
1 Swine in a production unit;
9 Nursery swine less than 55 pounds;
2.5 Finisher swine over 55 pounds;
10 Sheep or lambs;
30 Laying hens or broilers;
5 Ducks and/or geese; and 55 Turkeys.
Animal Unit Conversion Table. A conversion table designed to integrate the definition of an animal feeding operation with the animal unit definition.
Animal Species Animal
Units
Cow, feeder or slaughter beef animal, excluding calves under 300 pounds 1,000
Horses 500
Mature dairy cattle, excluding calves under 300 pounds 700
Farrow to finish sows 270
Swine in a production unit 1,000
13
Nursery swine less than 55 pounds 10,000
Finisher swine over 55 pounds 2,500
Sheep 10,000
Laying hens or broilers 30,000
Ducks and/or geese 5,000
Turkeys 55,000
Animal Waste Facility. A structure designed and constructed to store and/or process animal waste. Animal waste facilities include but are not limited to holding basins, lagoons, pits and slurry stores.
Apartment. A dwelling unit located in an apartment building.
Apartment Building. See Dwellings, Multiple
Apartment Hotel/House.
A. A dwelling unit located in an apartment building. A building or portion hereof containing three (3) or more dwelling units or individual guest rooms or suites or guest rooms not for the use of transients, or See structural alterations.
B. An apartment building in which all or most of the dwelling units are provided with maid service.
Aquaculture. Land devoted to the hatching, raising and breeding of fish or other aquatic plants or animals for sale or personal use.
Area, Building. The total area taken on a horizontal plane at the main grade level of the principal building exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces, and steps.
Assisted Living Center. Any institution, rest home, boarding home, place, building, or agency which is maintained and operated to provide personal care and services which meet some need beyond basic provision of food, shelter, and laundry in a free-standing, physically separate facility which is not otherwise required to be licensed. May also be considered a Group Care Facility.
Automobile-Machinery Service Station. Building and premises where motor fuel, oil, grease, batteries, tires, and vehicle accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail, and where, in addition, customary repair services may be rendered.
Automobile Salvage Yard. See junkyard.
Automobile or Trailer Sales Area. An open area used for display, sale or rental of a new or used motor vehicles or trailers in operable condition, and where only incidental repair work is done.
14
Basement. A story, the floor of which is more than one half (½) of its story height below the average level of the adjoining ground. Any story which is not a basement story shall be counted as a story for purposes of height, yard or other open space measurement.
Bed and Breakfast. An establishment that operates like an Inn or Motel that offers breakfast.
Billboard. See Sign.
Board. The Board of Zoning Adjustment, City of Mobridge, South Dakota.
Boarding or Lodging House. A building or part thereof, other than a hotel or motel, where both meals and lodging are provided, for compensation, for three or more persons, not transient, where no cooking or dining facilities are provided in individual rooms. (See also “Rooming House)
Body Shop. See Vehicle Repair Business.
Buildable Area. The portions of a lot remaining after required yards have been provided.
Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls used for shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or property.
Building, Height of. The vertical distance from the average contact ground level at the front wall of the building to the highest point of the building.
Building, Length of. For the purpose of computing required yard dimension or distance between buildings, the length of a building shall be the total length of the exterior wall or walls which are most nearly parallel to the lot line or other building to which the dimension or distance is measured.
Building Wall. For the purpose of computing required yard dimension or distance between buildings, the building wall includes such wall, roof overhang, or parts thereof which is most nearly parallel with the lot line or other building wall to which to dimension or distance is measured.
Building, Main or Principal. A building in which is conducted the principal use of lot on which it is situated. In any residential district any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated.
Building Set-Back Line. A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the street right-of-way and the front of a structure, within which no building or other structure shall be placed except as provided in Article 19, Section 19 .01. The building set-back line is parallel to or concentric with the street right-of-way.
15
Building Site. A lot parcel, or portion thereof, whether a lot of record or described by metes and bounds, used or intended to be used as the location of a building for housing one or two families.
Business Services. Any activities conducted for gain which render service primarily to other commercial and industrial enterprises) or which service and repair appliances and machines used in a home or business.
Campground. Any premises where two (2) or more camping units are parked or placed for camping purposes, or any premises used or set apart for supplying to the public camping space for two (2) or more camping units for camping purposes, which include any buildings, structures, vehicle or enclosures, used or intended for use or intended wholly, or in part, for the accommodation of transient campers.
Camping Unit. Any vehicle, tent, trailer or portable shelter used for camping purposes.
Commercial Trucking Terminal. A building, structure or place where twelve (12) or more commercially licensed trucks or trailers are rented, leased, kept for hire, or stored or parked for compensation, or from which trucks or transports, stored or parked on the property, are dispatched for hire as common carriers, and which may include warehouse space.
Commission, Planning. The Mobridge City Planning and Zoning Commission.
Comprehensive Plan. The Comprehensive Plan for the City of Mobridge or parts thereof, as and when adopted or amended by the Mobridge City Council.
Conditional Use; Special Exception. A principal use which is subject to conditional approval by the Board of Zoning Adjustment. A conditional use (or special exception) may be granted by the Board only under one of the following conditions:
A. Where there is a specific provision in this ordinance for such use within the District involved, or
B. In case the use in question is not listed as either permitted or prohibited in the District involved, and the Board is specifically authorized to determine whether an unlisted use is similar to others listed as permitted such favorable determination may not be made in the case of a use which is first listed as permitted or as prohibited in a less restricted District.
Congregate Housing. A residential facility for elderly persons (age 60 or older) within which are provided living and sleeping facilities, meal preparation, laundry services and room cleaning. Such facilities may also provide other services, such as transportation for routine social and medical appointments and counseling.
Convenience Store. A retail store in which articles for sale are restricted to gasoline sales and a limited range of food items such as milk, bread, soft drinks, ice cream, canned and bottled goods, snacks and candy. Retail sales may also include the limited sale of magazines, books, housewares, toiletries, bait, alcoholic beverages and tobacco. Recreational sales would include video lottery machines.
16
Day Care Center. Any type of group day care programs including nurseries for children of working parents, nursery schools for children under minimum age for education in public schools, parent cooperative nursery schools, playgroups for pre-school children, programs covering after-school care for school children. Notwithstanding any other provision of these ordinances to the contrary, a Day Care Center located in any building or facility in areas zoned R-1, R-2 and R-3 where the building or facility is also the primary residence of the operator of the Day Care Center, shall be deemed a permitted use. All other Day Care Centers located in the areas zoned R-1, R-2 and R-3 where the building or facility is not the primary residence of the operator of the Day Care Center shall be deemed a conditional use.
District, Zoning. A designated portion of land within which certain uniform regulations and requirements apply under the provisions of this Ordinance.
Domesticated Large Animals. Any animal that through long association with man, has been bred to a degree which has resulted in genetic changes affecting the temperament, color, conformation or other attributes of the species to an extent that makes it unique and different from wild individuals of its kind. For the purposes of this ordinance the definition shall include, but is not limited to, animals commonly raised on farms and ranches, such as cattle, horses, hogs, sheep, and mules.
Dump. A lot or parcel of land or part thereof used primarily for the disposal of solid waste such as garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, Junk, discarded machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, or waste material of any kind, by' dumping, burial, burning or any other means.
Dwelling. Any building or portion thereof designed or used as the home of one or more persons or families, but not including a tent, cabin, hotel, motel, trailer or mobile home. This definition shall include a modular dwelling, as defined herein.
Dwelling, Fixed. A dwelling permanently fixed to the ground, which shall not include mobile homes.
Dwelling, Mobile. (see Appendix A) A movable or portable unit, designed and constructed to be towed on its own chassis (comprised of frame and wheels), and designed to be connected to utilities for human occupancy and habitation as a permanent residence for one (1) or more persons whether resting on wheels, jacks or other supports.
The term shall include:
A. Units containing parts that may be folded, collapsed or telescoped when being towed and that maybe expanded to provide additional cubic capacity; and
B. Units composed of two (2) or more separately towable components designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of being separated again into the components for repeated towing. This definition shall not include a travel or vacation vehicle, either self-propelled or nonself- propelled, as separately defined.
17
Dwelling, Modular. (see Appendix A) A fixed dwelling comprising one or more pre-assembled or partially pre-assembled modules or units, built using the same type of materials used in conventional on-site construction, without integral chassis, brought to the building site by temporary means of transport, assembled and permanently anchored to the ground. A mobile home, as defined herein, shall not be deemed to be a modular unit or a modular dwelling.
Dwelling, Multi-Family. A building or portion thereof designed for or used for residence purposes by three or more families, including an apartment building, townhouse or condominium.
Dwelling, Single Family. A building designed for and used exclusively for residence purposes by one family or housekeeping unit.
Dwelling, Seasonal. A summer cottage, winter lodge or similar lodging occupied less than six (6) months during a year.
Dwelling, Town House. A building consisting of a series of three (3) or more attached or semi-detached dwelling units, each with a ground floor and a separate entrance, whether maintained in a single ownership, separate ownership, or condominium.
Dwelling, Two Family. A building designed for and used exclusively by two independent families or housekeeping units.
Dwelling Unit. One or more rooms designed for, intended for, or used as a residence by one family with facilities for cooking, sleeping, and sanitation therein.
Exploration. Any process by which the presence or absence location, quantity, or quality of a mineral deposit is determined, whether it be by means of drilling, or excavation.
Family. A group of one (1) or more persons occupying a-premises and living as a single housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house or hotel as defined herein.
Farm, Ranch, Orchard. An area of forty (40) acres or more which is used for growing usual farm products, vegetables, fruits, trees, and grain, and for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals such as horses, cattle, hogs and sheep, and including the necessary accessory uses for raising, treating, and storing products raised on the premises; but excluding an Animal Feeding Operation.
The processing and storage of raw agricultural products, such as grain elevators, and ethanol plants, shall not be considered a farm, ranch or orchard if such constitutes the main or principal use on the lot or parcel.
Farm Building. All buildings and structures needed in agricultural operation, including dwellings for owners, operators, farm laborers employed on the farm, and other family members.
18
Farm Occupation. A business activity customarily carried out on a farm by a member of the occupant’s family without structural alterations in the building or any of its rooms, without the installation or outside storage of any machinery, equipment or material other than that customary to normal farm operations, without the employment of persons not residing in the home, which does not cause the generation of additional traffic in the area. Farm occupations include, but are not limited to, seed sales and custom combining support facilities.
Farm Unit. All buildings and structures needed in an agricultural operation, including dwellings for owners, operators, and other family members.
Feed Lot. A lot or facility where animals have been, are or will be stabled or confined and fed or maintained for a total of 45 days or more in any l2-month period, and crops, vegetation, forage growth or post-harvest residues are not sustained in the normal growing season over any portion of the lot or facility.
Feed Lot, Commercial. A place where the principal business is the feeding of livestock and such feeding is not done as a subordinate activity to the production of crops on the premises of which the feed lot is a part.
Flammable or Combustible Liquids, or Hazardous Material. Flammable material is any material that will readily ignite from common sources of heat, or that will ignite at a temperature of 600mF or less. Flammable liquid is nay liquid having a flash point below 100mF and having vapor pressure not exceeding forty (40) pounds per square inch (absolute) at 100mF. Combustible liquid is any liquid having a flash point at or above 100mF. Hazardous material includes any flammable solids, corrosive liquids, radioactive materials, oxidizing materials, highly toxic materials, poisonous gases, reactive materials, unstable materials, hyperbolic materials, pyrophoric materials, and any substance or mixture substance which is an irritant, a strong sensitizer or which generates pressure through exposure to heat decomposition or other means.
Flood or Flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source and, mudslides or flows which are proximately caused or precipitated by accumulations of water on or under the ground.
The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined above.
A. Flood Hazard Boundary Map. An official map or plat of a community or City, issued or approved by the Federal Flood Administrator (Department of Housing and Urban Development), on which the boundaries of the flood plain, mudslide, and/or flood related erosion areas having special hazards have been drawn.
19
B. Flood Plain or Flood-Prone Area. Any normally dry land area that is susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. "Flood plain area having special flood hazards" means that maximum area of the flood plain that, on the average, is likely to be flooded once every 100 years (i.e., that has a 1-percent chance of flood occurrence in any given year).
C. Flood Proofing. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes or adjustments to properties and structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to lands, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and contents of buildings.
D. Floodway. The channel of a river or other water-course and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water-surfacing elevation more than one foot at any point.
E. Flood-way Encroachment Obstruction. Any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dyke, pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel rectification, bridge conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or regulatory flood hazard area which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water, either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water, or that is placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to the damage of life or property.
F. Habitable Floor. Any floor used for living, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or combination thereof. A floor used only for storage purposes is not a habitable floor.
G. Special Flood Hazard Area. The land within a community or City in the flood plain, which is subject to a one percent chance of flooding annually. Floor Area. The measurement of floor area for purposes required by this Ordinance shall be the sum of the area of the first floor, as measured to the inside of exterior walls, plus that area, similarly measured, of all other stories having eight-four (84) or more inches of headroom, which are accessible by a fixed stairway, elevator or escalator, and which may be made usable for the intended occupancy. For residential uses, the floor area of uninhabitable basements, cellars, garages, accessory building, attics, breezeways and unenclosed porches shall be excluded.
Frontage. All sides of a lot or parcel of land adjacent to the right-of-way of a street or road.
Game Farm. An area of five (5) acres or more, which is used for producing hatchery, raising game and non-domestic animals for sale to private shooting preserves.
Game Lodge. A building or group of detached, or semi-detached, or attached buildings occupied or used as temporary abiding place of sportsmen, hunters and fishermen, who are lodged, with or without meals, and in which there are more than two (2) sleeping rooms.
Garage, Private. A detached accessory building or a portion of a principal building used only for the storage of self-propelled vehicles and incidental residential storage.
Garage, Public. A building or portion thereof, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring, renting, selling, or storing self-propelled vehicles.
20
Grain Elevator. Grain storage facilities, which are the principal and primary use of the lot. Said facilities are generally equipped with devices for housing and discharging significant quantities of grain. This definition does not include normal farm product storage and warehousing facilities such as grain bins where such storage is an accessory use to the parcel.
Hobby Farm. An activity carried out in rural residential areas which includes the planting, cultivating, harvesting and storage of grains, hay or plants, fruits, or vineyards.
The raising and feeding of livestock and poultry shall be considered as part of a hobby farm if the area which the livestock or poultry is kept, is two (2) acres or more in area for every two (2) domestic large animals, and if such livestock does not exceed ten (10) animals: or the raising of livestock or poultry is incidental or supplemental to the residential use and is not primarily for the growing of crops or raising of livestock.
Holding Pens. A holding pen is a building, pen yard or fenced in area where livestock are kept or held for more than 48 hours with the intent or purpose of subsequently transporting said livestock to another location.
Home Occupation. A subordinate gainful occupation which is carried on in the home in a
Residential District, provided it is incidental to the residential use and meets the requirements of Titles 9, 10, and 11 of this Ordinance.
Horticulture. The science or art of cultivating fruits, vegetables, flowers, and plants.
Hotel, Motel. A building or buildings containing guest rooms to be occupied primarily by transients who are lodged with or without meal service.
House. A building that serves as living quarters for one or a few families.
House Trailer. See dwelling, mobile.
Junk Yard. The use of more than 750 cubic feet of open storage on any lot, or portion of a lot, or portion of a lot or tract of land where discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled or handled including auto wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards and places or yards for storage of house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment, scrap metals, or for the abandonment, dismantling, or wrecking of automobiles or other vehicles, machines, or parts thereof.
Kennel. Any lot or premises on which four (4) or more dogs and/or cats, more than six (6) months of age, are kept.
Lagoon. Any pond, basin, or other impoundment made by excavation or earthfill for storage or treatment of human sewage or animal waste.
21
Loading Space. Adequate space, logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used such as trucks, tractors, trailers, etc., and accessible to such vehicles at all times.
Lot. A parcel of land which is or may be occupied by a single main building and its accessory buildings or used customarily incident thereto, together with such yards or open spaces within the lot lines as may be required by this Ordinance. Such lot may consist of:
A single lot of record;
A portion of a lot of record;
A combination of complete lots of record, or complete lots of record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record;
A parcel of land described by metes and bounds;
A. Lot, Corner. A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection or upon two (2) parts of the same street which form an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. The point of intersection of the street lines is the corner.
B. Lot, Double Frontage. An interior lot which runs through a block from street to street and which has two non-intersecting sides abutting on two or more streets.
C. Lot, Interior. A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot Area. The computed lot area within the lot lines.
Lot Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
Lot Frontage. That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street.
Lot Line. The property or street right-of-way lines bounding a lot.
A. Front Lot Line. In the case of an interior lot, that line separating said lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot, or double frontage lot, "front lot line" shall mean that line separating said lot from that street which is designated as the front street in the plat and/or in the application for a zoning permit.
B. Rear Lot Line. The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
C. Side Lot Line. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side lot line of a corner lot, separating a lot from a street, is called a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot is called an interior side lot line.
Lot of Record. A lot which is a part of a recorded plat or a lot described by metes and bounds, the map and/or description of which has been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds.
Lot Reversed Frontage. A reversed frontage lot is defined as a lot on which the frontage is at right angles, interior angle less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees, to the general pattern in the area. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner or a through lot.
22
Lot Width. The mean horizontal distance across the lot between side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth, provided that the minimum lot widths required by this Ordinance shall be so measured at a distance from the front lot line equal to the required depth of the front yard.
Manufactured Home. A moveable or portable dwelling which is eight (8’) feet or more in width and forty (40’) feet or more in length, constructed on a chassis, and which is designed to be towed, designed for year-round occupancy, primarily to be used without a permanent foundation, but which may sit on a permanent foundation, and designed to be connected to utilities. It may consist of one or more units, separately transportable, but designed to be joined together into one integral unit.
The following shall not be included in this definition:
A. Travel trailer, pickup coaches, motor homes, camping trailers, or other recreational vehicles.
B. Manufactured modular housing which is designed to be set on a permanent foundation, and which uses standard sheathing, roofing, siding, electrical, plumbing, and heating systems.
Mineral. For purposes of this ordinance, any substance either inorganic, or organically derived, which occurs naturally in the earth, and has a consistent and distinctive set of physical properties, to include coal, clay, stone, sand, gravel, petroleum, natural gas, and all metals.
Modular Home Park. A parcel of land under single ownership, which has been planned and improved for the placement of, manufactured homes for non–transient use.
Mobile Home. See "Dwelling, Mobile".
Mobile Home Park. Any area, tract or site or plot of land whereupon a minimum of five (5) mobile homes as herein defined are placed, located or maintained, or intended to be placed, located or maintained, and shall include all accessory buildings used or intended to be used as part of the equipment thereof.
Modular Home. See "Dwelling, Modular"
Motel. A group of attached or detached buildings on the same lot containing sleeping quarters for rental to transients.
Navigable Waters. A body of water presently being used or is suitable for use for transportation and commerce, or if it has been so used or was suitable for such use in the past, or if it could be made suitable for such use in the future by reasonable improvements.
Net Assignable Square Feet. The sum of all areas on all floors of a building assigned to, or available for assignment to, an occupant or specific use.
Non-conforming Structure. A building or structure, lawfully existing at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance, that does not conform to the provisions of this Ordinance as to lot area, yard or building height requirement for the zoning district in which it is located.
23
Non-conforming Use. The use of a building or structure or of a tract of land, lawfully existing at the time of the effective date of this ordinance that does not conform to the use regulations for the zoning district in which it is located.
Noxious Matter. Material (in gaseous, liquid, solid, particulate, or any other form) which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effects upon the social, economic, or psychological well-being of individuals.
Nursery. A facility confining a specific number of small and/or young swine averaging ten (10) to fifty-five (55) pounds in size.
Nursing Home, Rest Home, Convalescent Home. A place which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide maintenance, personal, or nursing care for three or more persons who by reason of illness, physical deformity, or old age are unable to care for themselves.
Obstruction. Any structure or vegetation that blocks the complete vision of people.
Open Space. This term, as used in this Ordinance is intended to refer to front, side or rear yards adjoining buildings, or to other land space not occupied by buildings, required or provided to afford light, recreational opportunities, ventilation, visibility and other requirements for a healthful environment.
Operation. Any person(s) conducting or directing mineral exploration, extraction, or processing operations for the purpose of determining the potential for, or receiving, commercial gain.
Ownership Line. A line defining ownership of property under one owner of record.
Parking Area or Lot. An open area, other than a street or other public way, used for the parking of motor vehicles.
Parking Garage. A structure designed and used primarily for the storage or parking of passenger automobiles, including such accessory servicing of such automobiles as may be permitted by this Ordinance.
Permit.
A. Permit, Conditional Use. A permit granted by the Board of Zoning Adjustment for uses which are listed as "Conditional Uses" (as opposed to "Principal Uses") within a particular zoning district. The conditional use permit shall authorize the construction or alteration of buildings or structures in accordance with this Ordinance and shall specify any additional requirements as outlined by the Board of Zoning Adjustment.
B. Permit, Occupancy. A document issued by the Zoning Enforcement Officer which certifies that the completed building, structure or use proposed is consistent with the requirements of this Ordinance and for the use applied for.
24
C. Permit, Zoning. Any permit which authorizes the construction or alteration of buildings or structures in accordance with this Zoning Ordinance Planned Unit Development. An area of land in which a variety of housing types and subordinate commercial and industrial facilities are accommodated in a pre-planned environment under more flexible standards, such as lot sizes and setbacks, than those restrictions that would normally apply under these regulations. The procedure for approval of such development contains requirements in addition to those of the standard subdivision, such as building design principles, and landscaping plans.
Plat. A map, plan, or layout indicating the location and boundaries of individual properties.
Private Shooting Preserves. An acreage of at least one hundred sixty (160) acres and not exceeding one thousand two hundred eighty (1,280) acres either privately owned or leased on which hatchery raised game is released for the purpose of hunting, for a fee, over an extended season.
Property Line. The division between two parcels of land, or between a parcel of land and the street and/or road.
Public Uses. All lands, other than streets and highway, owned by and officially designated for continuing public use by a municipality, City, school district, State of South Dakota, United States Government, or any other duly constituted agency of government, such as parks, schools and administrative, recreation, cultural and service buildings.
Ranch Building. See Farm Building
Ranch Occupation. See Farm Occupation
Ranch Unit. See Farm Unit
Recreation Facilities.
A. Recreation Facilities, Private. Privately owned recreation facilities which are not operated for the general public for profit, including private country clubs, golf courses, riding clubs, golf courses, riding clubs, fishing or hunting clubs, game preserves, ski slopes, swimming pools and other similar non-commercial recreation areas or facilities.
B. Recreation Facilities, limited Commercial. Recreation areas and facilities open to the public, established and operated for profit, limited to enterprises serving vacationing and/or one-day customers, including picnicking, camping, fishing and boating, with the sale of goods and services limited to food, beverages, boating, fishing and camping supplies, boat docking and launching, tent and recreational vehicle parking.
C. Recreation Facilities, General Commercial. Recreation areas and facilities open to the public, established and operated for profit, including commercial golf courses, ski lodges and slopes, swimming pools, ice skating rinks, riding stables, race tracks, amusement parks, carnivals and similar commercial enterprises.
25
Residential Care Facility. A family home, group care facility, or similar facility for 24 hour non-medical care of persons in need of personal services, supervision or assistance for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual.
Right of Way. Right of way shall be defined as the area that intersects a road that extends into a piece of property, whether residential, commercial, or industrial, either owned by a private resident, city, county, state, business, or corporation, that can be accessed by individuals, businesses, city, county, and state personnel to conduct road or utility work.
The setback on county roads shall be thirty three (33’) feet, measured from center of the road extending out directly on one side of the road. The total setback is sixty six (66’) feet, when measured on both sides of the road. A building or other structure shall not be placed or constructed within the setback area. A building or other structure may only be placed or constructed after fifty (50’) feet, measured from the center of the road extending out directly on one side of the road. The total setback for buildings and other structures is one hundred (100’) feet, when measured on both sides of the road.
In the case of farming, no farmer shall utilize the area within the right of way without written permission from the county. If farming takes place within the right of way, the county, or other person or group on official business, may, without permission from the farmer in violation, conduct business within the right of way, even if it disturbs the farming that is taking place.
Rooming House. A building or part thereof other than a hotel or motel, where lodging is provided for compensation for three (3) or more persons, not transients, where no cooking or dining facilities or services are provided (See also "Boarding House").
Row of Trees. Ten or more trees planted in a line, separated by a distance of forty (40’) feet or less.
Running Gear. The parts which allow a manufactured home to be mobile including the tires, wheels, axles, running lights, and hitch. This definition shall include all mobility items exclusive of the parts of the chassis which make up the structural integrity of the manufactured home.
Salvage Yard. The use of more than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of open storage on any lot, portion of lot, or tract of land for the sale, storage, keeping, or for the abandonment, dismantling, or wrecking of automobiles or other vehicles, machines, or parts thereof.
Sanitary Landfill. A disposal facility employing an engineered method of disposing of solid wastes on land in such a manner which minimizes environmental hazards by spreading the solid wastes in thin layers, compacting the solid wastes to the smallest practical volume, and applying cover material at the end of each working day.
School, Denominational or Private. A school under the sponsorship of a private agency, corporation, or religious entity, having a curriculum generally equivalent to public elementary or secondary schools and accredited by the State of South Dakota; but excluding private trade or
26
commercial schools. “Day Care Center” as herein defined, shall not be considered schools as applicable to this definition.
School, Public. A school under the sponsorship of a public agency providing elementary or secondary curriculum, and accredited by the State of South Dakota; but excluding private trade or commercial schools.
Self-Storage Facility. A structure containing three or more units which are available for lease or rent by persons other than residents of the premises for the storage of goods not related to the sale or manufacture of goods on the same lot.
Semi-Portable Agricultural Structures. Anything which requires placement on the ground for agriculture related purposes. Semi-portable agricultural structures include, but are not limited to, feed bunks, calving, lambing, or farrowing sheds, and temporary grain storage facilities.
Semi-Public Users. Land owned by a non-profit organization or agency which is open to general public use, including but not limited to a cemetery, church, Sunday school, parochial school, college, hospital, site occupied by an auditorium, museum, art gallery or other institutions of an educational, religious, charitable, or philanthropic nature but not including any private club, lodge, fraternity or other similar activity.
Service Station. Buildings or premises, or portions thereof arranged or designed to be used for the retail sale of oil, gasoline or other products for the propulsion or lubrication of motor vehicles, including facilities for changing and repairing of tires or batteries, polishing, greasing, washing, or minor servicing of such motor vehicles, but excluding high speed automotive washing, steam cleaning, body repairing, major motor, transmission or chassis repairing and body bumping and painting.
Shelterbelt. Five or more rows of trees and/or shrubs which reduces erosion and protects against the effects of wind and storms.
Shelterbelt Restoration. The removal and replacement of two or more rows of trees or of trees totaling one-half (1/2) acre or more, whichever is greater, in an existing shelterbelt.
Sign. Any writing, numerals, pictorial representation, illustration, decoration, emblem, symbol, trademark, flag, banner, pennant, streamers, or any other figures or objects of similar character which:
Is a structure or any part thereof, or is attached to, painted on, or in any other manner represented on a building, column or other structure, or any portable device, and
Is used to announce, direct attention to, or advertise and
Is visible from any street, alley, park, or other public area.
A. Sign, Area of. The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed, excluding the necessary supports or
27
uprights on which such sign is placed. For a sign having more than one (1) display surface, all surfaces shall be included in computing the total of the exposed exterior display surface area. For a sphere or other curved display surface, the area shall be that of the largest plane passing through it at right angles to the principal line of vision.
B. Sign, Accessory. A sign, which relates solely to the building or premises on which it is located, in any manner indicated by the definitions here-under for functional types of accessory sign.
C. Signs, Accessory, Defined by Function.
(1) Bulletin Board. A sign of permanent construction, but with movable letters words or numerals indicating the name of a religious institution, school, library, auditorium, theater, stadium, athletic field or other similar use and the announcement of services or activities to be held therein.
(2) Directional Sign. A sign containing only words, numbers, arrows or pictorial matter directing pedestrians or motorists in the proper, and convenient use of the premises on which the sign is located.
(3) Identification Sign. A sign which displays only the name, address and/or use of the premises and/or the goods sold or produced or the services offered therein.
(4) Temporary Sign. A banner, pennant, streamer, poster, display or illustration which is affixed to or painted upon or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or piece of land or a portable device, and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business and is constructed of metal, cloth, canvas, plastic sheet, cardboard or other like materials and which is intended to be displayed for a limited period of time.
(5) Temporary Sign, Real Estate. A temporary sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the lot or tract of land on which the sign is located or to the sale or lease of one or more structures or a portion thereof located on such lot or tract of land.
(6) Temporary Sign, Construction. A temporary sign indicating the names of architects, engineers, contractors and similar persons or firms involved in the design or construction of a structure or project.
(7) Warning Sign. Any sign indicating a situation, which is dangerous or potentially dangerous.
D. Signs, Accessory, Defined by Structural Type.
(1) Awning, Canopy or Marquee Sign. A sign that is mounted on, painted on, or attached to an awning, canopy or marquee.
(2) Free Standing Sign. A sign, not attached to any building, which is suspended or supported by one or more upright columns or structures attached to the ground.
(3) Projecting Sign. A sign, not a wall sign, suspending from or supported by building or similar structure and projecting therefrom.
E. Sign, Advertising. A sign which directs attention to a use, commodity or service not related to the premises on which it is located, including a billboard.
F. Sign Face. A single surface of a sign, upon against, or through which the message of the sign is exhibited.
G. Sign, Flashing. Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light or any part thereof has conspicuous has intermittent variation in intensity of color.
H. Sign, Height. The vertical distance from the upper most point used in
28
measuring the area of the sign to the ground immediately below such point or to the level of the upper surface of the nearest curb of a street or alley (other than a structurally elevated roadway) whichever measure permits the greatest elevation of the sign.
I. Sign, Illuminated. A sign which is illuminated by an artificial source of light.
J. Sign, Moving. Any sign or part thereof which rotates, revolves, or otherwise is in motion.
K. Sign, Structure. The supports, uprights, bracing, or framework for signs. Slaughter House. A building used for the slaughtering of animals and the scalding, dressing, butchering and storage of animal carcasses, but not including the rendering, smoking, curing, or other processing of meat, fat, bones, offal, blood, or other by-products.
Story. That portion of a building between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor above, or any portion of a building between the topmost floor and the roof having a usable floor area equal to at least fifty (50%) percent of the usable floor area of the floor immediately below it.
Street. A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. The term "street" shall include avenue, circle, road, parkway, boulevard, highway, thoroughfare, or any other similar term.
Street Line. The right-of-way line of a street or road.
Structure. Any constructed or erected material or combination of materials, the use of which requires location on the ground, including but not limited to, buildings, stadiums, radio towers, sheds, storage bins, swimming pools, walls, fences, and signs.
Structural Alteration. Any change in the structural members of a building, such as load bearing walls, floors, columns, beams, or girders.
Subdivision Regulation. The Subdivision Regulations for the City of Mobridge or parts thereof, as and when adopted or amended by the Mobridge City Council.
Swine Production Unit. An operation confining a specific number of female breeding age swine for the purpose of farrowing. The operation shall farrow no more than an average of one-third (1/3) of the total herd at any one time and the total herd shall not farrow more than an average of two and one-half (2 ½) times within a twelve month period. All farrowed swine shall be relocated to an off-site nursery facility as defined by this ordinance, at approximately ten (10) pounds or said swine shall be calculated as part of the total animal units.
TEMPORARY BUILDING: All storage structures which are used or manufactured to be of a temporary nature, such as storage containers, tents, soft covered shelters and other similar type storage structures and all other storage type structures which are not permanently affixed to the real estate by footings or foundations. This does not include Accessory Buildings as defined in these ordinances. Except as otherwise contained in the Zoning Ordinances of the City of Mobridge, it shall be unlawful to place or keep temporary buildings on all zoned property without first obtaining a TEMPORARY BUILDING permit from the City Zoning Officer. The
29
cost of obtaining a TEMPORARY BUILDING permit shall be the sum of $20.00. No TEMPORARY BUILDING permit shall be issued for a term longer than one year. At the expiration of the term of the TEMPORARY BUILDING PERMIT, the temporary building shall be removed. The City Zoning Officer shall have discretion in issuing or refusing to issue the TEMPORARY BUILDING permit and the term of the permit by taking into consideration the condition, type and nature of the temporary building to be placed and the location and purpose of the temporary building so that the temporary building does not interfere with or detract from the use and attraction of the neighboring properties. Temporary greenhouses used by commercial establishments to store and sell plants and trees which will be erected and dismantled within 6 months are exempted from the cost and requirement of obtaining a TEMPORARY BUILDING permit. Upon application, the City Council is authorized to waive the cost of obtaining a TEMPORARY BUILDING permit if the temporary building is to be used for a civic function.
Tourist Home. A building or part thereof, other than a hotel, motel, boarding house, lodging house, or rooming house, where lodging is provided for transients by a resident family in its home for compensation.
Tow Business. A business engaged in removing, or delivering to or from public or private property, any type of motor vehicle, or an item that was being transported or towed by a motor vehicle, by towing, carrying, hauling, or pushing, and shall include vehicle service stations, vehicle repair businesses, auto-body businesses, and automotive dealerships that have a tow truck and repair vehicles on-site. All businesses that operate a tow truck shall comply with the Vehicle Storage Yard Requirements.
Town House. See Dwelling, Town House.
Trailer. See "Dwelling, Mobile"
Travel or Vacation Vehicle. A vehicle, either self propelled or non-self-propelled, so constructed as to permit its continued conveyance upon public streets and highways, and so designed and constructed as to provide sleeping and/or eating accommodations for persons while traveling or vacationing. Any portable vehicle providing such accommodations having a usable length of forty five (45’) feet or less shall be included within this definition, and shall not be defined as a mobile home.
Utility Facilities. Any above-ground structures or facilities, other than buildings, unless such buildings are used as storage incidental to the operation of such structures or facilities, owned by a governmental entity, a nonprofit organization, a corporation, or any entity defined as a public utility for any purpose and used in connection with the production, generation, transmission, delivery, collection, or storage of water, sewage, electricity, gas, oil, or electronic signals.
Variance. A variance is a relaxation of the terms of the Zoning Ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owning to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As used in the Ordinance, a variance is
30
authorized, only for height, area, and size of the structure or size of yards and open spaces; establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of non-conformities in the zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning district. This is NOT to be confused with a conditional use.
Vehicle Repair Business. Any land, building, structure, or premises used for repair, alteration, restoration, painting, cleaning, finishing of automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, boats, and other vehicles. The term “repairing” shall not include the rebuilding, dismantling or storage of wrecked or junked vehicles. A repair shop does not include a junkyard/salvage yard, an impound lot, or an automobiles gas/service station, or a business whose main income is derived from the sale of vehicles. Parking and/or storage of repairable motor vehicles on property shall not exceed ten (10) spaces per every one thousand square feet of Net Assignable Square Feet (NASF). All Vehicle Repair Businesses shall comply with the Vehicle Repair Business Requirements.
Vehicle Storage Yard. A storage yard for the temporary storing of wrecked, abandoned or dismantled trucks, recreational vehicles, boats, and other vehicles that maybe returned to the owner or sold for recycled metal or parts to a junk and/or salvage yard within sixty (60) days of the towing date, an Vehicle Storage Yard does not include Salvage or Junk Yards. A Vehicle Storage Yard shall comply with the Vehicle Storage Yard Requirements.
Video Lottery. Any video game of chance played on video lottery machines.
Video Lottery Machine Operator. Any individual, partnership, corporation, or association that places video lottery machines or associated equipment for public use in this state.
Video Lottery Machines, or Machine. Any electronic video game machine that, upon insertion of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game, including but not limited to video poker, keno, and blackjack, authorized by the commission utilizing a video display and microprocessors in which, by chance, the player may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. The term does not include a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash or tokens.
Windbreak. Any non-opaque man-made structure constructed of any material and erected adjacent to an animal feeding, calving, or other such lot of which its principal use is that of protecting livestock from the effects of the wind.
Yard. A required open space other than a court unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure from the ground upward except where otherwise specifically provided in this Ordinance that a building or structure may be located in a portion of a yard required for a main building. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of the side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the shortest horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used.
A. Yard, Front. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a main building extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street right-of-way and the front line of the building
31
projected to the sideline of the lot. The depth of the front yard shall be measured horizontally at right angles to the front lot line.
B. Yard, Rear. The required open space, extending for the full width of the lot, between the rear lot line and any principal building, measured horizontally at right angles to the rear lot line. In the case of through lots, there will be no rear yards, but only front and side yards.
C. Yard, Side. The open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard, measured between the nearest side lot line and a building. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line shall be deemed a sideline.
Zoning District; Zoning Use District; Uses District. These terms are synonymous with each other. See District Zoning.
Zoning Administrator. (also known as Zoning Officer or Zoning Enforcement Officer)
Appointed by the City Council of Mobridge, and is responsible for carrying out the rules and regulations of this ordinance.
4.02 STORAGE CONTAINERS
4.02.1 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of storage containers to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and promote positive aesthetics in the city.
4.02.2 Definitions.
A. An "accessory storage building" is: A building originally constructed for use as an accessory building for the storage of materials and equipment accessory to a primary use located on the property. For purposes of this section, cargo containers, shipping containers, railroad cars, truck vans, converted mobile homes, trailers, recreational vehicles, bus bodies, vehicles and similar prefabricated items and structures originally built for purposes other than the extended storage of goods and materials (herein collectively termed as “Storage Containers”) are not accessory storage buildings or accessory buildings.
B. Storage Containers include standardized reusable vessels that were:
1. Originally designed for or used in the packing, shipping, movement or transportation of freight, articles, goods or commodities (commonly called cargo containers or shipping containers); and/or
2. Originally designed for or capable of being mounted or moved by rail, truck or ship by means of being mounted on a chassis or similar transport device. This definition includes the terms "transport containers" and "portable site storage containers" having a similar appearance to and similar characteristics of cargo and shipping containers.
32
4.02.3 Storage on residential use properties.
A. Subject to rules on Temporary Buildings, Storage Containers shall NOT be permitted as accessory storage buildings on property in any residential zone of the city, or on any property within the city the primary use of which is residential. Cargo containers, shipping containers, railroad cars, truck vans, converted mobile homes, travel trailers, recreational vehicles, bus bodies, vehicles, and similar prefabricated items and other structures originally built for purposes other than the storage of goods and materials are not permitted to be used as accessory storage buildings on property zoned residential or on property the primary use of which is residential.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions set forth in subsection A of this section and subject to the rules for Temporary Buildings, the temporary placement of transport containers and/or portable site storage containers on residentially zoned properties, or on properties the primary use of which are residential, for the limited purpose of loading and unloading household contents shall be permitted for a period of time not exceeding 30 days in any one calendar year.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions set forth in subsection A of this section and subject to the rules for Temporary Buildings, licensed and bonded contractors may use cargo or shipping containers for the temporary location of an office, equipment, and/or materials storage structure during construction which is taking place on the property where the cargo or shipping container is located, if the use of the cargo or shipping container is authorized pursuant to a city building permit.
4.02.4 Storage Containers — Allowable locations.
The placement of a Storage Containers as an accessory storage use is limited to the following zoning districts: GC General Commercial, HC Highway Commercial, I-1 Light Industrial, I-2 Heavy Industrial. The placement of Storage Containers is further limited to properties in the above-identified zones only if the property upon which the Storage Container is proposed to be located is not primarily used for residential purposes.
4.02.5 Permit required — Development standards.
A. Placement of a Storage Container on any allowable zoned property shall be deemed a Conditional Use and a conditional use permit is required prior to placement of any Storage Container in any allowable area, ensuring proper location and effective anchoring/foundation according to the then most current edition of the International Building Code. The application shall show the proposed Storage Container is accessory to the permitted use of the property and meets the placement criteria for the zone.
B. Storage Containers shall meet the setback requirements of the underlying zone and shall be setback an additional distance so as to not interfere with visibility of traffic on adjoining streets. All Storage Containers must also be located in the side or rear yard of any existing principal building on the lot or parcel. No Storage Containers may be placed closer than 25 feet from a residential zoned lot or a lot which is being used for residential purposes.
33
C. Storage Containers shall not be stacked above the height of a single container device. Storage Containers shall not be used for any advertising purpose and shall be kept clean of all alpha-numeric signage and writing.
D. As a condition of placement, Storage Containers may be required to be fenced or screened from abutting properties and/or rights-of-way pursuant to the provisions of the underlying zoning regulations.
E. Storage Containers shall be located in an approved designated area and on the same property as the principal use and be included in the calculation of overall lot coverage.
F.Storage Containers shall not occupy required off-street parking, loading or landscaping areas.
G. Materials stored within Storage Containers are subject to review and inspection by fire chief or fire marshal.
4.02.6 Conflicts.
In the event any conflict exists between the provisions of this chapter and other currently existing provisions of the Code or other ordinances of the city, the terms and provisions of this chapter shall take precedence and to the extent of any such conflict, the terms and conditions of any existing provisions of the Code or other ordinances of the city shall be and hereby are amended insofar as necessary to conform to the provisions of this chapter.
34
TITLE 5 – ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS AND OFFICIAL
ZONING MAP
5.01 Zoning Districts. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the City is hereby divided into nine (9) zoning districts. All parts of the City shall be designated on the zoning district map as being located in one of the zoning districts named hereunder.
AG Agriculture
R-1 Low Density Residential
R-2 Medium Density Residential
R-3 Medium Density Residential and Mobile Home
GC General Commercial
HC Highway Commercial
I-1 Light Industrial
I-2 Heavy Industrial
CN Conservation
5.02 Zoning District Map. The zoning districts, as established In Section 5.01 are shown on the Official Zoning District Map, which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted and declared to be part of this Ordinance. The Official Zoning District Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Finance Officer and bear the seal of the City under the following words:
"This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning District Map referred to in Section 5.02 of Ordinance No. ___________ of the City of Mobridge, Walworth County, South Dakota, dated this ____________ day of ____________, (year).”
The Official Zoning District Map shall be and remain on file in the office of the City Finance Officer and shall be the final authority as to current zoning status in the City, regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning District Map, which may, from time to time, be made or published.
If a separate airport-zoning map for the City of Mobridge is prepared it shall carry the above certification and shall be declared to be a part of this ordinance.
5.03 Zoning District Boundaries. The following rules shall apply to the interpretation of zoning district boundaries:
1. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys, shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
2. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the limits of political jurisdictions be construed as following such limits.
3. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines, other property lines, or section lines and other government survey lines, shall be construed as following such lines.
4. Boundaries indicated as approximately adjoining a railroad right-of-way shall be construed to coincide with the nearest boundary line of such railroad right-of-way, unless otherwise fixed.
35
5. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams, rivers, or other continuously flowing or intermittent water courses, shall be construed as following the channel center line of such water courses as they existed at the time of adoption of this Ordinance; boundaries indicated as approximately following shore lines shall be construed to follow such
shorelines, and in the event of change in the shore lines, shall be construed as moving with the actual shorelines.
6. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections 1. through 5. above shall be so construed. If the boundary line cannot be shown accurately by any of the aforesaid methods, it shall be shown by written dimensions, indicating clearly the distance of said boundary line from the nearest parallel street centerline, government survey line, or other
permanent and legally established line.
7. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall interpret the location of boundary lines as shown on the Zoning District Map. When the Zoning Enforcement Officer's interpretation is questioned, the boundary lines shall be determined by the Board of Zoning Adjustment, as provided in Title 21.
8. Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this Ordinance, the Board of Zoning Adjustment may permit, as a special exception, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed fifty (50’) feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot.
9. Where the application of the aforesaid rules have a reasonable doubt as to the boundaries between two districts, the regulations of the more restrictive
district shall govern the entire parcel in question, unless otherwise determined
by the Board of Zoning Adjustment.
5.04 Zoning Map Change. If, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance,
changes are made in the district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning District Map, such changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning District Map by the Zoning Enforcement Officer within three (3) working days after the effective date of the amendment.
An entry on the Official Zoning District Map shall be made showing the approval date and the effective date of the amendment, which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Finance Officer.
No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning District Map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this Ordinance. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this Ordinance and punishable as provided under Section 3.07.
5.05 Zoning Map Replacement. In the event that the Official Zoning District Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the City Council may authorize the preparation of a new Official Zoning District Map which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning District Map.
The new Official Zoning District Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning District Map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original Official Zoning District Map, or any subsequent amendment thereof. The new Official
36
Zoning District Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Finance Officer and bear the seal of the City under the following words:
"This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning District Map of Ordinance No. ___________ of the City of Mobridge, Walworth County, South Dakota effective as of the ____________ day of ____________, (year).”
Unless the prior Official Zoning District Map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining, shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment.
37
TITLE 6 – GENERAL ZONING DISTRICT PROVISIONS 6.01 General. Regulations governing the use of land and buildings are hereby established in the several zoning districts as set forth in the following Articles, with each zoning district being identified by name and alphabetic symbol. The regulations, within each district, shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land. Only uses designated as permitted shall be allowed and any use not so designated shall be prohibited except in specific cases where the Board of Zoning Adjustment is authorized to rule on non-designated uses. 6.02 Zoning Affects Every Building and Use. No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is placed. 6.03 Required Lot Area or Other Open Space Cannot be Used. No lot, yard, parking area or other open space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make said area or dimension less than the minimum required by this Ordinance. No part of a yard, parking area or other space provided for any building in compliance with this Ordinance shall be included as part of a yard, parking area or other space required for another building except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance. 6.04 Obstructions to Vision at Street Intersection Prohibited. In all districts except General Commercial, on a corner lot, within the area formed by the centerline of streets at a distance of fifty eight (58’) feet from their intersections, there shall be no obstruction to vision between a height of three and one half feet and a height of ten feet above the average grade of each street at a center line thereof. The requirements of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit any necessary retaining wall.
38
TITLE 7 – NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
7.01 Intent. It is the intent of this Ordinance to recognize that the eventual elimination of existing uses and structures which are not in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance is as much a subject of health, safety and welfare as is the prevention of the establishment of new uses which would violate these provisions. However, it is the further intent that any elimination of non-conforming uses or structures shall be effected in such a manner as to avoid unreasonable invasion of established private property rights.
7.02 Non-Conforming Uses. A non-conforming use, as defined in Title 4, may be continued, subject to exceptions and conditions set forth hereunder.
1. Change of Use. If no structural alterations are made , any non-conforming use may be changed to another non-conforming use provided that the Board of Zoning Adjustment, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate to or more appropriate to the district than the existing non-conforming use. In permitting such change, the Board of Zoning Adjustment may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the provisions of this Ordinance.
2. Abandonment. No building, structure, or premises where a non-conforming user has ceased for one (1) or more years shall again be put to a nonconforming use, per SDCL 11-2-27.
7.03 Non-Conforming Structures. A non-conforming structure, as defined in Title 4, may be continued, subject to the following conditions and requirements.
1. Structural Alteration, Extension, or Repair. A non-conforming structure may be altered, extended, or repaired without prior approval of the Board of Zoning Adjustment, provided that such alteration, extension or repair does not increase the degree of the non-conformity, for example:
A. If a yard is non-conforming as to its dimension, such dimension shall not be further decreased, nor shall the length or heights of the exterior walls adjoining such non-conforming yard be increased.
B. If the building height is non-conforming, it shall not be increased.
2. Expansion of Use. No non-conforming structure may be changed to provide for an expansion of its use except by approval of the Board of Zoning Adjustment, even though such expansion is in accordance with the use requirements of this Ordinance. Examples of such expansion include increasing the number of dwelling units or the floor space of a commercial or industrial establishment. In approving an appeal for expansion of use in a nonconforming structure, the Board shall find that such extension wall not have a detrimental effect on neighboring property.
7.04 Repairing Damaged Building. A non-conforming building or a building occupied by a non-conforming use, which is damaged or destroyed by fire, flood, winds, acts of God, or other causes beyond the control of the owner, may be repaired or reconstructed and the non-conforming use, if any, may be continued, provided the repair or reconstruction does not increase the degree of the non-conformity. All repair or reconstruction of the damaged building shall be commenced immediately and all repairs or reconstruction shall be completed within one year from the date of the damage. In the event any damaged or destroyed building remains after
39
the event causing the damage and the remains of the building constitute a nuisance, said nuisance condition shall be abated within 3 months from the date of the event.
40
TITLE 8 – AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
8.01 Statement of Purpose. This District is primarily for agricultural and non-farm, or suburban residential uses.
8.02 Permitted Uses.
1. Principal Uses.
A. Agriculture, including the production of field crops, dairying, pasturage, farm woodlots, horticulture, apiculture, animal and poultry husbandry and the normal processing and sale of agricultural products, but not including specialized animal raising except as an accessory to other agricultural activities.
B. Fish and wildlife production areas.
C. Single-family dwellings.
D. Publicly owned recreation facilities.
E. Transportation and utility easements and rights-of-way.
2. Conditional Uses. (Subject to approval by Board of Zoning Adjustment)
A. Airports (See Section 18.07)
B. Mobile Homes
C. Specialized animal raising and care
D. Veterinary clinic or hospital
E. Mineral exploration and extraction. (See Section 18.05).
F. Recreation Facilities, private and limited commercial
G. Public uses
H. Semi-public uses
I. Seasonal dwellings
J. Sanitary landfills and dumps
K. Storage and/or sales of fertilizer, agricultural anhydrous ammonia, and agri-chemicals
L. Water Treatment Facilities
M. Historical monuments
N. Commercial feed lots, provided that no such special exception shall be issued unless and until the proprietor of such a feed lot has complied with the provisions of Chapter 46-25 SDCL.
O. Commercial radio or television stations and towers
P. Sewage treatment facilities
Q. Drive-in theatres.
3. Accessory Uses.
A. Residential garages
B. Swimming Pools, garden houses, tool houses, play houses, sheds
C. Living quarters of persons employed on the premises
D. Boarders and roomers (limited to two)
E. Home occupations (See Section 18.02)
F. Required off-street parking space.
G. Stables (Not part of a farm)
H. Signs, accessory (See Title 17)
I. Temporary buildings.
J. Roadside produce stands in conjunction with a bonafide farm operation on the premises
K. Other accessory uses as defined in Title 4.
41
8.03 Prohibited Uses. Only uses designated as permitted shall be allowed, and any use not so designated shall be prohibited. Changes to the above use lists shall be made through proper amendment procedures.
8.04 Area and Dimensional Standards. All structures shall comply with the
dimensional and area requirements as set forth in the following schedule:
Minimum Lot Size Minimum Yard Maximum Maximum
Dimensions Coverage
Lot
Area Frontage Front Side Rear Bldg. Hght.
(Acres) (Feet) (Feet) (Feet) (Feet) (Feet) (Strs.) (Percent)
Dwelling 5 150 100 20 20 30 2½
Schools 5 400 100 50 50 30 2½ 10
All Other 5 150 100 40 40 30 2½ 20
Uses
Shelter Belts 100
8.05 Dwellings on Farms. No more than three (3) permanent dwelling units; including mobile homes, may be located on a farm, to be occupied only by families or persons engaged in the operation of the same farm. Ownership of the sites on which such dwellings are located shall not be transferred as separate parcels except in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations and the standards set forth in this Ordinance.
8.06 Requirements for Accessory Structures. An accessory building may be erected detached from the principal building or may be erected as an integral part of the principal building, or it may be connected by a breezeway or similar structure. No accessory building shall be erected in any required yard other than a rear yard, except as hereinafter provided. Any accessory building not in a rear yard whether detached from or connected with the principal building shall be so placed as to meet all yard requirements for a principal building. If located in a rear yard, both detached and connected accessory structures shall be subject to the requirements set forth in the following paragraphs:
1. The height of such accessory buildings shall not exceed eighteen (18’) feet except barns and other agriculturally related buildings which shall not exceed forty (40’) feet and the distance of such buildings from other separate buildings on the same lot shall be at least six (6’) feet except that a breezeway, at least six (6’) feet in length, may connect an accessory building with a principal building.
2. The height of all-accessory fences, walls or hedges shall comply with the requirements of Section 18.01 for such fences.
3. No accessory building in a rear yard shall be less than forty (40’) feet from a side lot line or a rear lot line.
42
TITLE 9 – LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-1)
9.01 Statement of Purpose. This district is intended to encourage a variety of low density single-family and two family dwellings. The principal uses of land range from residences to uses, which are functionally compatible with low density residential uses. Recreational, religious and educational facilities, and other related uses in keeping with the residential character of the District may be permitted on review by the Board of Zoning Adjustment.
9.02 Permitted Uses.
1. Principal Uses
A. Single-Family Dwellings
B. Two-family Dwellings
C. Transportation and utility easements and rights-of-way.
2. Conditional Uses (Subject to approval by Board of Zoning Adjustments)
A. Nursery schools and day nurseries
B. Nursing Home, assisted living homes, convalescent homes and rest homes
C. Cemeteries adjacent to or in extension of existing cemeteries
D. Recreation facilities, private
E. Libraries, museums, and historical monuments or structures
F. Rooming, boarding or lodging houses
G. Town houses
H. Public uses
I. Semi-public uses
J. Mobile Home Parks (See Section 18.04 and Appendix A)
3. Accessory Uses
A. Residential garages
B. Swimming pools, garden houses, tool houses; play houses
C. Boarders and Roomers
D. Home occupations (See Section 18.02)
E. Living quarters for persons employed on the premises
F. Accessory signs (See Title 17)
G. Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be immediately adjacent to said construction work and which buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work. This shall include trailers used as offices.
H. Other accessory uses as defined in Title 4.
9.03 Prohibited Uses. Only uses designated as permitted shall be allowed, and any use not so designated shall be prohibited. Changes to the above use lists shall be made through proper amendment procedures.
43
9.04 Area of Dimensional Standards.
Minimum Lot Size Minimum Yard Maximum Maximum
Dimensions Coverage
Lot
Area Frontage Front Side Rear Bldg. Hght.
(Sq Ft) (Feet) (Feet) (Feet) (Feet) (Feet) (Strs.) (Percent)
Single 10,000 75 25 10 10 30/50* 2
Family
Dwelling
Two 14,000 100 25 10 10 30/50* 2
Family
Dwelling
Schools 5 acres 200 50 25 50 30 2½ 10
Hospital 2 acres 200 50 25 50 30 2½ 30
All Other Sufficient to 35 20 40 30 2½ 30
Uses Comply with
Yard and Parking
Requirements
Portable Buildings 2 6
*The maximum height may be increased to fifty (50’) feet provided that the side yard setback is increased by five (5’) feet for every five (5’) feet, or fraction thereof additional height over thirty (30’) feet.
9.05 Requirements for Accessory Structures. An accessory building may be erected detached from the principal building or may be erected as an integral part of the principal building, or it may be connected by a breezeway or similar structure. No accessory building shall be erected in any required yard other than a rear yard, except as hereinafter provided. Any accessory building not in a rear yard whether detached from or connected with the principal building shall be so placed as to meet all yard requirements for a principal building. If located in a rear yard, both
detached and connected accessory structures shall be subject to the requirements set forth in the following paragraphs:
1. The height of such accessory buildings shall not exceed eighteen (18’) feet and the distance of such buildings from other separate buildings on the same lot shall be at least six (6’) feet except that a breezeway, at least six (6’) feet in length, may connect an accessory building with a principal building.
2. No accessory building in a rear yard shall be less than six (6’) feet from a side lot line or a rear lot line.
3. Coverage of a rear yard by accessory buildings shall not exceed twenty-five (25%) percent.
44
4. No accessory building may be built or moved into City Limits that has galvanized metal siding. All new accessory buildings and those moved in with colored metal siding must be of new material and be uniform in color that conforms to the neighborhood. (2001ORD784) (2005ORD825)
45
TITLE 10 – MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-2)
10.01 Statement of Purpose. This district is intended to encourage a variety of single-family, two-family and multi-family dwellings. The principal uses of land range from residences to uses, which are functionally compatible with intensive residential uses. Recreational, religious, and educational facilities, and other related uses in keeping with the residential character of the District may permitted on review by the Board of Zoning Adjustment.
10.02 Permitted Uses.
1. Principal Uses.
A. Single-family dwellings
B. Two-family dwellings
C. Transportation and utility easements and rights-of-way.
2. Conditional Uses. (Subjects to approval be Board of Zoning Adjustment)
A. Nursery schools and day nurseries
B. Nursing Home, assisted living homes, convalescent homes and rest homes
C. Cemeteries adjacent to or in extension of existing cemeteries
D. Recreation Facilities, Private
E. Libraries, museums, and historical monuments or structures
F. Rooming, boarding or lodging houses
G. Multi-family dwellings
H. Town Houses
I. Public uses
J. Semi-Public uses
K. Mobile Homes
L. Mobile Home Parks (See Section 18.04)
3. Accessory Uses.
A. Residential garages
B. Swimming pools, garden houses, tool houses; play houses
C. Boarders and Roomers
D. Home occupations (See Section 18.02)
E. Living quarters for persons employed on the premises
F. Accessory signs (See Title 17)
G. Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be immediately adjacent to said construction work and which buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work. This shall include trailers used as offices.
H. Other accessory uses defined in Title 4.
10.03 Prohibited Uses. Only uses designated as permitted shall be allowed, and any use not o designated shall be prohibited. Changes to the above use lists shall be made through proper amendment procedures.
46
10.04 Area of Dimensional Standards.
Minimum Lot Size Minimum Yard Maximum Maximum
Dimensions Coverage
Lot
Area Frontage Front Side Rear Bldg. Hght.
(Sq Ft) (Feet) (Feet) (Feet) (Feet) (Feet) (Strs.) (Percent)
Single 7,000 50 25 6 6 30/50* 2
Family
Dwelling
Two 10,000 75 25 6 6 30/50* 2
Family
Dwelling
Multi 10,000 + 25 10² 6 40 3
Family 1,000 for each
Dwelling additional unit
Schools 5 acres 200 50 25 50 30 2½ 10
Hospital 2 acres 200 50 25 50 30 2½ 20
All Other Sufficient to 35 20 40 30 2½ 30
Uses Comply with
Yard and Parking
Requirements
*The maximum height may be increased to fifty (50’) feet provided that the side yard setback is increased by five (5’) feet for every five (5’) feet, or fraction thereof additional height over thirty (30’) feet.
* Minimum side yard shall be 1/5 of sum of height + length of building walls most nearly parallel.
10.05 Requirements for Accessory Structures. An accessory building may be erected detached from the principal building or may be erected as an integral part of the principal building, or it may be connected by a breezeway or similar structure. No accessory building shall be erected in any required yard other than a rear yard, except as hereinafter provided. Any accessory building not in a rear yard whether detached from or connected with the principal building shall be so placed as to meet all yard requirements for a principal building. If located in a rear yard, both detached and connected accessory structures shall be subject to the requirements set forth in the following paragraphs:
47
1. The height of such accessory buildings shall not exceed eighteen (18’) feet and the distance of such buildings from other separate buildings on the same lot shall be at least six (6’) feet except that a breezeway, at least six (6’) feet in length, may connect an accessory building with a principal building.
2. The height of all-accessory fences, walls or hedges shall comply with the requirements of Section 18.0l for such fences.
3. No accessory building in a rear yard shall be less than six (6’) feet from a side lot line or a rear lot line.
4. Coverage of a rear yard by accessory buildings shall not exceed fifty (50%) percent.
5. No accessory building may be built or moved into City Limits that has galvanized metal siding. All new accessory buildings and those moved in with colored metal siding must be of new material and be uniform in color that conforms to the neighborhood. (2001ORD784) (2005ORD827)
48
TITLE 11 – MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL AND MOBILE
HOME DISTRICT (R-3)
11.01 Statement of Purpose. This district is intended to encourage a variety of single-family, two-family, multi-family and mobile home dwellings. The principal uses of land range from residences to uses, which are functionally compatible with intensive residential uses. Recreational, religious, and educational facilities, and other related uses in keeping with the residential character of the District may be permitted on review by the Board of Zoning Adjustment.
11.02 Permitted Uses.
1. Principal Uses
A. Single-family dwellings
B. Two-family dwellings
C. Mobile Homes
D. Transportation and utility easements and rights-of-way.
2. Conditional Uses. (Subject to approval by Board of Zoning Adjustments)
A. Nursery schools and day nurseries
B. Nursing Home, assisted living homes, convalescent homes and rest homes
C. Cemeteries adjacent to or in extension of existing cemeteries
D. Recreation Facilities, Private
E. Libraries, museums, and historical monuments or structures
F. Rooming, boarding or lodging houses
G. Multi-family dwellings
H. Town houses
I. Public uses
J. Semi-public uses
K. Mobile Home Parks (See Section 18.04 and Appendix A)
3. Accessory Uses.
A. Residential garages
B. Swimming pools, garden houses, tool houses, playhouses
C. Boarders and Roomers
D. Home occupations (See Section 18.02)
E. Living quarters for persons employed on the premises
F. Accessory signs (See Title 17)
G. Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which buildings shall be immediately adjacent to said construction work and which buildings shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work. This shall include trailers used as offices.
H. Other accessory uses as defined in Title 4.
11.03 Prohibited Uses. Only uses designated as permitted shall be allowed, and any use not so designated shall be prohibited Changes to the above use lists shall be made through proper amendment procedures.
49
11.04 Area of Dimensional Standards.
Minimum Lot Size Minimum Yard Maximum Maximum
Dimensions Coverage
Lot
Area Frontage Front Side Rear Bldg. Hght.
(Sq Ft) (Feet) (Feet) (Feet) (Feet) (Feet) (Strs.) (Percent)
Single 7,000 50 25 6 25 30/50* 2
Family
Dwelling
Two 10,000 75 25 6 25 30/50* 2
Family
Dwelling
Multi 10,000 + 25 10² 25 40 3
Family 1,000 for each
Dwelling additional unit
Schools 5 acres 200 50 25 50 30 2½ 10
Hospital 2 acres 200 50 25 50 30 2½ 20
All Other Sufficient to 35 20 40 30 2½ 30
Uses Comply with
Yard and Parking
Requirements
*The maximum height may be increased to fifty (50’) feet provided that the side yard setback is increased by five (5’) feet for every five (5’) feet, or fraction thereof additional height over thirty (30’) feet.
* Minimum side yard shall be 1/5 of sum of height + length of building walls most nearly parallel.
11.05 Requirements for Accessory Structures. An accessory building may be erected detached from the principal building or may be erected as an integral part of the principal building, or it may be connected by a breezeway or similar structure. No accessory building shall be erected in any required yard other than a rear yard, except as hereinafter provided. Any accessory building not in a rear yard whether detached from or connected with the principal building shall be so placed as to meet all yard requirements for a principal building. If located in a rear yard, both detached and connected accessory structures shall be subject to the requirements set forth in the following paragraphs:
50
1. The height of such accessory buildings shall not exceed eighteen (18’) feet and the distance of such buildings from other separate buildings on the same lot shall be at least six (6’) feet except that a breezeway, at least six (6’) feet in length, may connect an accessory building with a principal building.
2. The height of all-accessory fences, walls or hedges shall comply with the requirements of Section 18.0l for such fences.
3. No accessory building in a rear yard shall be less than six (6’) feet from a side lot line or a rear lot line.
4. Coverage of a rear yard by accessory buildings shall not exceed fifty (50%) percent.
5. No accessory building may be built or moved into City Limits that has galvanized metal siding. All new accessory buildings and those moved in with colored metal siding must be of new material and be uniform in color that conforms to the neighborhood. (2005ORD825) (2001ORD784)
51
TITLE 12 – GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (GC)
12.01 Statement of Purpose. The intent of the General Commercial District (GC) is to provide a commercial area for those establishments providing the general shopping needs of the trade area and in particular, those businesses normally oriented to the pedestrian shopper. The grouping of uses is intended to strengthen the central business area as the urban center of trade, service, governmental and cultural activities, and to provide neighborhood commercial convenience areas.
12.02 Permitted Uses.
1. Principal Uses
A. Non-residential uses of the types permitted in the Residential District as
follows:
Offices of civic, religious and charitable organizations
Private clubs, lodges, fraternity and sorority houses
B. Lodging, including hotels, motels and apartment hotels.
C. Any retail business whose principal activity is the sale of new or used merchandise or antiques. Such retail business may include a workshop for servicing or repair of goods sold on the premises.
D. Service establishments in which the retail sale of goods may or may not be involved, of the following types:
Barber and Beauty Shops
Photography studios
Watch, clock or jewelry repair
Catering services
Secretarial, stenographic and typing services
Physical culture establishments
Dry cleaning and laundry pick up services
Self-service laundry and dry cleaning
Household appliance repair
Funeral Home or Mortuary
E. Commercially operated vocational schools, not including the use of equipment or machinery first listed as permitted in the I-1or I-2 Districts.
F. Restaurants, tea rooms, cafes and other establishments serving food, beverages or both, including drive-in facilities.
G. Radio and television studios, bowling alleys, roller rinks, ice-skating rinks, swimming pools, assembly halls, enclosed theaters, concert halls, dance halls, or similar places of assembly or entertainment.
H. Banks and other lending and financial establishments including drive-in facilities.
I. Workshop types of services, limited to the following:
Interior decorating
Re-upholstering and furniture refinishing
Laundry and dry cleaning
Medical and dental laboratories not connected with practice of medicine or dentistry
52
Electrical Repair, not including the repair of industrial or road building machines or similar large machines.
Duplicating, addressing, blue printing, photocopying, electrostatic reproduction, film processing, mailing, and mail listing services
Locksmith, gunsmith
Shoe shine and shoe repair shops, hat cleaning and blocking
Tailor or dressmaking shop
J. Drive-in establishments related to the sale of goods or services permitted in this District, including drive-in theaters.
K. Rental of autos, trucks, trailers, and home gardening and repair tools
L. Food locker plant, including the cutting and packaging of meat, fowl, fish or game, sale at retail, delivery of individual home orders, renting of individual lockers of home-customer storage thereof, but excluding the slaughtering or eviscerating thereof.
M. Repair services related to goods or merchandise permitted to be sold in this District.
N. Offices of professional, business or industrial firms, not including the manufacture or storage of goods on the premises.
O. Recreation facilities, general commercial
P. Gasoline service station.
Q. Off-street parking as a principal use.
R. Professional Services offices including but not limited to:
Medical and dental office and clinics
Legal, engineering, architectural, accounting and similar professional offices
Accounting, bookkeeping and auditing services
Real estate and insurance offices
S. Governmental Services
T. Bus passenger terminals and taxicab transportation services.
U. Parks
V. Public buildings and grounds
W. Self-Storage facility
X. Vehicle Repair Business
Y. Tow Business
2. Conditional Uses. (Subject to approval by Board of Zoning Adjustment)
A. Any other retail business or commercial or professional service establishment determined by the Board of Zoning Adjustment to be of the same general character as, and not producing more noise, dust, odor, vibration, blast or traffic than those enumerated in Section 12.02.1, but not including any uses listed as permitted in the Industrial Districts (I), Articles 14 & 15. Buildings containing both commercial and residential uses under the condition that the residential uses are not located on the ground floor.
B. Buildings containing both commercial and residential uses under the condition that the residential uses are not located on the ground floor.
3. Accessory Uses.
A. Signs, as regulated by Title 17
B. Off-street parking as required by Section 18.06
C. Any use customarily incidental to the principal permitted use.
53
12.03 Prohibited Uses. Only uses designated as permitted shall be allowed, and any use not so designated shall be prohibited except in specific cases where the Board of Zoning Adjustment is authorized to rule on non-designated uses.
12.04 Area and Dimensional Standards. All structures shall comply with the dimensional requirements set forth hereunder.
1. Minimum Front Yard Depth. No front yard is required.
2. Minimum Side and Rear Yard. The schedule of side and rear, yard dimensions shall be as follows:
A. Yard adjoining a lot line in a Commercial or Industrial District: No side yard or rear yard is required, but a use serviced from the side or rear shall have access thereto for loading and unloading in accordance with Section 18.06.
B. Yards adjoining a lot line of a Residential District shall be as follows:
Based on the dimension of building wall parallel or most nearly parallel with the side or rear lot line, the width of side yard and depth of rear yard shall be determined in accordance with the following formula:
Height of wall + length of wall = width or depth of yard 3
provided, however, that no side yard width shall be less than 25 feet and no rear yard depth shall be less than 25 feet.
3. Maximum Height Limits. The maximum height of structures shall be 75 feet or 6 stories.
54
TITLE 13 – HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT (HC)
13.01 Statement and Purpose. Intended "to provide locations for types of businesses which are not compatible with the uses which are characteristic of the General Commercial District but, which are essential in serving the total needs of both urban and rural population. It is intended that such Districts be located at or near major thoroughfare intersections, with emphasis on highway services catering to motorists, farmers, and ranchers.
13.02 Permitted Uses.
1. Principal Uses
A. Gasoline service stations and automobile repair garages.
B. Truck stops
C. Tire store sales and service including vulcanizing, involving no manufacturing on the premises.
D. Milk distributing stations, but not involving bottling on the premises.
E. Lodging, including hotels and motels.
F. Recreation facilities, limited commercial
G. Retail stores for the sale of automobile parts and accessories, souvenirs, curios, film, magazines and other products customarily sold to meet the needs of the motoring public
H. Restaurants, tea rooms, cafes and other establishments serving food, beverages or both, including drive-in facilities.
I. Retail sale of used merchandise and the retail sale of new and used automobiles, trucks, boats, mobile homes, motorcycles or agricultural implements, and garden supplies.
J. Fruit and vegetable markets.
K. Garden centers, greenhouses and nurseries
L. Trucks and trailer for hauling, rental and sales (U-Haul type).
M. Self-Storage facility
N. Tow Business including Vehicle Storage Yard with ten (10) or fewer stored vehicles.
O. Vehicle Repair Business.
P. All Principal uses as set forth in General Commercial Zoned areas as defined in TITLE 12, 12.02 Permitted Uses, 1. Principal Uses.
2. Conditional Uses (Subject to approval by Board of Zoning Adjustment)
A. Any other retail business or commercial services establishment to be of the same general character as, and not producing more noise, dust, odor, vibration, blast or traffic than those enumerated in Section 13.02.1, but not including any uses listed as permitted in the Industrial District (I), Articles 14 and 15.
B. All Conditional Uses as set forth in General Commercial Zoned areas as defined in TITLE 12, 12.02 Permitted Uses, 2. Conditional Uses.
55
3. Accessory Uses.
A. Signs, as regulated by Title 17.
B. Off-street parking as required by Section 18.06
C. Any use customarily incidental to the principal permitted use.
13.03 Prohibited Uses. Only uses designated as permitted shall be allowed, and any use not so designated shall be prohibited except in specific cases where the Board of Zoning Adjustment is authorized to rule on non-designated uses.
13.04 Area and Dimensional Standards. All structures shall comply with the dimensional requirements set forth hereunder.
1. Minimum Front Yard Depth. Minimum front yard depth shall be the height of the building, but not less than thirty (30) feet.
2. Minimum Side and Rear Yards. The schedule of side and rear yard dimensions shall be as follows:
A. Yard adjoining a lot line in a Commercial or Industrial District: No side yard or rear yard is required, but a use serviced from the side or rear shall have access thereto for loading and unloading in accordance with Section 18.06.
B. Yards adjoining a lot line of a Residential or Agricultural District shall be as follows: Based on the dimension of building wall parallel or most nearly parallel with the side or rear lot line, the width of side yard and depth of rear yard shall be determined in accordance with the following formula:
Height of wall + length of wall = width or depth of yard 3 provided, however, that no side yard width shall be less than 25 feet and no rear yard depth shall be less than 25 feet.
3. Maximum Height Standards. The maximum height of structures shall be 40 feet or 3 stories.
56
TITLE 14 – LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-1)
14.01 Statement of Purpose. In furtherance of a general policy of fostering a diversity of urban activities and a stable tax base in the City, it is intended that provision be made for varied types of industrial uses at appropriate locations where they will be compatible with other uses in adjoining districts. It is intended further, that within this Industrial District, location requirements and development standards shall be such as to reduce to a practical minimum the objectionable effects which certain types of industry might have upon one another and upon other uses permitted in adjoining non-industrial districts.
14.02 Permitted Uses.
1. Principal Uses.
A. Agriculture
B. Commercial establishments associated with or intended to serve the industrial establishments or their employees as follows:
Restaurants
Offices and facilities relating to emergency medical, drug and health services and the practice of industrial medicine.
Gasoline service stations.
Engineering, architectural, accounting, legal and similar professional services.
Duplicating, addressing, blueprinting, photocopying, mailing and stenographic services
Private employment agencies
Vocational and technical schools, public or private
C. Blending, packaging and storage of previously manufactured products, as follows: Chemical products, including household, cleaning and industrial compounds and insecticides.
Feed, grain, flour, sugar and other food products
Pharmaceutical preparations and drugs
D. The manufacture of finished products from previously prepared materials, such as:
Canvas Cloth Cork
Felt Fibers Fur
Glass Leather Paper
Precious or semi-precious metals or stone
Plastics Shell Textiles
Tobacco Wire
E. The manufacturing of the following finished products from previously prepared materials:
Cosmetics, toiletries and perfume.
Electric appliances, instruments, components and accessories
Household, personal or other small articles, such as jewelry, silverware, plastic ware, musical instruments and parts, toys, rubber stamps, sporting and athletic goods, pens, pencils and other office and artists' supplies, miscellaneous notions, signs and advertising displays
Office equipment and supplies and computing and accounting machines
Precision instruments, including professional scientific and regulating devices, photographic and optical goods
Wood products, including furniture, cabinet work and similar products
57
F. Non-manufacturing activities as follows: Operational equipment of public utilities and communication networks such as electrical receiving and transforming stations, radio, microwave or television transmission or receiving towers, and public utility substations
Transportation terminals and equipment, such as railway freight houses, truck terminals and transit vehicle storage areas, maintenance and service facilities for the foregoing, but excluding railroad maintenance facilities and marshalling yards.
Warehousing, refrigerated and general storage. Building materials sales and storage, not including sawmills, planing mills, or the mixing of cement, bituminous or asphaltic concrete
Building contractors equipment yards
Crematories
Research testing laboratories, not including the use of machines or equipment which are prohibited in this Industrial District
Laundries and dry cleaning establishments
Postal facilities, including the handling of large quantities of mail by rail or truck.
Hay, grain, feed and fertilizer, storage and sale
Fuel and ice dealers
Animal hospitals and fur animal farms
Off-street parking as a principal use
G. Vehicle Storage Yard with more than ten (10) stored vehicles in accordance with Appendix J.
H. Vehicle Repair Business.
I. Tow Business
J. Tow Business including Vehicle Storage Yard with more than ten (10) vehicles in accordance with Appendix J.
2. Conditional Uses (Subject to approval by Board of Zoning Adjustment)
A. Any other commercial or industrial use not listed but determined by the, Board of Zoning Adjustment to be of the same general character as those listed as principal uses in A through F herein before but not including any use which is prohibited or first listed in the Heavy
Industrial District (I-2), Article 15.
3. Accessory Permitted Uses.
A. Signs, as regulated by Title 17.
B. Off-street parking and loading, as required by Section l8.06
C. Any use customarily incidental to the principal permitted use, including dwellings used as quarters of watchmen or caretakers.
14.03 Area of Dimensional Standards. All structures shall comply with the dimensional requirements set forth hereunder:
1.Minimum Front Yard Depth. Minimum front yard depth shall be the height of the building, but not less than thirty (30) feet.
2. Minimum Side and Rear Yards. The schedule of side rear yard dimensions shall be as follows:
A. Yard adjoining a lot line in a Commercial or Industrial District: No side yard or rear yard is required, but a use serviced from the side or rear shall have access thereto for loading and unloading in accordance with Section 18.06.
58
B. Yards adjoining a lot line of a Residential District shall be not less than fifty (50) feet in depth.
3. Maximum Height Limit. The maximum height of structures shall be fifty (50) feet.
59
TITLE 15 – HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (I-2)
15.01 Statement of Purpose. In furtherance of a general policy of fostering a diversity of urban activities and a stable tax base in the City, it is intended that provision be made for varied types of industrial uses at appropriate locations where they will be compatible with other uses in adjoining districts. It is intended further, that within this Industrial District, location requirements and development standards shall be such as to reduce to a practical minimum the objectionable effects which certain types of industry might have upon one another and upon other uses permitted in adjoining non-industrial districts.
15.02 Permitted Uses.
1. Principal Uses.
A. Agriculture
B. Commercial establishments associated with or intended to serve the industrial establishments or their employees as follows:
Restaurants
Offices and facilities relating to emergency medical, drug and health services and the practice of industrial medicine.
Gasoline service stations.
Engineering, architectural, accounting, legal and similar professional services.
Duplicating, addressing, blueprinting, photocopying, mailing and stenographic services
Private employment agencies
Vocational and technical schools, public or private
C. The manufacture of metal products, using methods and materials as specified hereunder:
The fabrication of metal excluding the fabrication of structural steel, heavy machinery and transportation equipment.
The casting of light weight non-ferrous metals, welding, machining and other metal working process, but excluding punch presses having over twenty (20) tons rated capacity, drop hammers and other noise-producing machine operating tools.
The shaping of sheet metal in the manufacture of air conditioning refrigeration and heating equipment and office furniture, but excluding the stamping of automobile bodies and fenders and other units of similar size.
D. The processing or manufacture of food products, excluding pickles, sauerkraut, fish, flour, sugar, and vinegar.
E. Non-manufacturing activities as follows:
Bulk Storage of flammable liquids, not to exceed 25,000 gallons.
Workshops for the repair of industrial machines and equipment, the use of which is permitted in this District.
Advertising signs, as controlled by Title 17.
Off-street parking as a principal use.
F. Any other use, except the following:
1. Conditional Uses, as listed in this Article, which may be permitted only upon approval of the Board of Zoning Adjustment.
60
2. Principal or Conditional Uses in any Residential or Commercial District, which shall be prohibited. Uses specifically listed in part A through E above as permitted in the Industrial District shall be permitted even though listed in another District as well.
G. Vehicle Storage Yard with more than ten (10) stored vehicles in accordance with Appendix J.
H. Vehicle Repair Business.
I. Tow Business
J. Tow Business including Vehicle Storage Yard with more than ten (10) vehicles in accordance with Appendix J.
2. Conditional Uses. (Subject to approval by Board of Zoning Adjustment)
A. The following uses, with restrictions and requirements as indicated hereunder:
Junkyards, scrap and waste storage and wholesaling, provided that such uses shall not be permitted unless they are enclosed on all sides by an opaque wall or fences no less than ten (10’)
feet high; provided also that no stored scrap or waste material shall be visible from any street or road or from any Residential District.
Stone quarries and sand and gravel pits, subject to the provisions of Section 18.05.
B. The following uses which shall not be located within one thousand (1,000’) feet of any Residential District: Slaughterhouses, stock yards, and livestock sales, Incineration, reduction or storage of garbage, offal or rancid fats , Manufacture of explosives, ammunition, fireworks, or matches.
C. Any other commercial or industrial use not listed but determined by the Board of Zoning Adjustment to be of the same general character as those listed as principal uses in A through E herein before but not including any use which is prohibited.
3. Accessory Permitted Uses.
A. Signs, as regulated by Title 17.
B. Off-street parking and loading, as required by Section 18.06
C. Any use customarily incidental to the principal permitted use, including dwellings used as quarters of watchmen or caretakers.
15.03 Area and Dimensional Standards. All structures shall comply with the dimensional requirements set fourth hereunder:
1. Minimum Front Yard Depth. Minimum front yard depth shall be the height of the building, but not less than thirty (30’) feet.
2. Minimum Side and Rear Yards. The schedule of the side and rear yard dimensions shall be as follows:
A. Yard adjoining a lot line in a Commercial or Industrial District: No side yard or rear yard is required, but a use serviced from the side or rear shall have access thereto for loading and unloading in accordance with Section 18.06.
B. Yards adjoining a lot line of a Residential District shall be not less than fifty (50’) feet in depth.
3. Maximum Height Limits. The maximum height of structures shall be one hundred (100’) feet.
61
TITLE 16 – CONSERVATION DISTRICT (CN)
16.01 Statement of Purpose. Areas possessing natural resources, the preservation and wise use of which take precedence over other urban uses, which might otherwise encroach or destroy such resources. The type of resource, which the land possesses will determine the uses which should be permitted on such land. In addition, this District is for the protection of drainage ways to permit the unimpeded flow of surface run-off without endangering life and health or causing property damage due to flooding, by controlling the nature and intensity of land uses and the location, elevation and quality of structures in the floodplain. It shall be the intent of the City Government to administer this Zoning Ordinance in such a manner as to encourage the development of resources in the Conservation District as follows:
Resource Best Use Future Zoning District
1. Woodland, streams and Public Recreation Continue in (CN) water bodies having scenic or other recreational value.
2. Sand, gravel, limestone, Controlled Extraction Continue in (CN) or change and other mineral to (I)deposits.
3. Flood Plain or areas Wildlife Management Continue in (CN) requiring special Recreation, Limited drainage treatment. agriculture
16.02 Permitted Uses.
1. Principal Uses
A. Limited agricultural uses such as pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries,
horticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop
harvesting.
B. Wildlife and Natural Preserves.
2. Conditional Uses. (Subject to approval by Board of Zoning Adjustment)
A. Agriculture, general
B. Specialized animal raising and care
C. Recreation Facilities, Limited Commercial, and Private
D. Mineral extraction (See Section 18.05)
E. Seasonal Dwellings
F. Fish hatcheries
G. Shooting preserves
H. Single family dwellings (Not including mobile homes)
I. Public Uses.
3. Accessory Uses and Structures.
A. Garden Houses and Tool Houses
B. Lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas accessory to a residence
C. Required off-street parking space
D. Signs, accessory (See Title 17)
E. Stables (not part of a farm) – conditional
F. Temporary buildings
G. Other accessory uses as defined in Title 4
62
16.03 Prohibited Uses. The following uses shall be prohibited in all designated flood plain and floodway areas.
1. All uses or structures with a high flood damage potential or which adversely affect the efficiency or unduly restrict the capacity of the channels or floodways of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system.
2. Storage of potentially hazardous materials which if subject to flooding may become buoyant, flammable, explosive or may be injurious to human, animal, or plant life.
3. Dwellings, schools, places of general assembly and institutions for human care.
4. Other uses that are likely to cause pollution of waters, as defined in South Dakota Law.
16.04 Area and Dimensional Standards. Area and dimensional requirements shall be as specified in the Conditional Use Permit. As a minimum all uses shall comply with the dimensional and area requirements as set forth in the following schedule:
Minimum Lot Minimum Yard Maximum
Size Dimensions Building Height
Area Frontage Front Side Rear
(Acres) (Feet) (Feet) (Feet) (Feet) (Feet)
All Uses 5 300 100 25 50 35
16.05 Development Standards in Designated Flood Plain Areas. All structures within the flood plain area shall conform to the following standards:
1. Any residence shall be constructed on fill so that the first floor or the basement floor are above the regulatory flood-protection elevations. The fill, which shall include the access to the structure from a public street shall have an elevation no less than one foot above the regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular area, and the fill shall extend no less than fifteen feet beyond the limits of any structure or building erected thereon.
2. Where existing streets or utilities are at elevations which make strict compliance with the above provisions impractical, flood proofing or other measures to provide protection to the flood protection elevation standards may be authorized only by special permit.
3. Any structure, other than a residence, shall ordinarily be elevated on fill as provided in paragraph 1 above, but may in special circumstances be protected by other flood-proofing measures to a point at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation.
4. Where in the opinion of the Board, topographic data, engineering, and other studies are needed to determine the effects of flooding on a proposed structure or fill and/or the effect of the structure or fill on the flow of water, the Board may require the applicant to submit such data or other studies prepared by competent engineers and other technical people.
5. Any structure, equipment or material permitted shall be firmly anchored to prevent it from floating away and thus damaging other structures and threatening to restrict bridge openings and other restricted sections of the stream.
16.06 Establishment of Boundaries in Flood Plain Areas.
1. The boundaries of the Flood Plain and Floodway areas shall be based on data provided by reports and records of the U.S Army Corps of Engineers, the U.S. Geological survey, the Federal Flood Insurance Administration, or other official agency.
63
2. For areas subject to flooding but for which there is no other applicable data, the Fifth District Planning and Development Commission may be asked to supply such data, together with appropriate recommendations for the guidance of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
3. In the absence of a Flood Plain Boundary as set forth herein before as such boundary may apply to any parcel of land for which a zoning application has been made, it shall be the duty of the Zoning Enforcement officer to refer such application to the Planning and Zoning Commission for decision. It shall be the duty of said Commission to establish said boundary as it applies to such parcel of land, arid render a decision as to the compliance or non-compliance of the proposed use with the regulations set forth herein before.
16.07 Warning and Disclaimer of Responsibility. The degree of flood protection required by this Ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. Larger floods may occur flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This Ordinance does not imply that areas outside the flood Plain area boundaries or land uses permitted within such area will be free from flooding or flood-damages. This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
64
TITLE 17 – SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS
17.01 General Provisions. Signs of all types as defined in Title 4 shall comply with the regulations set forth in this Section. In addition to the standards and requirements set forth in succeeding sub-sections, the following provisions shall apply to signs of all types.
1. For definitions, see City of Mobridge Zoning Ordinance # 784 Title 4.
2. This title shall not apply to any display of directional signs, street name signs, or other signs which have been authorized and erected by a governmental body.
3. A sign is a structure or a part of a structure for the purpose of applying yard and height regulations.
4. Signs are prohibited within the public right-of-way except that the council may grant a special permit for temporary signs and decoration to be placed on a right-of-way for a period of time not to exceed ninety (90) days, subject to the laws of South Dakota and all titles listed in the City of Mobridge Zoning Ordinance # 784. Also, no signs shall be attached or otherwise applied to trees, bus shelters, utility poles, trash receptacles, newspaper vending machines or boxes, or any other unapproved supporting structure not otherwise placed in the public right-of-way except as specifically permitted by this Section, provided that a bus shelter, trash receptacle or newspaper vending machine may have an identification sign. No sign shall be erected in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, or at any location where, by reason of position, shape, or color it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device, or which makes use of the words “stop”, “look”, “danger”, or other word(s) phrase(s), or symbol(s) in such a manner as to interfere with or mislead or confuse motorists or pedestrians. Light sources for illuminated signs shall not be of such brightness as to constitute a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Signs are also prohibited when the sign projects beyond the property or street right-of-way line.
5. Signs and their superstructures within the Highway Commercial (HC) District may exceed into the public right-of-way a distance not to exceed fifteen (15”) inches when flat against the building.
6. Illuminated flashing signs shall not be permitted within the “AG”, “R-1”, “R-2”, “R-3”, and “CN” districts.
7. Illuminated signs or devices giving off an intermittent, steady, or rotating beam, consisting of a collection or concentration of rays of light shall be permitted except carbon, are lights which may be located and used on private property in the “GC”, “HC”, “I-1”, and “I-2” districts for a period not to exceed three (3) days.
8. Illuminated signs shall be permitted when such signs are accessory to permitted nonresidential uses.
9. One name plate sign per lot in the “GC”, “HC”, “I-1”, and “I-2” district pertaining to a permitted use may be erected not to exceed fifty (50%) percent of the authorized aggregate footage of advertising sign space for such lot.
10. For the purpose of selling or leasing property, a sign or signs not in excess of eight (8) square feet of sign may be placed within the front yard of such property to be sold or leased. Such sign or signs shall not be less than ten (10’) feet from the front lot line unless flat against the structure.
11. For the purpose of selling or promoting a residential project of six (6’) or more dwelling units, a sign not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet may be erected upon the project site and maintained until each of the units has been rented or leased. At such time the sign shall be
65
removed and future signs will be subject to Title 17. They shall also be no less than six (6’) feet from the street right-of-way line.
12. The area within the frame shall be used to calculate the square footage except that the width of a frame exceeding twelve (12”) inches shall constitute advertising space, or should such letter or graphics be mounted directly on a wall or fascia or in such a way as to be without a frame the dimensions for calculating the square footage shall be the area extending six (6”) inches beyond the periphery area formed around such letters or graphics in a plane figure bounded by straight lines connecting the outermost points thereof. Each surface utilized to display a message or to attract attention shall be measured as a separate sign, and symbols, flags, pictures, wording, figures or other forms of graphics painted on or attached to windows, walls awnings, free standing structures, suspended by balloons or kites or on persons, animals, or vehicles shall be considered as a sign to be included in calculating the overall square footage.
13. Signs existing after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title which do not conform to the regulations set forth in this title are a nonconforming use or structure and as such shall be under the regulations set forth in the City of Mobridge Zoning Ordinance Title 7. All signs prior to the City of Mobridge Zoning Ordinance # 784 will be “grandfathered” in. The superstructure for mounting of signs and such signs shall not be attached to a roof or project above the roof of a building not more than six (6’) feet.
14. Temporary Signs or banners when authorized by the City Planning Commission.
17.02 Signs in the “R-1”, “R-2”, “R-3”, and “CN” Districts. Within these districts the following signs are permitted:
1. One double surfaced name plate sign for each dwelling which shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area per surface. Such sign may indicate the name of the occupation, if such exists. Yard lights and name plate signs in R-1, R-2, R-3, CN districts provide such lights are three (3’) feet or more from all lot lines and subject to Title(s) 9, 10, 11, and 16 in the City of Mobridge Zoning Ordinances # 784. Lights for illuminating parking; provide where necessary provided that glare is not visible areas or yards for safety and security purposes may be provided where necessary provided that glare not visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent residential property and not more than three (3’) foot candles of light intensity are present at the residential property line.
2. One double surfaced name plate sign for each dwelling group of six or more units, which shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area per surface. Such sign may indicate the names and addresses of the buildings or project, or may be a directory for occupants or state any combination of the above information.
3. One double surfaced name plate sign for each permitted use other than residential which shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area per surface plus one-half (1/2) square foot per surface for each one (1’) foot of setback greater than twenty (20’) feet.
4. Symbols, statues, sculptures, and integrated architectural features on non residential building may be illuminated by floodlights, provided the direct source of light is not visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent residential property.
5. Signs Over Show Windows or Doors of a non-conforming business establishment announcing without display or elaboration only the name and occupation of the proprietor and not to exceed two (2’) feet in height and ten (10’) feet in length.
6. Name, Occupation, and Warning Signs not to exceed two (2) square feet located on the premises of a business.
66
7. One (1) billboard/bulletin board for each frontage on a public street shall be permitted, which shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area on one (1) face. Such board may be on the wall, projecting, or free-standing.
8. Memorial Signs, tablets, names of buildings, and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of metal affixed flat against a structure.
9. One (1) unlighted construction sign of any structural type, may be located on a construction site of exceeding a total of thirty-two (32) square feet in area per face.
17.03 Signs in the “GC” District. Within the “GC” district, name plate signs, business signs, and advertising signs are permitted subject to the following regulations:
1. Within the General Commercial district, the aggregate square footage of square feet for each front foot of building abutting on sign space per lot shall not exceed the sum of two (2) public right-of-ways fifty (50’) feet or more in width with the least width of a corner lot fronting on a public right-of-way being the front for purposed of this title plus one (1) square foot for each front foot of side yard abutting on a public right-of-way fifty (50’) feet or more in width. No individual sign surface shall exceed sixty (60) square feet in area, nor shall two or more smaller signs be so arranged and integrated as to cause a sign surface greater than sixty (60) square feet.
17.04 Signs in the “HC”, “I-1”, “I-2”, and “AG” Districts. Within the “HC”, “I-1”, “I2”, and “AG” districts name plate signs, business signs, and advertising signs are permitted subject to the following regulations:
1. The aggregate square footage of sign space per lot shall not exceed the sum of six (6) square feet per front foot of building, plus three (3) square feet per front foot of property not occupied by a building, plus one (1) square foot for each foot of public right-of-way fifty (50’) feet or more in width abutting the side of the structure plus a ten (10%) percent increase.
2. The least width of such corner lot shall be the front for purposes of this title, individual sign surface shall exceed two hundred fifty (250) square feet.
3. Wall Signs placed against the exterior walls of buildings shall not extend more than six (6”)inches outside of a building's wall surface; shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet in area for anyone premise, and shall not exceed twenty (20’) feet in height above the mean centerline street grade.
4. Projecting Signs fastened to, suspended from, or supported by structures shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area for anyone premise; shall not extend more than six (6’) feet into any required yard; shall not extend more than six (6’) feet into any public right-of-way; shall not be less than ten (10’) feet from all side lot lines; shall not exceed a height of thirty (30’) feet above the mean centerline street grade, and fifteen (15’) feet above the driveway or an alley. (2006ORD840) (2001ORD784)
5. Ground Signs shall not exceed thirty (30’) feet in height above the mean centerline street or grade; shall meet a minimum of one- half (1/2) of the yard requirements for the district in which it is located; shall not exceed one hundred (l00) square feet on one side nor two hundred (200) square feet on all sides of anyone premise. (2006ORD840) (2001ORD784)
6. Roof Signs shall not exceed ten (10’) feet in height above the roof; shall meet all the yard and height requirements for the district in which it is located; and shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet on all sides for anyone premise.
7. Combinations of any of the above signs shall meet all the requirements for the individual sign.
67
17.05 Billboard Signs. Billboard signs shall be permitted in accordance with regulations outlined only in areas specified in the following sections:
1. Within HC, I-1 and I-2 use district; for a lot upon which a principal use other than billboards exist, any portion of the aggregate square footage of sign space for such lot may be allocated to billboard use at the rate of four (4) square feet of billboard surface to one (1) square foot of aggregate square footage of sign space to permit billboards, but no single billboard shall exceed two hundred fifty (250) square feet in area and no billboard shall be less than twenty (20’) feet from the front lot line.
2. Also within the GC, HC, I-1, and I-2 district, the aggregate square footage of advertising space per lot when a billboard is the principal use shall not exceed ten (10) square feet per front foot of lot on a public right-of-way which is fifty (50’) feet or more in width.
3. Billboards shall be subject to all yard requirements within the R-1, R-2, R3, CN, and AG districts. Billboards shall not be less than ten (10’) feet from the front lot line.
17.06 Sign as Obstruction/Deception. Signs shall not resemble, imitate, or approximate the shape, size, form, or color of railroad or traffic signs, signals, or devices. Signs shall not obstruct or interfere with the effectiveness of railroad or traffic signs, signals, or devices. No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window, or fire escape; and no sign shall be attached to a fire escape. No sign shall be placed so as to obstruct or interfere with traffic visibility.
17.07 Sign Responsibility, Maintenance, and Removal.
1. Owner’s Responsibility.
a. The owner of any sign and the owner of the premises on which it is located shall be responsible for keeping it in repair and in proper state of preservation.
b. The owner of any sign and the owner of the premises on which it is located shall be responsible for the removal of such sign if and when it is abandoned or becomes no longer functional.
2. Enforcement.
a. In the case of non-compliance with the provisions of 18.07
(1)(a) and (1)(b) above, the zoning Administrator shall notify, in writing, the owner of the abandoned or nonfunctional sign in question or the owner of the premises on which such sign is located. If such order is not complied within thirty (30) days after the date of such order, the
Zoning Administrator shall remove such sign at the expense of the owner of the real estate.
17.08 Nonconforming Signs. Signs lawfully existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this Ordinance may be continued although the use, size, or location does not conform with the provisions of this Ordinance. However, it shall be deemed a nonconforming use or structure.
68
TITLE 18 – SPECIAL USE REGULATIONS
18.01 Exceptions to Application of Area and Dimensional Standards.
1. Exceptions to Lot Width and Area Requirements. In a District where it is permitted, a single family dwelling may be erected on a lot which is nonconforming as to lot area or width, provided however, that, where two or more abutting lots of record were held in one ownership at the effective date of this Ordinance, and where one or more of such lots are non-conforming, the exception in this paragraph shall not apply. Further that no dwelling shall be erected on a lot which does not abut on at least one street for at least forty (40’) feet.
2. Front Yard Exceptions and Modifications.
A. Exceptions for Existing Alignment. In a Residential District, where the average of existing front yard depths for lots located on the same side of the street within one hundred (100’) feet of both sides of a lot in question is less than the required front yard specified in this article, such average of depths shall be the required depth for such lot, provided that no front yard depth shall be less than fifteen (15’) feet.
B. Front Yards Required in Non-residential Districts along Residential District Boundary Lines. In any block which includes both residential and Non-residential Districts along the same side of the street, the front yard requirements of the Non-residential District shall be either the requirements set forth for such district or the requirements set forth for the Residential District in such block, whichever is greater.
3. Side Yard Exceptions for Narrow Lots. In case of a lot which is existing and of record at the time of the effective date of this Ordinance in any Residential District, if the owner of record does not own any adjacent property, one and one-half (1 ½”) inches may be deducted from the required width of the side yard for each foot by which the lot is narrower than the required width. Such deductions shall not apply to buildings higher than two (2) stories. In no case shall any side yard be narrower than five (5’) feet.
4. Rear Yard Exceptions of Shallow Lots. For a lot which was of record at the time this Ordinance became effective, which lot is in a Residential District and has a depth of less than one hundred ten (110’) feet, the depth of the rear yard need not exceed twenty-five (25’) percent of the depth of the lot, but shall not be less than fifteen (15’) feet in any case.
5. Uses and Projections Permitted in Yards. The following accessory uses and structural projections shall be permitted within any required yard, with limitations as specified:
Required or permitted fences, walls, and landscaping shall conform to the following location and maximum height limitations except as otherwise specified elsewhere in this Ordinance: Yard Location and Maximum Fence Height in Feet :
a. Rear Yard: If within ten (10) feet of side or rear lot lines 6 feet in height. If ten (10) feet or more from side or rear lot line 10 feet in height.
b. Side Yard: At any location 6 feet in height.
69
c. Front Yard: Subject to the restrictions of section 6.04, any fence may be up to 42 inches in height provided however a fence may be constructed up to 4 feet in height if the fence is a non-view obscuring fence which shall not obstruct vision to an extent greater than fifty percent (50%) of its total area.
6. Height Limit Exceptions
A. The height limits of this Ordinance shall not apply to churches, schools, hospitals and such public buildings of a cultural, recreational or administrative nature; provided that the yard requirements set forth in the district in which it is located for non-dwelling structures in Residential Districts shall be complied with.
B. Church, spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, monuments, fire and hose towers, chimneys, smokestacks and flag-poles may exceed the height limits. C. Water tanks, bulkhead, grain elevators, gas holders, radio and television transmission and receiving towers and similar structures auxiliary to permitted principal uses in a district may exceed the height limits.
18.02 Home Occupations. In order to be permitted as an accessory use, a home occupation shall comply with the definition given in Title 4. In addition, it shall comply with the following requirements:
1. There shall be no non-resident employees engaged in the home occupation.
2. No articles produced off the premises may be stored outside.
1. No mechanical equipment shall be installed or used which will create excessive noise, interference with radio or television transmission or reception, or will be a public nuisance.
2. The space devoted to such home occupation may not exceed twenty-five (25%) percent of the gross floor area of the principal building.
3. No goods shall be displayed, and there shall be no external evidence of the home occupation conducted on the premises except one identification sign as provided for in Title 17.
4. All other applicable sections of this Ordinance shall apply including Section 18.06, Off-street Parking and Loading Requirements, for the specific Home Occupation involved.
18.03 Group Housing Planned Unit Development. In the case of the group housing of two (2) or more buildings to be constructed on a plot of ground, not subdivided into the customary street and lots, and which will not be so subdivided or where the existing or contemplated street and lot layout make it impracticable to apply the requirements of this ordinance to the individual building units in such group housing, the application of the term of this Ordinance may be varied by the Board of Zoning Adjustment in a manner which will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood. However, in no case shall the Board of Zoning Adjustment authorize a use prohibited in the district in which the housing is to be located or a smaller lot area per family than the minimum required in such district, or a greater height, or a smaller yard area than the requirements of this Ordinance permit in such a district.
18.04 Mobile Home Parks. The purpose of this Section is to recognize the increasing demand for the mobile park type of residential development and to provide for the appropriate development of such parks. It is intended to provide location requirements and development standards, which will lead to the development of stable and desirable mobile home parks, compatible with other uses in the vicinity.
1. Mobile home parks shall be a minimum of two acres
70
2. They shall be a maximum density of six (6) units per gross acre.
3. A minimum of ten (10%) percent of the gross site area shall be devoted to open space and recreational facilities
4. Underground utility hookups shall be provided for each lot. These utilities shall include water, sewer, electricity, and telephone.
5. Where the individual mobile home units in a mobile home park are served by dedicated public streets, those public streets shall be platted and constructed according to the applicable street standards.
6. Where individual mobile home units are served by private street systems, those streets shall:
A. Where parking is to be allowed on both sides of the street, provide a driving surface of thirty-six (36’) feet.
B. Where parking is to be prohibited on both sides of the street, provide a driving surface of twenty-four (24’) feet.
C. Provide a four (4’) foot wide pedestrian walkway on both sides of the road.
D. All roadways and walkways in mobile home parks shall be hard-surfaced within five (5) years of the date of permit.
E. Be accessible at all times to emergency vehicles.
F. All entrances, exits, and streets shall be lighted.
7. Each mobile home shall be placed within a lot, which is a minimum of five thousand (5,000 sq’) square feet and has a minimum width of fifty (50’) feet.
8. Each mobile home shall have a minimum setback of ten (10’) feet. A distance of twenty (20’) feet must be maintained between all structures.
18.05 Mineral Exploration, Extraction, Storage and Processing.
1. Purpose. To provide for mineral exploration, extraction, storage, or processing operations compatible with adjacent land uses, and to protect the City, cities, and individual citizens from objectionable noise, dust, traffic, visual eyesores, and other nuisances.
2. Establishment of Boundaries or Limits.
A. Within any zoning district where any type of mineral exploration, extraction, processing or storage, is permitted as a conditional use, the physical limits of the site shall be established by the Board of Zoning Adjustment, taking into account the existing or potential uses of the adjoining property and the applicable development standards for the site as set forth hereunder. The boundaries shall be established initially upon application for permit, and thereafter, should the operator desire to expand such boundaries, each enlargement shall be subject to approval by the Board of Zoning Adjustment.
B. Mineral exploration or extraction operations involving petroleum drilling, excavation of the earth by means of heavy or mechanized earth moving equipment, mineral processing operations, or mineral storage, shall not be conducted closer than five hundred (500’) feet from any existing residence, place of business, public or semi-public use, or recreation area unless the operator presents a release signed by the affected parties, to the Board of Zoning Adjustment.
C. Said operations shall not be conducted closer than five hundred (500’) feet from any residential or commercial district.
D. Temporary operational roads or permanent roads shall not be closer than five hundred (500’) feet to any residential district.
E. No exploration or extraction of minerals involving excavation of the earth by means of heavy or mechanized earth-moving equipment shall take place within thirty (30’) feet of an adjacent
71
property line plus one (1’) foot horizontal for each foot of vertical excavation, unless a written agreement is made with the owner of said property. Written evidence of said agreement shall be submitted to the Board of Zoning Adjustment.
3. Standards. The city standards shall be the same as those required by SDCL Title 45 as well as any additional requirements that the Board of Zoning Adjustment may require to promote the public health, safety and general welfare.
4. Requirements for Conditional Use Permit.
A. Any operator intending to explore for, or to extract or process, for commercial gain, any substance or minerals, which activity involves the penetration of the land surface by digging, drilling, excavating on private land not owned by the operator, or a public land, shall submit to the Board of Zoning Adjustment, written evidence of approval of the landowner(s). Government agencies must obtain permission in the same fashion as stated above.
B. Any operator intending to explore for, or to extract or process, for commercial gain, any substance or mineral involving the penetration of the land surface by digging, drilling, or excavating shall show evidence that he/she has complied with State regulations by submitting to the Board when he applies for a conditional use permit, copies of all documents supplied to the State. All data and records submitted to the State during the course of mineral exploration, extraction or processing operations, or after completion of these operations, including reclamation plans, shall also be submitted to the Board within 15 days of their submission to the State.
C. When public hearings as required by Title 21 of this Ordinance are held, potential needs for employee housing, and municipal facilities and services shall be considered.
D. The operator shall provide any reasonable information the Board of Zoning Adjustment deems necessary.
5. Construction of Buildings and Structures, and Requirements for Services.
A. Any facilities, utilities, and services required shall be provided by the operator, unless agreement is reached with local units of government for provision of these facilities, utilities and services. Written evidence of such agreement must be provided to the Board of Zoning Adjustment.
B. Any construction of buildings or structures in conjunction with mineral exploration, extraction, processing or storage shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Zoning Adjustment and appropriate application made for a conditional use permit.
C. Upon completion of a mineral exploration, extraction or processing project, buildings and structures for which no future use is contemplated and for which no other acceptable use is practicable or feasible shall be dismantled or demolished, and removed in their entirety.
D. The removal of accessory buildings, foundations, and structures, and all mobile homes, shall be the responsibility of the operator.
E. The schedule for dismantling or demolishment shall be submitted to the Board of Zoning Adjustment prior to the commencement of said activity.
6. Development of Employee Housing or Related Facilities in Conjunction with Mineral Extraction and Processing.
A. Any proposed development of employee housing or related facilities which does not comply with the regulations for the zoning district in which it will be located, will require a redesignation to the appropriate zoning district through the amendment procedure as provided for in Title 24 of this Ordinance.
B. Parts A, C, D, and E of Section, 18.05.5 of this Article shall apply.
72
18.06 Off-street Parking and Loading Standards.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to provide, through special regulations for adequate off-street parking and loading facilities, as necessary for efficient and convenient community activity and for the prevention of traffic congestion.
2. Off-Street Parking Spaces Required.
A. In all districts, in connection with any use, there shall be provided, at the time any building or structure is erected or enlarged or increased in capacity, off-street parking spaces in accordance with the schedule set forth in Section l8.06.2.B. It shall be the intent that the following required parking spaces be used in connection with the building for which they are required and at no time will existing provided parking spaces be reduced in number.
B. Schedule of Parking Spaces Required.
TYPE OF USE NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
(1) Uses not Listed Requirements for most nearly similar use specifically listed, as determined by the Board of Zoning Adjustment.
(2) RESIDENTIAL
Dwelling, all types 2 spaces for each dwelling unit
Rooming Houses 1 for every 2 sleeping rooms or 1 for every 2 paying and Elderly Housing occupants, whichever is greater.
(3) PUBLIC INSTITUTION –
ALL AMUSEMENT AND
ASSEMBLY
Administrative Offices of
Government, Dance Halls,
Lodge Halls, Exhibition Halls,
Skating Rinks, Swimming Pools
and Places of Assembly
without Fixed Seats 1 for each 200 sq. ft. of floor area
(4) SERVICES
Dental Offices and Clinics, 1 for each 100 sq. ft. of floor area
Laundry and Dry Cleaning
Pick-up, Bars, Taverns,
and Night Clubs
73
Hospitals and Medical Clinics 1 for each on-duty employee at facility plus 1 for each licensed bed. These spaces may be contiguous to or within one block of the facility.
Barber Shops and 2 per operator
Beauty Parlors
Hotels, Motels and 1 for each living or sleeping unit
Tourist Homes
Business and 1 for each 200 sq. ft. of floor area
Professional Offices
Restaurants, of the following
Types:
Indoor Service Only 1 for each 100 sq. ft. of floor area
Including Curb Service 1 for each 100 sq. ft. of floor area in addition to curb service stalls provided
Providing Primarily Carryout
Service 1 for each 30 sq. ft. of floor area
5. RETAIL SALES
Retail Stores and Shops 1 space for each 600 sq. ft. of floor area
6. GENERAL COMMERCIAL
AND INDUSTRIAL
Commercial Service 1 for each 600 sq. ft. of floor area or 1 for each 2 employees on maximum shift, whichever is greater
Manufacturing Plants 1 for each 1200 sq. ft. of floor area or 1 for each 2 employees on maximum shift, whichever is greater
Wholesale Establishments and 1 for each 300 sq. ft. of floor area or 1 for each 2
Warehouses employees on maximum shift, whichever is greater
C. Application of Schedule.
(1) Floor Area Defined. For purpose of applying the requirements of divisions (3) through (6) of Section 18.06.2.B, “Floor Area” shall mean the gross floor area used or intended to be used by tenants, or for services to the public or customers, patrons, clients or patients, including areas occupied by fixtures an equipment used for display or sales of merchandise. It shall not include areas used principally for non-public purposes, such as storage, incidental repair, processing or
74
packaging of merchandise, for show windows, for offices incidental to the management or maintenance of stores or buildings, for toilet or rest rooms, for utilities or for dressing rooms, fitting or alteration rooms and hallways.
(2) Unless otherwise specified, the required off-street parking facilities shall be located on the same lot as the structure or served, except that a parking facility providing the sum of parking spaces required for several uses may be provided contiguous to and in common with the several structures and uses served.
3. Off-street Loading Space Required
A. Requirements. In any district there shall be provided and maintained off-street loading space in connection with every building or part thereof hereafter erected which is to be occupied by any commercial or industrial use. For any such use off-street loading space shall be provided as specified in Section 18.06.3.3.
B. Schedule of Loading Spaces Required.
Size of Building in Gross Square Feet Number of Loading Spaces
Less than 5,000 None
5,000 to 19,999 One
20,000 to 39,999 Two
40,000 to 64,999 Three
65,000 to 100,000 Four
Each additional 100,000 square feet or One Additional or fraction thereof
C. Application of Schedule.
Joint Loading Space. Owners or occupants of several establishments of buildings not separated by a street may jointly provide the required off street loading space, provided (1) that no loading dock shall be more than two hundred (200’) feet distance from the service door of the building it. is intended to serve and (2) that the gross area of all the establishments or buildings to be served by such joint loading facility shall be used to determine the required number of loading spaces.
D. Development Standards for Off-Street Loading Space.
(1) Each loading space shall not be less than (10’) feet in width, fifty (50’) feet in length and fourteen (14’) feet in vertical clearance, provided that, if it is shown that the building or establishment in question is not and will not be served by trucking vehicles more than thirty-five (35’) feet in length, the Board of Zoning Adjustment may grant an exception reducing the required length of loading space to a length no less than the maximum length of such servicing vehicles but in no case to be less than twenty-five (25’) feet.
75
(2) No loading space shall be located closer than twenty-five (25’) feet to any lot in any Residential District unless wholly within a completely enclosed building or unless separated from such Residential District lot by a wall, solid fence or hedge not less than six (6’) feet in height.
(3) Access to Loading Areas. Every loading area shall have vehicular access to and from a public street or alley.
18.07 Airport Standards.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to reduce through special regulations, airport hazards. As airport hazards endangers the lives and property of users of the Mobridge Airport and property or occupants of land in its vicinity, and also if of the obstructive type, in effect reduces the size of the area available for the landing, takeoff, and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of the airport and the public investment therein.
2. Definition. The following definitions as they relate to this section, unless the content otherwise requires, are included here.
A. Airport means the Mobridge Airport located one mile east of the City of Mobridge.
B. Airport Elevation means the established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area which elevation is established to be 1730 feet above mean sea level.
C. Airport Hazard means any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for, or is otherwise hazardous to, the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at the airport; and any use of land which is hazardous to persons or property because of its proximity to the airport.
D. Height. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all airport zones set forth in this Section and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean see level elevation unless otherwise specified.
E. Landing area means the area of the airport used for landing, taking off or taxing of aircraft.
F. Landing Strip means any grass or turf covered area of the airport specifically designated and used for the landing and/or take-off of aircraft. This term shall have the same meaning throughout this Section as does the term "runway."
G. Runway means any paved surface of the airport which is specifically designated and used for the landing and for take-off of aircraft.
H. Slope means an incline from the horizontal expressed in an arithmetic ratio of horizontal magnitude to vertical magnitude.
3. Airspace Obstruction Zoning.
A. Airspace Zones. In order to carry out the purposes of this Ordinance, the airspace zones are hereby established: Primary Zone, Horizontal Zone, Conical Zone, Non-Instrument Approach Zone, and Transitional Zone and whose locations and dimensions are as follows:
1. Primary Zone. All that land which lies directly under an imaginary primary surface longitudinally centered on a runway and extending 200 feet beyond each end of a runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point
on the runway centerline. The width of the primary surface is 250 feet.
2. Horizontal Zone. All that land which lies directly under an imaginary horizontal surface 150 feet above the established airport elevation, or a height of 1,880 feet above mean sea level, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii from the center of each
76
end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs.
3. Conical Zone. All that land which lies directly under an imaginary conical surface extending upward and outward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
4. Non-Instrument Approach Zone. All that land which lies directly under an imaginary non-instrument visual approach surface longitudinally centered on the extended centerline at the end of each landing strip. The inner edge of the non-instrument approach surface is at the width and elevation as, and coincides with the primary surface. The non-instrument approach surface inclines upward and outward at a slope of 20:1, expanding uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet, and then continuing at the same rate of divergence to the periphery of the conical surface.
5. Transitional Zone. All that land which lies directly under an imaginary transitional surface extending upward and outward at right angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of 7 to 1 from the sides of the primary surfaces and from the sides of the approach surfaces until they intersect the horizontal surface or the conical surface.
B. Height Restrictions. Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance and except as necessary and incidental to airport operations, no structure or tree shall be constructed, altered, maintained, or allowed to grow in any airspace zone created in Section 18.07.03.A so as to project above any of the imaginary airspace surfaces described in said Section
18.07.03.A. Where an area is covered by more than one height limitation, the more restrictive limitations shall prevail.
4. Land Uses Safety Zoning.
A. Safety Zone Boundaries. In order to carry out the purpose of this Section there are hereby created and established the following safety zone boundaries:
1. Safety Zone A: All that land in the approach zones of a runway which is located within a horizontal distance of 1,000 feet from each end of the primary zone and in the, 7:1 transitional zones to the 50 foot contour.
2. Safety Zone B: All that land in the approach zones of a runway which is located within a horizontal distance of 3,000 feet from each end of the primary zone and is not included in Zone A.
B. Use Restrictions
1. General. Subject at all times to the height restrictions set forth in Section 18.07.03.B, no use shall be made of any land in any of the safety zones defined in Section
18.07.04 which creates or causes interference with the operations of radio or electronic facilities on the airport or with radio or electronic communications between the airport and aircraft, makes it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and other lights, results in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impairs visibility in the vicinity of the airport, or otherwise endangers the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft.
2. Zone A: Subject at all times to the height restrictions set forth in Section l8.07.03.B and to the general restrictions contained in Section 18.07.04.B.l areas designated as Zone A shall contain no buildings or temporary structures and shall be restricted to those uses which will not create, attract, or bring together an assembly of persons thereon. Permitted uses may include agriculture, cemeteries and auto parking.
77
3. Zone B: Subject at all times to the height restrictions set forth in Section 18.07.03.B and to the general restrictions contained in Section 18.07.04.B, areas designated as Zone B shall only be used for agriculture and residential purpose, provided that the residential densities do not exceed those required in the Agricultural District.
5. Hazard Marking and Lighting
A. Non-conforming Uses. The owner of any non-conforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the City of Mobridge.
B. Permits and Variances. Any permit or variance granted by the Zoning Enforcement Officer or Board of Zoning Adjustment as the case may be, may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this ordinance and be reasonable in the circumstances, so condition such permit or variance as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question at his/her own expense, to install, operate, and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airport hazard.
78
TITLE 19 - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE AND ENFORCEMENT
19.01 Zoning Administrator. An administrative official who shall be known as the Zoning Administrator and who shall be designated by the City Board of Commissioners shall administer and enforce this Ordinance. This person may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the City Council may direct. If the Zoning Administrator shall find that any of the provisions of this Ordinance are being violated, he/she shall notify, in writing, the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He/she may order discontinuance of illegal use of land, building, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or illegal additions, alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being performed; or shall take any other action authorized by this Ordinance to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
19.02 Building, Temporary Building, Demolition, or Temporary Demolition Permits Required. No building, sprinkler system, fence, structure, or concrete improvement (including, but not limited to sidewalks, curb, gutter, steps, patios, pads, driveways, footings and slabs) shall be demolished, constructed, replaced, erected, partially erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit therefore issued by the Zoning Administrator. No building, temporary building, demolition, or temporary demolition permit shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, unless he/she received a written order from the City Planning Commission in the form of an administrative review, conditional use, or variance as provided by this Ordinance. NO building permit shall be required to repair or replace roofing, siding, windows and flooring in buildings which do not structurally alter the building.
19.03 Application for Building, Temporary Building, Demolition, or Temporary Demolition Permits. All applications for building, temporary building, demolition, or temporary demolition permits shall describe the exact nature of the work to be completed; show the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact size and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any; and the location and dimensions of the work to be completed. Building, temporary building, demolition, or temporary demolition permit applications may be obtained from the Zoning Administrator. The application shall include such other information as lawfully may be required by the Zoning Administrator, including existing or proposed building, alteration or demolition; existing or proposed uses of the building and land; the number of families, housekeeping units, or rental units the building is designed to accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with, and provide for the enforcement of this Ordinance. All building, temporary building, demolition¸ or temporary demolition permit applications approved or disapproved shall be kept on file by the Zoning Administrator. The approved building, temporary building, demolition, or temporary demolition permit applications shall have a letter attached showing the date of the letter, date of application, address of work, and expiration date of building, temporary building, demolition, or temporary demolition permit. If a building, temporary building, demolition, or temporary demolition permit application is disapproved, the Zoning Administrator shall state the reasons for such refusal in writing to the applicant on the building,
79
temporary building, demolition, or temporary demolition permit.
The issuance of a building, temporary building, demolition, or temporary demolition permit shall, in no case, be construed as waiving any provisions of this Ordinance or any other Ordinance of the City of Mobridge. The applicant and Owner of the property shall remain responsible for complying with all other Mobridge Municipal Ordinances, notwithstanding the issuance of the requested building, temporary building, demolition, or temporary demolition permit.
If the work described in any building permit for new construction has not been completed within one (1) year of the date of issuance thereof or any building permit for remodeling construction has not been completed within six (6) months of the date of issuance thereof or any building permit for demolition has not been completed and reclaimed within six (6) months of the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and be canceled by the Zoning Administrator; and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new building, temporary building, demolition, or temporary demolition permit or an extension of the existing building or demolition permit had been obtained. A building permit may also be cancelled if the work described on the building or demolition permit has not been started within 90 days after the date of issuance. Unless an extension of the building or demolition permit is issued, after the work described therein has commenced, the failure to complete the work described in the building or demolition permit shall be deemed a nuisance and in addition to all other penalties described in this CODE, the city is authorized to abate the nuisance in any manner authorized by law and the owner shall be liable to the city for all costs of abatement, including attorney fees.
If the work described in any temporary building permit for new construction has not been completed within thirty (30) days of the date of issuance thereof or any temporary building permit for remodeling construction has not been completed within thirty (30) days of the date of issuance thereof or any demolition in association with a temporary demolition permit has not been completed and reclaimed within thirty (30) days of the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire and be canceled by the Zoning Administrator and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected, together with notice that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a new building, temporary building, demolition, or temporary demolition permit has been obtained. A temporary building permit or temporary demolition permit may also be cancelled if the work described on the temporary building permit or temporary demolition permit has not been started within fourteen (14) days after the date of issuance. The failure to complete the work described in the temporary building or temporary demolition permit shall be deemed a nuisance and in addition to all other penalties described in this CODE, the city is authorized to abate the nuisance in any manner authorized by law and the owner shall be liable to the city for all costs of abatement, including attorney fees. The fee for a temporary building and temporary demolition permit shall be $20.00.
It shall be unlawful to place or keep temporary buildings on all zoned property without first obtaining a temporary building placement permit from the Zoning Administrator. The cost of obtaining a temporary building placement permit shall be the sum of $20.00. No
80
temporary building placement permit shall be issued for a term longer than one (1) year. At the expiration of the term of the temporary building placement permit, the temporary building shall be removed. The Zoning Administrator shall have discretion in issuing or refusing to issue the temporary building placement permit and the term of the permit by taking into consideration the condition, type and nature of the temporary building to be placed and the location and purpose of the temporary building so that the temporary building does not interfere with or detract from the use and attraction of the neighboring properties. Temporary greenhouses used by commercial establishments to store and sell plants and trees which will be erected and dismantled within 6 months are exempted from the cost and requirement of obtaining a temporary building placement permit. Upon application, the City Council is authorized to waive the cost of obtaining a temporary building placement permit if the temporary building is to be used for a civic function.
An applicant for a building or demolition permit may apply to the Zoning Administrator for an extension of the building or demolition permit upon showing good cause for not completing the work within the applicable period. Upon application, and a showing of good cause the Zoning Administrator shall be entitled to grant the applicant for extension of the building or demolition permit an extension of the building or demolition permit for a period not to exceed six (6) months upon conditions as the Zoning Administrator deems appropriate and just. There shall be no fee charged for the extension of time and the extension of time is not required to be approved by the Council.
The Zoning Administrator shall deny any building or demolition permit if the property which is the subject of the building or demolition permit or if other property owned by the Applicant or Owner of the property is in violation of any provision of these Zoning Ordinances or is in violation of any Nuisance Ordinance of the City or is the subject of any lien imposed thereon by the City due to abatement of any Nuisance or if the property or the owner of the property is in default in paying any sums to the City of Mobridge, including but not limited to charges for water, sewer or garbage fees. The Zoning Administrator may grant a temporary building or temporary demolition permit if the property which is the subject of the building or demolition permit or if other property owned by the Applicant or Owner of the property is in violation of any provision of these Zoning Ordinances or is in violation of a Nuisance Ordinance of the City or is the subject of any lien imposed by the City of Mobridge due to abatement of any Nuisance or Zoning Ordinance.
Upon a showing of good cause, the City Council may grant a building, temporary building, demolition, or temporary demolition permit even though the Zoning Administrator is not authorized to issue the building permit pursuant to this paragraph.
19.04 Construction and Use to be Provided in Applications and Permits. Building permits issued on the basis of applications approved by the Zoning Administrator authorized only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved application and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance.
81
19.05 Obtaining a Building Permit. All building/zoning permits shall be obtained by application of the owner or builder and shall give an estimated cost of the construction or repairs and the initial fees shall be based on such estimate; provided that if at the completion of said construction or repair the estimated cost as given in the application appears inadequate to the Zoning Administrator, he/she may demand bills or receipts to substantiate such value and additional fees may be assessed accordingly. It is the owner's responsibility to obtain a permit prior to construction on his/her property, owned or leased.
19.06 Fee for Building Permit. The fee for each building permit will be on file in the office of the Zoning Administrator or Finance Officer.
82
TITLE 20 -CITY PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
20.01 Organization. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of five (5) or more members, the total membership of which shall always be an uneven number. The Commission members shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. The term of each of the appointed members shall be for three years, serving staggered terms. Each member shall serve until his/her successor is appointed and qualified. Members of the Commission may be removed for cause by the appointed authority. Vacancies shall be filled by the Mayor with the confirmation of the City Council and shall be for the unexpired term. The members of the Planning Commission shall be city residents of legal age who are qualified by knowledge or experience to act in matters pertaining to the development and administration of a comprehensive plan of development for the city.
20.02 Proceedings of the City Planning and Zoning Commission. The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve as a Board of Adjustment as provided by South Dakota law. The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall adopt rules necessary for the conduct of its affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this Ordinance. The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall keep record of all proceedings. Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times the Planning and Zoning Commission may determine. The Chairperson, or in his/her absence, the acting chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meeting shall be open to the public. The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failure to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be of public record and be immediately filed with the Secretary of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall adopt from time to time, subject to the approval of the City Council, such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to carry appropriate provisions of this Ordinance into effect. The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall meet as often as necessary, but is required to hold a meeting not less than once every three
(3) months, per SDCL 11-2-3.1.
20.03 Hearings, Appeals, and Notices. Appeals to the City Planning and Zoning Commission may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the City affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator. Such appeal shall be taken with fifteen (15) days after permit publications in the newspaper, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the City Planning and Zoning Commission a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the
City Planning and Zoning Commission all the paper constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the petition hold a public hearing on the appeal, give public notice prior to, as well as, give due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. The Finance Officer will notify all adjacent landowners of any Conditional Use and Variance notices and will also publish the required notices in the City’s legal newspaper. The City will recover all expenses and time associated with a resident requesting a Conditional Uses or a Variance. The City Finance Officer
83
will bill/invoice the requesting resident for expenses and time incurred and the amount will be set by the City Council and on file in the office of the Finance Officer.
84
TITLE 21 - CITY PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION POWERS AND
DUTIES
21.01 Administrative Review. The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official or agency based on or made in the enforcement of any zoning regulation relating to the location or soundness of structures or to interpret any map.
21.02 Conditional Uses; Conditions Governing Applications; Procedures. The City
Planning and Zoning Commission shall have power to hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, requests for conditional uses or for decisions upon other special questions upon which the City Planning and Zoning Commission is authorized by this Ordinance to pass; to decide such questions as are involved in determining whether a conditional use should be granted; and to grant conditional uses with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this Ordinance, or to deny conditional uses when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Ordinance. A conditional use shall not be granted by the City Planning and Zoning Commission unless and until:
1. A written application for a conditional use is submitted indicating the section of this Ordinance under which the conditional use is sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested and upon payment of the applicable fees set by Resolution.
2. Notice shall be given at least fifteen (15) days in advance of public hearing. The owner of the adjacent property, and all adjacent property owners, for which the conditional use is sought or his/her agent shall be notified by certified mail. Notice of such hearing shall published in one (1) official publication of the City and/or County at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing;
3. The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney;
4. The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a finding that it is empowered under this section of this Ordinance described in the application to grant the conditional use, and that the granting of the conditional use will not adversely affect the public interest; and
5. Before any conditional use shall be issued, the City Planning and Zoning Commission shall make written findings certifying compliance with the specific rules governing individual conditional uses and the satisfactory provisions and arrangements have been made concerning the following:
a. Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or catastrophe;
b. Off-street parking and loading areas where required, with particular attention to the items in a above and the economic, noise, glare, or other effects of the conditional use on adjoining properties and properties generally in the District;
c. Refuse and service areas, with particular reference to the items in a and b above;
d. Utilities, with reference to locations, availability, and compatibility;
e. Screening and buffering with reference to type, dimensions, and character;
85
f. Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare traffic safety, economic effect and compatibility and harmony with properties in the District;
g. Required yards and other open spaces; and
h. General compatibility with adjacent properties and other property in the District.
21.03 Variances, Conditions Governing Applications; Procedures. The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the power, where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance, or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situation or conditions of such piece of property, the strict application of any regulation under this Ordinance would result in peculiar and exceptional difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon, the owner of such property, to authorize, upon an appeal relating to the property, a variance from such strict application so as to relieve such difficulties or hardships, as such relief may be granted without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
1. No such variance shall be authorized by the Commission unless it finds that the strict application of the Ordinance would produce undue hardship; such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity; the authorization of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property; and the character of the district will not be changed by the granting of the variance; and the granting of such variance is based on the reasons of demonstrable and exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for purposes of convenience, profit, and caprice.
2. No variance shall be authorized unless the Commission finds that the condition or situation of the property concerned or the intended use of the land concerned is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to this Ordinance.
3. A variance from the terms of this Ordinance shall not be granted by the City Planning and Zoning Commission unless and until a written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating that special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or buildings involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district; that literal interpretation of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this Ordinance; that the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action of the applicant; that granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Ordinance to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district and until applicable fees set by Resolution are paid.
4. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district, and no permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance.
5. Notice of a public hearing shall be provided and held as set forth in 21.02 (2) and (3). Any party may appear in person, or by agent or by attorney; the City Planning and Zoning Commission shall make findings that the requirements of this TITLE have been met by the application for a variance; the Commission shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of a variance; and the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, structure, or building; the Commission shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general
86
purpose and intent of this Ordinance and will not injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
6. In granting any variance, the City Planning and Zoning Commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made in part of terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance.
7. Under no circumstances shall the City Planning and Zoning Commission grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this Ordinance in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this Ordinance in said district.
21.04 City Planning and Zoning Commission has Powers of Zoning Administrator on Appeals; Reversing Decision of Zoning Administrator. In exercising the above mentioned power, the City Planning and Zoning Commission may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirements, decision, or determination appeal form, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination appeal as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the Administrator from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the full membership of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of any such administrator, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this Ordinance or to effect any variation in this Ordinance.
21.05 Vacated Public Ways. Whenever any street or other public way is vacated by official action of the City, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended districts.
21.06 Power and Duties.
1. The Planning and Zoning Commission may initiate proposed amendments to this Ordinance.
2. The Commission shall review all proposed amendments to this Ordinance and make recommendations to the City Council as specified in Title 24.
3. The Commission shall have all other responsibilities designated to it by this Ordinance and South Dakota Law.
87
TITLE 22 -APPEALS
22.01 Duties of Zoning Administrator, City Planning and Zoning Commission, Board of Adjustment, and Courts on Matters of Appeal. It is the intent of this Ordinance that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be presented first to the Zoning Administrator and that such questions shall be presented to the City Planning and Zoning Commission only in appeal from the decisions of the Zoning Administrator and that recourse from the decisions of the City Planning and Zoning Commission shall be to the City Council and then to the court as provided by law. The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as stated in this SECTION and Ordinance. Under this Ordinance, the City Council shall have the following duties:
1. Of considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or the repeal of this Ordinance as provided by law; and
2. May establish a schedule of fees and charges for such procedures.
22.02 Stay of Proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the City Planning and Zoning Commission after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him/her, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his/her opinion, cause eminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise that by a restraining order which may be granted by the City Planning and Zoning Commission or by a court of record on application on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
22.03 Appeals from the City Planning and Zoning Commission; Procedures of Appeal. Any person or persons, or any board, taxpayer, department, board, or bureau of the City aggrieved by any decision of the City Planning and Zoning Commission/Board of Adjustment may appeal to the City Council and then seek review by a court or record of such decision in the manner provided by the laws of the State of South Dakota.
88
TITLE 23 - SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES, AND EXPENSES
23.01 Schedule of Fees, Charges, and Expenses. The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses and a collection procedure for building permits, certificates of zoning compliance, appeals, and other matters pertaining to this Ordinance. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Zoning Administrator and Finance Officer and may be altered or amended only by the City Council. Until all application fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application for appeal.
89
TITLE 24 -AMENDMENTS
24.01 Amendments. The provisions set forth in this Ordinance may, from time to time, be amended, supplemented, changed, modified, or repealed by action of the City Council or when such amendment, supplement, change, modification, or repeal is requested through a petition by thirty (30%) percent of the landowners in the district requesting change. An individual landowner may also petition the Board to change the zoning of all or any part of his property. Upon filing or upon separate request by the City Council, the City Planning and Zoning Commission and the Board shall hold a public hearing not less than fifteen (15) days after the notice published in the official newspaper of the City and/or County and subject to the provisions in SDCL 11-4. Such petitioning landowner shall also notify all other abutting landowners by registered mail of the petitioned zoning change at least one week prior to any public hearing held thereon by the City Planning and Zoning Commission. The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall within forty-five (45) days make its recommendation to the City Council. The report of such recommendation shall include approval, disapproval, or other suggestions and the reasons therefore, and a discussion of the effect on such amendment, supplement, change, modification upon adjacent property and upon the Comprehensive Plan. The City Council shall therefore, by duly enacted Ordinance, either adopt or reject such amendment, supplement, change, modification, or repeal, and if it is adopted by the City Council, the same shall be published in the official newspaper in the City and/or County and take effect on the twentieth (20th) day after its publication.
90
TITLE 25 -VIOLATIONS, COMPLAINTS, PENALTIES, AND REMEDIES
25.01 Building Permit Violations. Each violation of Title 19 shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred ($200) dollars, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed thirty days for each violation, or by both the fine and imprisonment. The City shall, in addition, be entitled to maintain an action for civil injunctive relief, pursuant to SDCL 21-8.
25.02 Violation of Ordinance. Each violation of these ordinances, except Title 19, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred ($200) dollars, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed thirty days for each violation, or by both the fine and imprisonment. The City shall, in addition, be entitled to maintain an action for civil injunctive relief, pursuant to SDCL 21-8.
91
TITLE 26 -LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
26.01 Separability. Should any article, section, or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
26.02 Purpose of Catch Heads. The catch heads appearing in connection with the foregoing sections are inserted simply for convenience to serve the purpose of any index; and they shall be wholly disregarded by any person, officer, court or other tribunal in construing the terms and provisions of this Ordinance.
26.03 Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance, or inconsistent with the provision of this Ordinance, are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this Ordinance full force and effect.
26.04 Effective Date. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication according to law.
92
APPENDIX A
MODULAR MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOME STANDARDS
The following standards for mobile home tie-downs have taken into account possibilities and practicalities of providing protection from high winds for mobile homes. The standards may be used in conjunction with the ideas and concepts presented in TR75, Protecting Mobile Homes from High Winds, prepared by the Defense Civil Preparedness Agency, Washington, D.C.
Mobile Homes require two types of anchorage: (1) over-the-top tie-downs to restrict overturning and (2) frame ties to prevent the mobile home from being pushed from its piers. The standards apply to single mobile homes up to 14 feet in width. "Double-wides" do not require over-the-top ties, but they require the same number of frame ties.
Mobile Home Piers and Footings. All mobile homes shall meet the following minimum requirements for mobile home piers and footings:
1. The ground on which the mobile home is placed will support a minimum of 2,5OO pounds per square foot;
2. All piers shall be placed on footings of solid concrete with minimum dimensions of 16" x 16" x 4";
3. Piers shall be constructed of standard 8" x 8" x 16" hollow concrete blocks;
4. Piers shall be topped with solid concrete caps 8" x 16";
5. Treated wood shims shall be driven tight between the cap and the main frame to provide uniform bearing. These shims shall be impervious to salt air and to rot. They shall taper from 0" to 3/4" in thickness and shall be wide enough to provide bearing over the concrete cap;
6. Other types of piers and foundations of equivalent permanence and weight bearing ability may be approved. Jacks or heavy metal adjustable columns, anchored to both frame and foundations, may be used;
7. Piers shall be centered under each main frame (or chassis) member, with a maximum spacing of 10 feet on centers. The end piers shall be no farther than five (5) feet in from the ends of the mobile homes. The mobile home tie-downs will also have to meet the following criteria:
1. Over-the-top tie-downs shall be positioned at stud and rafter locations near each end of the mobile home. Others. if needed may be positioned between them.
2. Either steel cable or steel strapping can be used for ties. All ties shall be fastened to ground anchors, as described in Section 3 below and drawn tight with galvanized turnbuckles or yoke-type fasteners and tensioning devices. Turnbuckles shall be ended with jaws or forged or welded eyes.
Turnbuckles with hook ends will not be permitted.
3. All cable ends shall be secured with at least two U-bolt-type cable clamps or other fastening device as approved by the enforcing officials.
4. Cables used for tie-downs shall be either galvanized steel or stainless steel having a breaking strength greater than 4,800 pounds. Cable shall be either 7/32" diameter or greater (7 x 19) aircraft cable.
93
5. When flat steel straps are used for tie-downs, they must be in accordance with Federal Specification QQ-S-78l; that is l ¼ " x .035", Type 1, Class B, Grade 1, with a breaking strength of at least 4,750 pounds.
6. Steel straps used for ties must terminate with D-rings, bolts, or other fastening devices which will not cause distortion of the band or reduce its breaking strength.
7. Sharp edges of the mobile home that would tend to cut the cable or strap must be protected by a suitable device to prevent cutting when the mobile home is buffeted by the wind. Likewise, special adapters must be installed to prevent the cable or strap from knifing through the mobile home.
8. Connection of the cable frame tie to the I-beam (or other shape) main structural-frame member should be by a 5/8" drop-forged closed eye bolted through a hole drilled in the center of the I-beam web. A washer, or equivalent, should be used so that the beam is sufficiently reinforced around the hole. If steel-strap ties are used, care should be exercised to insure that minimum bending radius is adhered to so that the breaking strength of the strap is not reduced.
9. Frame ties should connect the anchor and the steel I-beam (or other shape) main structural frame member which runs lengthwise under the mobile home. Frame ties CAN'T BE CONNECTED to any of the steel outrigger beams which fasten to and intersect the main I-beams at right angles. The outriggers do not have adequate strength to resist the frame-tie loadings during high winds. Pictures will be added to final draft
Mobile home ground anchors shall meet the following requirements:
1. Ground anchors should be aligned with centers of piers. Also, they should be situated immediately below the outer wall to accommodate over-the-top as well as frame ties.
2. Auger-type anchors shall have a minimum diameter of 6 inches (arrowheads 81') and be sunk to their full depth (at 1 east 4 I) . Steel rods shall be at least 5/8" in diameter, have a forged or welded eye at top, or have a yoke-type fastening and tensioning device or a threaded connector and tensioning device.
3. Anchors shall be capable of withstanding 5,700 pounds of pull (in a vertical or diagonal direction) without-failure. This loading can be achieved by many anchors in most kinds of soils.
4. Deadman anchors shall be sunk to a depth of 5 feet, have a minimum length of 2 feet, and have a diameter of at least 6 inches. Hollow concrete blocks are not approved. Steel rods
shall be at least 5/8" in diameter, with the bottom hooked into the concrete deadman.
5. Anchors to reinforced concrete slabs must be of strength comparable to that presented above.
Pictures will be added to final draft
94
MODULAR MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOME PROVISIONS
Definitions of Modular Manufactured Homes and Standards
Modular Home Regulations. Modular shall meet or exceed all of the following requirements:
A. Modular homes shall meet or exceed the Uniform Building Codes.
B. Modular homes will includes all off-site constructed homes, which may be transported to the site in one or more sections.
C. Modular homes shall have more than 1,000 square feet in ranch style and 850 square feet split and be placed on a permanent foundation. The foundation shall be to a depth below the frost line.
D. Modular homes shall have a minimum of a 3 1/2-roof pitch.
Mobile Home Types and Standards.
Type I Manufactured Home. Type I manufactured homes shall meet or exceed the following requirements:
A. Have more than 1,100 square feet of occupied space in a double-section or larger multi-section unit.
B. Be placed on a permanent foundation. The foundation shall be to a depth below the frost line.
C. Utilize a permanent perimeter enclosure in accordance with approved installation standards, as specified below.
D. Be anchored to the ground, in accordance with manufacturer's specifications, or as prescribed by the ANSI/NFPA 501A standards.
E. Have a gabled roof with a pitch of at least 1-½ feet.
F. Have a vinyl or wood lap siding material of a type customarily used on site-constructed residences.
G. Have roofing material of a type customarily used on site-constructed residences.
H. The age of the manufactured house may not exceed ten (10) years from the date of manufacture unless permitted by conditional upon review from the Mobridge Planning and Zoning Commission.
Type II Manufactured Homes. Type II manufactured homes shall meet or exceed the following requirements:
A. Have more than 700 square feet of occupied space in a single, double, expand or multi-section unit.
B. Utilize a permanent perimeter enclosure in accordance with approval installation standards, as specified below.
C. Be anchored to the ground, in accordance with manufacturers specifications, or as prescribed by the BNSI/NFPA 5018 standards.
D. Have siding material of a type customarily used on site-constructed residences.
E. Have roofing material of a type customarily used on site-constructed residences.
F. The age of the manufactured house may not exceed ten (10) years from the date of manufacture unless permitted by conditional upon review from the Mobridge Planning and Zoning Commission.
G. Be placed onto a support system, in accordance with approved installation standards, as specified below.
95
Type III Manufactured Homes. Type III manufactured homes shall meet or exceed the following requirements:
A. Have more than 700 square feet of occupied space in a single, double, expand or multi-section unit.
B. Utilize a permanent perimeter enclosure in accordance with approved installation standards, as specified below.
C. Be anchored to the ground, in accordance with manufacturer's specifications or as prescribed by the ANSI/NFPA 501A standards.
D. The age of the manufactured house may not exceed ten (10) years from the date of manufacture unless permitted by conditional upon review from the Mobridge Planning and Zoning Commission.
Installation Standards.
Permanent Perimeter Enclosures. Permanent Perimeter Enclosures will be required of all types of manufactured homes (Type I, II, and III). Those manufactured homes designated as requiring permanent perimeter enclosure must have footings and crawl space or basement walls. The space between the floor joints or the home shall be completely enclosed with the permanent perimeter enclosure (except for required openings)
Foundation Siding/Skirting. All manufactured homes without a permanent perimeter enclosure shall have an approved foundation siding/skirting enclosing the entire perimeter of the home.
Support Systems.
A. All HUD-code manufactured homes of the Type I classification shall be installed with load bearing foundations in conformance with the manufacturer's installation specifications.
B. Type II and III manufactured homes not placed on a permanent foundation shall be installed on a support system in conformance with the
C. Manufacturer's installation specifications or with the support system regulations in the ANSI/NFPA 501A 1977 installation standards.
Structural Alterations. Due to its integral design, any structure alteration or modification of a manufactured or mobile home after it is placed on the site must be approved by the City Council.
96
APPENDIX B
INDUSTRIALPERFORMANCE STANDARDS
1. Physical Appearance. All operations shall be carried on within an enclosed building except that new materials or equipment in operable condition may be stored in the open. Normal daily wastes of an inorganic nature may be stored in containers not in a building when such containers are not readily visible from the street.
2. Fire Hazard. No operation shall involve the use of highly flammable gases, acid, liquids, grinding processes or other inherent fire hazard. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the use of normal heating fuels, motor fuels and welding gases when handled in accordance with other City ordinances.
3. Noise. No operation shall be carried on which involves noise in excess of the normal traffic noise of the adjacent street at the time of the daily peak hour of traffic volume. Noise shall be measured at the property line and when the level of such noise cannot be determined by observation with the natural senses, a suitable instrument may be used and measurement may include breakdowns into a reasonable number of frequency ranges. All noises shall be muffled so as not to be objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency or shrillness.
4. Sewage and Liquid Wastes. No operation shall be carried on which involves the discharge into a sewer, water course or the ground of liquid wastes of any radioactive nature, or liquid wastes of a chemical nature which are detrimental to normal sewage plant operation or corrosive and damaging to sewer pipes and installations.
5. Air Contaminants. Air contaminants and smoke shall be less dark than designated Number One on the Ringleman Chart as published by the United States Bureau of Mines, except that smoke of a density designated as Number One shall be permitted for one (1) four (4) minute period in each one-half (½ ) hour. Light colored contaminants of such an opacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than the aforesaid shall not be permitted. Particular matter of dust as measured at the point of emission by any generally accepted method shall not be emitted in excess of two tenths (.2) grains per cubic foot as corrected to a temperature of five hundred (500) degrees Fahrenheit, except for a period of four (4) minutes in any one-half (~) hour. At which time it may equal but not exceed six-tenths (.6) grains per cubic foot as corrected to a temperature of five hundred (500) degrees Fahrenheit. Due to the fact that the possibilities of air contamination cannot reasonably be comprehensively covered in this section, there shall be applied the general rule that there shall not be discharged from any sources whatsoever such quantities of air contaminants or other material in such quantity as to cause injury, detriment, nuisance or annoyance to any considerable number of persons or to the public in general or to endanger the comfort, repose, health or safety of any such considerable number of persons or to the public in general or to cause or have a natural tendency to cause injury or damage to business, vegetation or property.
6. Odor. The emissions of odors that are generally agreed to be obnoxious to any considerable number of persons, shall be prohibited. Observations of odor shall be made at the property line of the establishment causing the odor. As a guide to classification of odor, it shall be deemed that strong odors of putrefaction and fermentation tend to be obnoxious and that such odors as associated with baking or the roasting of nuts and coffee shall not normally be considered obnoxious within the meaning of this Ordinance.
97
7. Gases. The gases sulphur dioxide and hydrogen sulphide shall not exceed five (5) parts per million. All nitrous fumes shall not exceed one (1) part per million. Measurements shall be taken at the property line of the particular establishment involved.
8. Vibration. All machines including punch presses and stamping machines shall be so mounted as to minimize vibration and in no case shall such vibration exceed a displacement of three thousandths (3/1,000) of an inch measured at the property line. The use of steam or broad hammers shall not be permitted in this district.
9. Glare and Heat. All glare, such as welding arcs and open furnaces shall be shielded so that they shall not be visible from the property lines. No heat from furnaces or processing equipment shall be sensed at the property line to the extent of raising the temperature of air or materials more than five (5) degrees Fahrenheit.
98
APPENDIX C
CONCENTRATED ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION REGULATIONS
Intent
An adequate supply of healthy livestock, poultry and other animals is essential to the well-being of the citizens of the City and the State of South Dakota. However, livestock, poultry, and other animals produce manure which may, where improperly stored, transported, or disposed, negatively affect the City environment. Animal manure must be controlled where it may add to air, surface water, ground water, or land pollution. The following regulations have been adopted to provide protection against pollution caused by manure from domesticated animals. All new and proposed expansions of Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations shall comply with the regulations as outline herein.
It is the intention of the Board of Adjustment in the enforcement of this ordinance that when an operator of an existing Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation applies for a permit to expand to another class level, the standards that apply to the expansion will not be applied to existing structures that were built in compliance with accepted industry standards in existence at the time of the construction of such facilities. A special exception can be issued, see Special Exception in the City of Mobridge Zoning Regulations.
Definitions
Animal Manure: Poultry, livestock, or other animal excreta or mixture of excreta with feed, bedding or other materials.
Animal Unit: A unit of measure for livestock equated as follows; one animal unit is equivalent to:
1 Cow, feeder, or slaughter beef animal, excluding calves under 300 pounds;
0.5 Horse;
0.7 Mature dairy cattle, excluding dairy calves under 300 pounds;
0.27 Farrow-to-finish sows;
1 Swine in a production unit;
10 Nursery swine less than 55 pounds;
2.5 Finisher swine over 55 pounds;
10 Sheep or lambs;
30 Laying hens or broilers;
5 Ducks and/or geese; and
55 Turkeys.
Applicant: An individual, a corporation, a group of individuals, partnership, joint venture, owners, or any other business entity having charge or control of one or more concentrated animal feeding operations.
99
Change in Operation: “Change in operation” means a cumulative expansion of more than 300 animals units, after date , which are confined at an existing unpermitted concentrated animal feeding operation.
Farm Dwelling: Any dwelling owned or occupied by the farm owners, operators, tenants, or seasonal or year-around hired workers.
Non-Farm Dwelling: Any occupied dwelling which is not a farm dwelling.
Permit: A permit required by these regulations unless stated otherwise.
Potential Pollution Hazard: A Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation of 50 to 499
Animal Units may be classified as a Class D Operation by the City Zoning Officer when a Potential Pollution Hazard exists. Factors to be considered by the Zoning Officer in determining a Potential Pollution Hazard include the following:
1.The Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation does not meet the minimum setback andseparation distances of these regulations.
2.A Potential Water Pollution Hazard exists due to sitting over a shallow aquifer or drainagewhich contributes to the waters of the State.
Process Generated Wastewater: Water directly or indirectly used in the operation of an animalfeeding operation. The term includes spillage or overflow from water systems;
water and manure collected while washing, cleaning or flushing pens, barns, manure pits or otherareas; water and manure collected during direct contact swimming, washing or spray cooling ofanimals; and water used in dust control.
Process Wastewater: “Process wastewater” means any process generated wastewater and any precipitation (rain or snow) that comes into contact with the animals, manure, litter or bedding, feed, or other portions of the animal feeding operation. The term includes runoff from an open lot.
Shall: “Shall” means that the condition is an enforceable requirement of this permit.
Shallow Aquifer: An aquifer vulnerable to contamination because the permeable material making up the aquifer (a) extends to the land surface so percolation water can easily transport contaminants from land surface to the aquifer, or (b) extends to near the land surface and lacks a sufficiently thick layer of impermeable material on the land or near the land surface to limit percolation water from transporting contaminants from the land surface to the aquifer.
Shallow Well: A well which is located in a shallow aquifer.
Should: “Should” means that the condition is a recommendation. If violations of the permit occur, the City will evaluate whether the producer implemented the recommendations contained in this permit that may have helped the producer to avoid the violation.
100
Significant Contributor of Pollution: To determine if a concentrated animal feeding operation meets this definition, the following factors are considered:
1. Size of feeding operation and amount of manure reaching waters of the state;
2. Location of the feeding operation in relation to waters of the state;
3. Means of conveyance of manure and process wastewater into waters of the state;
4. The slope, vegetation, rainfall and other factors affecting the likelihood or frequency of discharge of animal wastes and process wastewater into waters of the state. Water of the State means all waters within the jurisdiction of this state, including all streams, lake, ponds, impounding reservoirs, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface and underground, natural or artificial, public or private, situated wholly or partly within or bordering upon the state.
Zone A: Special Flood Hazard Areas subject to inundation by the 100-year flood.
Zone X: These areas have been identified in the community flood insurance study as areas of moderate or minimal hazard from the principal source of flood in the area.
Animal Units
Animal species and number of a species required to equal 300, 1,000 and 2,000 animal units. Note that these figures relate to inventory rather than annual production. Other animal species equivalents which are not listed will be based on species’ waste production.
EQUIVALENT NUMBER OF
A SPECIES TO EQUAL:
ANIMAL UNIT
EQUIVALENT
ANIMAL SPECIES 300 AU 1,000 AU 2,000 AU SPECIES/AU
Feeder or Slaughter 300 hd 1,000 hd 2,000 hd 1.0
Cattle
Mature Dairy Cattle 210 hd 700 hd 1,400 hd 0.7
Finisher Swine750 hd 2,500 hd 5,000 hd 2.5
(over 55 lbs)
Nursery Swine
(less than 55 lbs) 3,000 hd 10,000 hd 20,000 hd 10
Farrow-to-Finish (sows) 81 hd 270 hd 540 hd 0.27
Swine Production Unit 300 hd 1,000 hd 2,000 hd 1
(Sows Breeding, Gestating & Farrowing)
Horses 150 hd 500 hd 1,000 hd 0.5
Sheep 3,000 hd 10,000 hd 20, 000 hd 10
Turkeys 16,500 hd 55,000 hd 110,000 hd 55
Laying Hens and 9,000 hd 30,000 hd 60,000 hd 30
Broilers (continuous overflow watering in facility)
Laying Hens and 9,000 hd 30,000 hd 60,000 hd 30
Broilers
(liquid handling system in confinement facility)
Ducks 1,500 hd 5,000 hd 10,000 hd
101
5 Classes of Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations
A Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation is defined as a lot, yard, corral, building or other area where animals have been, are, or will be stabled or confined for a total of 45 days or more during any 12-month period, and where crops, vegetation, forage growth, or post harvest residues are not sustained over any portion of the lot or facility. Two or more animal feeding operations under common ownership are single animal operation if they adjoin each other, or if they use a common area, or system for disposal of manure.
For the purpose of these regulations, Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations are divided into the following classes:
ANIMAL UNITS
Class A 2,000 or more
Class B 1,000 to 1,999
Class C 300 to 999
Class D 0 to 300 (Potential water pollution hazard)
Class E 0 to 300 (No pollution hazard)
Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation Permit Requirements
Owner of Class A, Class B, Class C, and Class D Concentrated Animal Feeding
Operations are required to complete a permit application whenever any of the following occur:
1. A new Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation is proposed where one does not exist.
2. An expansion is proposed beyond what a current permit allows.
3. A cumulative expansion by 300 animal units, after date , of existing concentrated animal feeding operation that does not have a permit.
4. A change in ownership.
5. An existing concentrated animal feeding operation is to be restocked after being idle for five (5) or more years.
6. A signed complaint has been received by the City Zoning Officer or South Dakota Department of Environment and Natural Resources and after inspection reveals that the Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation is in violation of City or State regulations.
102
Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation Control Requirements
1. No Significant Contribution of Pollution
In general, no Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation shall be constructed, located, or operated so as to create a significant contribution of pollution.
2. State General Permit
Class A and B Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations shall obtain a State General Permit pertaining to the animal species of the Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation. A City permit may be approved conditioned on receiving a State permit.
Classes C and D Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations will be required to obtain a State General Permit if either of the following occur:
a. If an earthen storage basin or lagoon is used for manure storage.
b. The Board of Adjustment decides conditions require a State permit.
3. Nutrient Management Plan
Classes A, B, C, and D Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations shall submit a Nutrient Management Plan to the State. The applicant shall develop, maintain, and follow a nutrient management plan to ensure safe disposal of manure and protection of surface and ground water. The South Dakota Department of Environment & Natural Resources must approve the plan prior to land application of any wastes. Due to crop rotation, site changes, and other operational changes, the producer should update the plan annually to reflect the current operation and crops grown on the application sites. The applicant shall collect, store, and dispose of liquid and solid manure according to recognized practices of good agricultural management. The economic benefits derived from agricultural operations carried out at the land disposal site are secondary to the proper and safe disposal of the manure.
A generic nutrient management plan that the applicant may use in developing a nutrient management plan is available from the South Dakota Department of Environment & Natural Resources. The generic nutrient management plan is based on application of nitrogen. The applicant may use other plans, provided the alternate plan contains all the information necessary to determine compliance with conditions of this general permit. Nitrogen, in addition to that allowed in the nutrient management plan, may be applied up to the amounts as indicated by soil or crop nitrogen test results that are necessary to obtain the realistic crop yield.
The South Dakota Department of Environment & Natural Resources recommends and encourages producers to develop nutrient management plans for other nutrients such as phosphorous and potassium. Over application of these nutrients may lead to water quality problems in area lakes and streams and result in potential damage to the producer’s land and crop.
The applicant must maintain records to show compliance with the plan.
The plan must comply with City Manure Application Setbacks.
Land spreading agreements shall be provided if applicant does not have minimum acreage to apply animal manure. Animal manure shall be applied within five miles of the Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation.
103
4. Manure Management and Operation Plan
Classes A, B, C, and D Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations shall submit a Manure Management and Operation Plan.
A. Plan must include:
1. The location and specifics of proposed animal manure facilities.
2. The operation procedures and maintenance of manure facilities.
3. Plans and specifications must be prepared or approved by a registered professional engineer, or a South Dakota licensed Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS) engineer. Waste treatment facilities will require inspection by an engineer and as-built plans to be submitted to the City Zoning Officer.
4. Animal manure shall not be stored longer than two years.
5. Manure containment structures shall provide for a minimum design volume of 270 days of storage.
6. Producers shall keep records on manure applications on individual fields which document acceptable manure and nutrient management practices have been followed. These records shall include soils test results for surface two feet of soil, actual and projected crop yields, nutrient analysis of manure, and information about date, rate and method of manure applications for individual fields.
7. Manure transportation plan; manure transportation is limited to five Miles from the place of origin.
B. As a condition of the permit, the City Board of Adjustment may require the producer to participate in environmental training programs and become a certified livestock manager.
C. The Board of Adjustment may require manure to be injected or incorporated into the soil.
5. Management Plan for Fly and Odor Control Classes A, B, C, and D Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations shall dispose of dead animals, manure and wastewater in such a manner as to control odors or flies. A management plan is required for submission of a permit. The City Board of Adjustment will review the need for control measures on a site specific basis, taking in consideration prevailing wind direction and topography. The following procedures to control flies and odors should be considered in a management control plan.
A. Operational plans for manure collection, storage treatment and use must be kept updated and implemented.
B. Methods to be utilized to dispose of dead animals should be included in the management plan.
C. Plant trees and shrubs to reduce wind movement of odors away from buildings, manure storage ponds and/or lagoons.
D. Provide adequate slope and drainage to remove surface water from pens and keep pen area dry so odor production is minimized.
E. Store solid manure in containment areas having good drainage to minimize odor production.
F. Remove manure from open pens as frequently as possible to minimize odor production.
G. Consider use of covers on open storage systems or liquid manure systems to reduce odor production.
H. Avoid spreading manure on weekends, holidays, and evenings during warm season when neighbors may be involved in outdoor recreation activities.
I. Avoid spreading during calm and humid days, since these conditions restrict the dispersion and dilution of odors.
J. Incorporation of manure must occur within 24 hours of open air spreading.
104
6. Required Setbacks (defined as radius) and Separation Distance for new Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations and those Expanding by 300 or More Animal Units after (date) .
MINIMUMS
CLASS A CLASS B CLASS C CLASS D & E
Established Residences 3,960 feet* 2,640 feet 2,640 feet 2,640 feet not including owners/operators
Churches, Businesses and 5,280 feet* 5,280 feet 2,640 feet 2,640 feet
Commercially Zoned Areas
Incorporated Municipality 3 miles 2 miles 5,280 feet 2,640 feet
Private Wells & Public Water 2,640 feet 1,760 feet 1,320 feet 1,320 feet
Supplies other than the operator
Lakes and Streams 500 feet 500 feet 200 feet 200 feet
Classified as Fisheries as identified by the State
Federal, State & City Road 300 feet 300 feet 200 feet 200 feet
ROW Housed
Federal, State & City Road 300 feet 300 feet 200 feet 200 feet
ROW Open Lot
Township Road ROW Housed 150 feet 150 feet 150 feet 150 feet
Township Road ROW 150 feet 150 feet 150 feet 150 feet
Open Lot
Designated 100 Year Prohibited
Floodplain
*plus 1,000 feet for 1,000 additional units
Proposals for new Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations, on a site-by-site basis, shall be set back from adjoining property lines as determined by the City Board of Adjustment.
7. Exemptions from Separation Distance
1. If a Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation is closer than the separation distances provided in these regulations, the applicant can request a written waiver from the separation distance. The residence, business, church, school, municipality, or public use area may waive the distance requirement. The waiver is recorded with the City Register of Deeds in order that any future owners can be informed.
105
2. Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation expansion of 300 animal units or more can apply to City Board of Adjustment for a variance to the required setback and separation distance regulations.
8. New Residences
Anyone establishing a new residence must comply with the minimum setbacks as stated in Section 6, Established Residences, upon determining the class of the concentrated animal feeding operation where the new residence will be located.
The following uses are prohibited in Zone A:
1. New Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations after adoption of this ordinance.
2. Existing Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations will not be able to expand beyond a total of 300 animal units.
3. Earthen storage basins and lagoons.
4. Stockpiling of solid waste.
The following uses are prohibited in Zone B:
1. New and expansion of Class A and B Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations.
2. Earthen storage basins and lagoons.
The following uses are allowed in Zone B by Special Exception:
1. New Class D and expansion of existing Class D up to 999 animals units (Class C).
The City may require soil borings to determine impermeable material between land surface and the aquifer.
Each application for a new or expanded Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation (CAFO) will be reviewed by the Board of Adjustment on a site specific basis. The Board of Adjustment reserves the right to increase the minimum required setbacks and separation distance on a site specific review, based on one or more of the following considerations.
A. A concentration of CAFOs in the area exists or would occur which may pose an air or water quality concern.
B. Due to topography and prevailing wind direction, additional setback and separation distance is appropriate to safeguard air or water quality.
C. A Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation is in excess of 5,000 animal units.
9. Manure Application Setbacks
A. The following manure application setbacks apply to all classes of Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations.
CITY MANURE APPLICATION SETBACKS
SURFACE OR IRRIGATION INCORPORATED OR
CATEGORY APPLIED INJECTED
Lake, Rivers and Streams 1,000 feet 100 feet (lake)
Classified as Fisheries from 50 feet (river & stream) high water mark
Streams and Lake 1,000 feet 300 feet classified as Drinking
Water Supplies
Public Roads 25 feet (surface) from 10 feet from right-of right-of-way way
300 feet (irrigation)
106
Area of 10 or more 300 feet (surface) 300 feet
Residences 1,000 feet (irrigation)
Public Wells 1,000 feet 1,000 feet
Private Shallow Wells 1,000 feet 250 feet
A Residence other than the 1,000 feet 300 feet
Operator
Natural or Manmade 500 feet 50 feet
Drainage
B. The City Board of Adjustment may require liquid manure to be incorporated or injected in order to minimize air and water quality impacts.
C. Requests for application of liquid manure by means of irrigation will be reviewed by the Board of Adjustment on a site-specific basis. Impact on air and water quality will be taking into consideration.
10. Standards for Special Exceptions
A. The City Board of Adjustment may request information relating to a Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation not contained in these regulations.
B. The City Board of Adjustment may impose, in addition to the standards and requirements set forth in these regulation, additional conditions which the Board of Adjustment considers necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
C. Special Exceptions shall be in effect only as long as sufficient land specified for spreading purposes is available for such purposes and other provisions of the permit are being adhered to.
D. When considering an application, the City Board of Adjustment will take into consideration current and past violations relating to Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations that the applicant has an interest in.
E. Permit applicants will be required to file a letter of assurances as required by the Board of Adjustment. The letter of assurances will be prepared by the zoning officer and signed by both the applicant and the zoning officer.
F. A neighboring township that adjoins between two counties will follow the regulations of the City that is most restrictive.
G. An applicant’s record on environmental issues, employment, and labor compliance must be submitted with the application. If the City Planning and Zoning Commission finds the person is a “bad actor” then the applicant will be denied a permit.
11. Facility Road Maintenance Agreements
All facilities within City of Mobridge that cause excessive maintenance of City or Township roads shall be required to have a written agreement with the Township Board or City Highway Superintendent, stating acceptance responsibility for all additional costs incurred by the facility in maintenance of said road. Excessive maintenance shall be defined as: All work and material costs incurred over and above the average cost of maintaining that specific type of road within that local governmental units jurisdiction. The terms of said agreement shall be determined prior to the issuance of a conditional use permit.
12. Information Required for Class A and B Concentrated Animal Feeding Operational Permit.
A. Owner’s name, address and telephone numbers.
B. Legal descriptions of site and site plan.
107
C. Number and type of animals.
D. Nutrient management plan.
E. Manure management and operation plan.
F. Management plan for fly and odor control.
G. Information on ability to meet designated setback requirements including site plan to scale.
H. General permit from South Dakota Department of Environment & Natural Resources if available for animal species.
I. Review of plans and specifications and nutrient management plan by the South Dakota Department of Environment & Natural Resources.
J. Information on soils, shallow aquifers, designated wellhead protection areas, and 100-year floodplain designation.
K. Notification of whomever maintains the access road (township, City and state).
L. Notification of public water supply officials.
M. Any other information as contained in the application and requested by the City Zoning Officer.
N. Written notification to landowners or tenants living within the setback area to the proposed facility, and publication of notice in official City newspaper at least once.
O. A full written plan must be submitted at least four weeks in advance of the public hearing in the City courthouse or other location, available for public inspection.
P. A copy of the general permit application must be submitted to the City, at the time it is submitted to State Department of Environment and Natural Resources.
Q. A list of owner’s names contracted to do manure land spreading and a legal description of the land must be submitted to the City.
13. Information Required for Class C and D Concentrated Animal Feeding Operational Permit.
A. Owner’s name, address and telephone number.
B. Legal descriptions of site and site plan.
C. Number and type of animals.
D. Nutrient management plan.
E. Manure management and operation plan.
F. Management plan for fly and odor control.
G. Information on ability to meet designated setback requirements, including site plan to scale.
H. Review of plans and specifications and nutrient management plan by the South Dakota Department of Environment & Natural Resources if using lagoon or earthen storage basin.
I. Information on soils, shallow aquifers, designated wellhead protection areas, and 100-year floodplain designation.
J. Notification of whomever maintains the access road (township, City and state).
K. Notification of public water supply officials.
L. Any other information as contained in the application and requested by the City Zoning Officer.
108
APPENDIX D
CITY OF MOBRIDGE SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
An Ordinance establishing rules, regulations, and standards governing the subdivision of the
land within City of Mobridge, South Dakota, and providing harmonious development of the City and its environs for the coordination of streets within subdivisions with other existing or planned streets or with other features of the comprehensive plan of the City for adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light and air, and for a distribution of population and traffic which will tend to create conditions favorable to health, safety, convenience, or prosperity.
Now, therefore, be it enacted by City of Mobridge, South Dakota.
ARTICLE I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 101 - Purpose
These regulations shall be for the purpose of promoting harmonious development through the
implementation of the City of Mobridge Comprehensive Plan.
SECTION 102 - Extent of Regulation
The provisions of these regulations shall apply to every addition to, or subdivision within City
of Mobridge, South Dakota, and their prescribed area of extra-territorial jurisdiction. No plat of a
subdivision of land shall be filed or recorded until it has been submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for their review and then approved by the City of Mobridge Common Council.
SECTION 103 -Definitions
For the purposes of this ordinance, certain terms or words used herein shall be interpreted as
follows:
The word person includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual.
The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number
includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular.
The word shall is mandatory, the word may is permissive.
The words used or occupied included the words intended,
designed, or arranged to be used or occupied.
109
The word lot includes the words plot or parcel.
The word building includes the word structure.
Alley: A public right-of-way which is used primarily as a secondary means of access to the abutting property.
Block: A track or parcel of land bounded by public streets or land, streams, railroads, unplatted lands or a combination thereof.
Comprehensive Plan: A long-range plan for the improvement and development of City of Mobridge, South Dakota, as adopted by the Planning Commission and the City Common Council.
Cul-de-sac: A street having one end connecting with a public street and being terminated as its other end by a vehicular turn-around.
Improvements: Pavements, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, grading street signs, plantings, and other items for the welfare of the property owners and the public.
Lot: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of plotted land, intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development.
Lot of record: A tract of land described as an integral portion of a subdivision plat which is properly recorded in the Register of Deeds Office of City of Mobridge, South Dakota.
Plat: A map, drawing, or chart on which the subdivider's plan of the subdivision is presented and which he submits for approval and which will be recorded in final form.
Right-of-way: A strip of land separating private property from the existing road, street or alley or dedicated in public ownership.
Street: A right-of-way, dedicated to public use, which affords a primary means of access to the abutting property.
Street -major: Provides for the through traffic movement between areas and across the city, and direct access to abutting property; subject to necessary control of entrances, exits and curb use.
Street -collector: Provides for traffic movement between major arteries and local streets, and direct access to abutting property.
Street - local: Provides for direct access to abutting land, and for local traffic movements.
Subdivider: A natural person, firm, co-partnership, association or corporation who submits a proposed subdivision to the Planning Commission.
110
Subdivision: The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into four or more lots, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development.
Water course, drainage way, channel or stream: A natural or man-made depression in which a current of surface run-off water flows following precipitation.
ARTICLE 2 - PROCEDURES
SECTION 201 B Pre-Application
Prior to the subdivision of any land, the subdivider or his/her agent shall discuss informally with the Planning Commission the proposed subdivision with reference to these Subdivision Regulations, the Zoning Ordinance, and the Comprehensive Plan.
SECTION 202 B Preliminary Application Fee
The subdivider shall pay to the Zoning Administrator a preliminary application fee as stated in the approved fee schedule before application.
SECTION 203 B Preliminary Application
The subdivider shall prepare and submit to the Planning Commission the following:
1. Seven (7) copies of the preliminary plat and shall include or be accompanied by the following information:
a) Receipt for preliminary platting fee.
b) Proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not duplicate previously filed plat names.
c) A date, scale, northpoint, and key map showing the general location of the proposed subdivision in relation to surrounding development.
d) Names and addresses of the developer, engineer, surveyor, or landscape architect responsible for the survey or design.
e) Location of boundary lines in relation to section or quarter section lines, including a legal description of the property.
f) Existing contours wherever five (5) feet of deviation occurs.
g) Location, width, and name of existing or platted streets and alleys, railroads, utilities, rights-of-way or easements, parks, and existing structures within the proposed subdivision and their relationship to the same of adjacent subdivisions.
111
h) Zoning classifications and existing and proposed land use.
i) Written and signed statements explaining how and when the subdivider proposes to provide and install all required sewers or other suitable sanitary disposal systems, water supply, pavement, sidewalks, drainage ways, and other required improvements, or in lieu of the completion of such work and installations previous to the final approval of a plat, the City Common Council may accept a bond, in an amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to it, providing for and securing to the municipality the actual construction and installation of such improvements and utilities within a period specified by the City Common Council and expressed in the bond, or in lieu of completion of such work and installations previous to the final approval of a plat for an assessment or other method whereby the municipality is put in an assured position to do said work and make said installations at the cost of the owners of the property within the subdivision.
j) Written and signed statements by the appropriate officials, obtained by the developer, ascertaining the availability of gas, electricity, and water the proposed subdivision.
k) Layout, numbers, and approximate dimensions of lots and the number of each block.
2. After receipt of the preliminary plat applications, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall distribute said applications to the appropriate officials, who shall examine the proposed plat in terms of compliance with all laws, regulations, and codes of the City. The findings of the examinations shall be returned to the Commission within fifteen (15) days.
3. The Commission, upon receipt of the examination findings, shall approve or disapprove the preliminary plat application at the time of their next regularly scheduled meeting. Approval of the preliminary plat by the Commission shall be void at the end of six (6) months unless a final plat has been submitted.
4. Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the Commission, the subdivider may proceed
with the preparation of the final plat.
SECTION 204 B Final Application Fees
The subdivider shall pay to the Zoning Administrator a final application fee after preliminary approval and before final application. The fee shall be as stated in the approved fee schedule.
SECTION 205 - Final Plat Application
The subdivider shall prepare and submit to the Planning and Zoning Commission the following, prepared by an engineer or land surveyor registered in the State of South Dakota:
1. Seven (7) copies of the final plat at a uniform size of fifteen (15) inches by twenty-six
(26) inches or eight and one-half (8-1/2) inches by fourteen (14) inches. All final plat
submittals shall be in conformance with the design standards set forth in Article V of this
Ordinance and shall include or be accompanied by the following information, in addition to that already submitted on the preliminary application:
112
a) The exact location and layout of lots, streets, alleys, easements, and other public ground with accurate dimensions in feet and decimals of feet, interior angles, length of radii and/or arcs of all curves, together with the names of all streets.
b) Location and description of all monuments.
c) Location by section, township, range, City, and state, including descriptive boundaries
of the subdivision, based on an accurate traverse giving angular and linear dimensions
that must be mathematically close.
d) Notarized certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any titled interest in or lien upon the land subdivided consenting to the plat, including dedication of all
streets, alleys and public ways, parks or other public grounds, or lands for charitable,
religious, or educational purposes, if any, and granting easements.
e) Certificate signed by the City Finance Officer stating that there are no regular or special taxes due or delinquent against the property described in the plat.
f) Certificate signed by the Director of Equalization approving the plat.
g) One copy of any private restriction or covenants affecting the subdivision or any part
thereof.
2. Any subdivision of land containing four or more lots, no matter how described, must be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval or disapproval. Upon action by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the plat shall then be submitted for approval or disapproval by the City Common Council. Any plat submitted for
approval by the City Common Council shall contain the name and address of a person to whom notice of hearing may be sent; and no plat shall be acted upon by the City Common Council without affording a hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of which shall be sent by mail to said address not less than five days before the date fixed therefore. Also any plat approved by the City Common Council shall require the signature of the City Finance Officer and the Mayor of the City of Mobridge.
3. The plat shall be approved or disapproved by the City Common Council within sixty (60) days after submission thereof; otherwise such plat shall be deemed to have been approved and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the City Common Council on demand; provided, however, that the applicant for the approval may waive this requirement and consent to the extension of such period. The ground of disapproval of any plat shall be stated upon the records of the City Common Council.
5. The approval of a plat by the City Common Council shall not be deemed to constitute or effect any acceptance by the municipality or public of the dedication of any street or other ground shown on the plat.
6.
113
5. When any map, plan, plat or replat is tendered for filing in the office of the Register of
Deeds, it shall be the duty of any such officer to determine whether such proposed map,
plan, plat or replat is or is not subject to the provisions of the Ordinance and whether the
endorsements required by this Ordinance appear thereon, and no register of deeds or deputy shall accept for record, or record, any such map, plan, plat or replat unless and until the same shall have been approved by the City Common Council of the City of Mobridge pursuant to this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 3 - DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION 301 - General Standards
Land within the proposed subdivision which the Planning and Zoning Commission finds to be unsuitable for subdividing due to flooding or bad drainage shall not be subdivided until the objectionable features have been eliminated or until adequate safeguards against such objectionable features are provided.
SECTION 302 - Streets and Alleys
1. Streets in the subdivision normally shall connect with streets already dedicated in adjoining or adjacent subdivisions.
2. Minor residential streets should be planned as to discourage through traffic. Permitted culde-sacs shall not be longer than four hundred (400) feet and shall terminate with a turnaround having a curbline diameter of not less than eighty (80) feet.
3. Centerline off-sets of intersecting streets shall be avoided, but where necessary shall be not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet.
4. Blocks in residential subdivisions shall be not less than three hundred (300) feet long and not more than one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet long.
5. Half streets shall be prohibited except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision or where it is found to be practical to require the dedication of the other half when adjoining property is subdivided.
6. Under normal conditions streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, except where topography or other conditions justify variations. More than
four (4) approaches to any intersection shall be prohibited.
7. Alleys shall be provided in Commercial and Industrial districts except where other definite and assured provision is made for service access.
8. The right-of-way widths and pavements widths (back-to-back of curb) for interior streets and alleys included in any subdivision shall not be less than the minimum dimensions for each classification as follows:
114
TYPE PAVEMENT WIDTH R.O.W
Major Arterial Streets 66' 80'
Local Streets 46' 66'
Alleys 16' 20'
SECTION 303 - Lots
1. Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles to straight street lines or radial to
curved street lines.
2. Every lot shall abut and have access to a public street.
3. Double frontage lots shall be avoided except where they back upon a major street.
SECTION 304 B Easements
1. Easements on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for sanitary sewers where necessary and shall be a total of at least ten (10) feet wide on each side.
2. Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way of such width as will be adequate for both water flow and maintenance operations.
ARTICLE 4 - IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION 401 - IMPROVEMENTS
It shall be the responsibility of the developer to install in accordance with plans, specifications, and data approved by the City of Mobridge Common Council certain required improvements as follows:
1. Staking - the external boundaries and corners of each block and lot shall be monumented by iron rods, pipes, or pins not less than one (1) inch in diameter and extending at least twenty-four (24) inches below grade.
2. Street Grading - all full width streets located entirely within the boundary of the
subdivision, except major and collector streets, shall be graded to a minimum width of nine (9) feet back of both curb lines to within six (6) inches of the grade approved by the designated engineer of the City of Mobridge.
3. Street Surfacing - the streets shall be paved in accordance with street improvement and paving standards and regulations approved by the City of Mobridge, South Dakota.
4. Sanitary Sewer - where a municipal sanitary sewer is accessible by gravity flow within 100 feet of the final plat, the subdivider shall submit to the City Water Superintendent the plans for connection with a trunk line to the existing system. The City shall then inform the subdivider of
115
the trunk size requirements as per anticipated development in the general area. Where a municipal sanitary sewer is not accessible by gravity flow within 100 feet of the final plat, the subdivider shall make provision for the disposal of sewerage as required by law. Where a municipal sanitary sewer accessible by gravity connection is not within 100 feet of the final plat, but where plans for the installation of city sanitary sewers within such proximity to the plat have been prepared and construction will commence within twelve (12) months from the date of the approval of the plat, the subdivider shall be required to install sewers in conformity with such plans.
5. Water Mains - where a public water supply is within one hundred (100) feet of a proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall install, or have installed, a connection to each lot prior to the paving of the street, as according to the City Code(s) requirement(s). Where a public water supply is not available, each lot in a subdivision shall be furnished with a water supply system and proper provisions for the maintenance thereof. Any lot so serviced shall have a minimum area of one-half (1/2) acre. The design of any such system shall be subject to the approval of the State Department of Health.
ARTICLE 5 - ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 501 - Enforcement
1. No plat of any subdivision within the application of this Ordinance shall be entitled to be filed or recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds or have any validity until such plat has been prepared, approved, and acknowledged in the manner prescribed by this
Ordinance.
2. It shall be unlawful to sell, trade, or otherwise convey any lot or parcel of land for building purposes as a part of or in conformity with any plat, plan, or re-plat of any subdivision within the area subject to application of this Ordinance unless said plan, plat, or re-plat shall have been approved as prescribed by this Ordinance and filed and recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds.
ARTICLE 6 - PENALTY
SECTION 601 - Penalty
It is declared unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate any of the terms or provisions of this Ordinance. Violation thereof shall be a misdemeanor and may be punishable by a fine established by the City for each and every day that any violator fails to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance.
Any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided.
116
Nothing herein contained shall prevent City of Mobridge from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent any violation.
ARTICLE 7 - SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
SECTION 701 - Severability Clause
Should any section or provision of these regulations be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the regulations as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
ARTICLE 8 - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
SECTION 801 - Conflict with Other Regulations
No final plat of land within the force and effect of the Zoning Ordinance shall be approved unless it conforms to these Regulations. Whenever there is a discrepancy between standards or dimensions noted herein and those contained in the Zoning Ordinance, building code, or other official regulations or ordinances, the most restrictive shall apply.
117
APPENDIX E - RE-PLATTING LAND
SECTION 101 – Pre-Application
Prior to dividing or re-platting any land, the owner, person(s) responsible, or his/her agent shall
discuss informally with the Planning Commission the proposed area to be re-platted with
reference to Appendix E of the Zoning Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan.
SECTION 102 – Preliminary Application Fee
The owner, person(s) responsible, or his/her agent shall pay to the City Finance Officer a
preliminary application fee that is on file in the office of the Finance Officer before application.
SECTION 103 – Preliminary Application
The owner, person(s) responsible, or his/her agent shall prepare and submit to the Planning
Commission the following:
A. Five (5) copies of the preliminary plat at a uniform size of fifteen (15) inches by twenty-six
(26) inches or eight and one-half (8-1/2) inches by fourteen (14) inches. All preliminary
submittals shall be in conformance with the design standards set forth in Article III of
Appendix D of this Ordinance relating to Sub-divisions and shall include or be
accompanied by the following information:
1. Receipt for preliminary platting fee.
2. Proposed name of the division of land, which shall not duplicate previously filed plat
names.
3. A date, scale, northpoint, and key map showing the general location of the proposed
subdivision in relation to surrounding area.
4. Names and addresses of the developer, engineer, surveyor, or landscape architect
responsible for the survey or design.
5. Location of boundary lines in relation to section or quarter section lines, including a
legal description of the property.
6. Existing contours wherever five (5) feet of deviation occurs.
7. Location, width, and name of existing or platted streets and alleys, railroads, utilities,
rights-of-way or easements, parks, and existing structures within the proposed division
and their relationship to the same of adjacent divisions or subdivisions.
8. Zoning classifications and existing and proposed land use.
9. Written and signed statements explaining how and when the owner or person(s)
responsible proposes to provide and install all required sewers or other suitable sanitary
disposal systems, water supply, pavement, sidewalks, drainage ways, and other required
improvements, if needed, or in lieu of the completion of such work and installations
previous to the final approval of a plat, the Council may accept a bond, in an amount
and with surety and conditions satisfactory to it, providing for and securing to the
municipality the actual construction and installation of such improvements and utilities,
if needed, within a period specified by the Council and expressed in the bond, or in lieu
of completion of such work and installations previous to the final approval of a plat for
118
an assessment or other method whereby the municipality is put in an assured position to
do said work and make said installations at the cost of the owners of the property within
the divided area/land.
10. Written and signed statements by the appropriate officials, obtained by the owner or
person(s) responsible, ascertaining the availability of gas, electricity, and water the
proposed divided area/land.
11. Layout, numbers, and approximate dimensions of lots and the number of each block, if
required.
B. After receipt of the preliminary plat applications, the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall distribute said applications to the appropriate officials, who shall examine the
proposed plat in terms of compliance with all laws, regulations, and codes of the City. The
findings of the examinations shall be returned to the Commission within fifteen (15) days.
C. The Commission, upon receipt of the examination findings, shall approve or disapprove
the preliminary plat application at the time of their next regularly scheduled meeting.
Approval of the preliminary plat by the Commission shall be void at the end of six (6)
months unless a final plat has been submitted.
D. Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the Commission, the owner, person(s)
responsible, or his/her agent may proceed with the preparation of the final plat.
SECTION 104 – Final Application Fees
The owner or person(s) responsible shall pay to the City Finance Officer a final application fee after preliminary approval and before final application. The fee amount shall be on file in the Office of the Finance Officer.
SECTION 105 – Final Plat Application
The owner, person(s) responsible, of his/her agent shall prepare and submit to the Planning and
Zoning Commission the following, prepared by an engineer or land surveyor registered in the
State of South Dakota:
A. Five (5) copies of the final plat at a uniform size of fifteen (15) inches by twenty-six (26)
inches or eight and one-half (8-1/2) inches by fourteen (14) inches. All final plat submittals
shall be in conformance with the design standards set forth in Article V of Appendix D of
this Ordinance and shall include or be accompanied by the following information, in
addition to that already submitted on the preliminary application:
1. The exact location and layout of lots, streets, alleys, easements, and other public ground
with accurate dimensions in feet and decimals of feet, interior angles, length of radii
and/or arcs of all curves, together with the names of all streets.
2. Location and description of all monuments.
3. Location by section, township, range, county, and state, including descriptive
boundaries of the divided area/land, based on an accurate traverse giving angular and
linear dimensions that must be mathematically close.
4. Notarized certificate signed and acknowledged by all parties having any titled interest in
119
or lien upon the land divided consenting to the plat, including dedication of all streets,
alleys and public ways, parks or other public grounds, or lands for charitable, religious,
or educational purposes, if any, and granting easements.
5. Certificate signed by the County Treasurer stating that there are no regular or special
taxes due or delinquent against the property described in the plat.
6. Certificate signed by the City Engineer approving the plat.
7. One copy of any private restriction or covenants affecting the divided area/land or any
part thereof.
B. Any division of land containing two or more lots, no matter how described, must be
submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for approval.
Any plat submitted for approval shall contain the name and address of a person to whom notice
of hearing may be sent; and no plat shall be acted upon by the Council without affording a
hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of which shall be sent by mail to said address not
less than five days before the date fixed therefore.
C. The plat shall be approved or disapproved within sixty (60) days after submission thereof;
otherwise such plat shall be deemed to have been approved and a certificate to that effect
shall be issued by the Council on demand; provided, however, that the applicant for the
approval may waive this requirement and consent to the extension of such period. The
ground of disapproval of any plat shall be stated upon the records of the Council.
D. The approval of a plat by the Council shall not be deemed to constitute or effect any
acceptance by the municipality or public of the dedication of any street or other ground
shown on the plat.
When any map, plan, plat or re-plat is tendered for filing in the office of the Register of Deeds, it shall be the duty of any such officer to determine whether such proposed map, plan, plat or re-plat is or is not subject to the provisions of the Ordinance and whether the endorsements required by this Ordinance appear thereon, and no register of deeds or deputy shall accept for record, or record, any such map, plan, plat or re-plat unless and until the same shall have been approved by the City Council of such municipality.
120
APPENDIX F - PROCEDURE FOR MUNICIPAL ANNEXATION
Annexation by Petition
The governing body of a municipality, upon receipt of a written petition describing the boundaries of any territory contiguous to that municipality sought to be annexed to that municipality, may by resolution include such territory or any part within such municipality if the petition is signed by not less than three-fourths of the registered voters and by the owners of not less than three-fourths of the value of the territory sought to be annexed to the municipality.
For purposes of this section, “contiguous” includes territory separated from the municipality by reason of intervening ownership of land used as a golf course or any land owned by the State of South Dakota or any subdivision thereof. (SDCL 9-4-1)
Annexation by Resolution
The governing body may by resolution annex property into the city which is contiguous with the
corporate limits and either platted or unplatted. (SDCL 9-4-4, 9-4-5)
Step 1 Study required before annexation without petition. Except as provided by 9-4-1, before a
municipality may extend its boundaries to include contiguous territory, the governing body shall
conduct a study to determine the need for the contiguous territory and to identify the resources
necessary to extend the municipal boundaries. (9-4-4.1)
Step 2 Based on the study provided for in 9-4-4.1, the governing body may adopt a resolution of intent to extend its boundaries. The resolution, in towns/cities of 1000 or more persons per last federal census, shall include:
1. The description and boundaries of the territory to be annexes;
2. That ample and suitable resources exist to accommodate the orderly growth or
development of the contiguous territory;
3. The municipal utilities and a major street network are considered in terms of the
proposed boundary extension and that there is a definite timetable upon which
municipal service will be extended into the contiguous territory;
4. The approximate cost of the extended service to the residents of the contiguous territory
and the municipality;
5. The estimated difference in tax assessment rate for the residents in the contiguous
territory;
6. That exclusions and irregularities in boundary lines are not the result of arbitrariness;
7. That there is reasonable present or demonstrable future need for annexing the
contiguous territory; and
121
8. That population and census data indicate that the municipality has or may experience
growth or development beyond its present boundaries. (SDCL 9-4-4.2)
Step 3 A proposed Resolution of Intent to annex is drafted with the date of public hearing and is sent by certified mail to all affected property owners and the County Commission. Copies must e sent not less than ten days prior to the public hearing date. See SDCL 9-4-4.3,9-4-4.4.
Step 4 The hearing is held by the city council and the Resolution of Intent is adopted and published and becomes effective twenty days after publication.
Step 5 Within sixty days after adoption, copies of the Resolution of Intent are mailed to all property owners affected and the County Commission by certified mail.
Step 6 If the area to be annexed includes unplatted property, a resolution approving such annexation is adopted by the County Commission, published, and becomes effective unless referred to a vote. See 94-5.
Step 7 After adoption of the Resolution of Intent and approval by the County Commission if
necessary, the city council holds a public hearing and adopts an Annexation Resolution. This may include all or part of the area described in the Resolution of Intent. The Annexation Resolution is published and becomes final after twenty days unless referred to a vote.
For the purpose of exclusion, it can be found in 9-4-6 through 9-4-10.
122
APPENDIX G - PROCEDURE FOR REZONING
Procedure for Rezoning
1. The owner or his/her agent petitions to have their property rezoned and pay the required fee. The fee amount shall be on file in the Office of the Finance Officer.
2. The Planning Commission must hold a public hearing on the rezoning request. At least fifteen
(15) days before the Planning Commission public hearing, the Zoning Administrator publishes
a notice of the hearing in the City’s newspapers.
3. Planning Commission hearing is held; they recommend either approval or disapproval of the
rezoning to the City.
4. Notice is given by the City Finance Officer in the newspaper once a week for at least two (2)
successive weeks before a hearing of the City Commission.
5. Abutting landowners must be notified by certified or registered mail at least seven (7) days
before the hearing, that a hearing will take place concerning rezoning of the property by the
City Commission.* The individual landowner is responsible for notifying all abutting
landowners.
6. Commissioners hold hearing, take action. If approved it becomes effective twenty (20) days
after a summary of the action is published in the City’s newspapers.
7. The City Finance Officer files the certified copy of any maps or charts with the Register of
Deeds.
8. Any changes to zoning district boundaries must be made in accordance with 4.0102, Zoning
Map Changes.
*IT IS ADVISABLE FOR THE NOTICE TO LIST BOTH THE PLANNING COMMISSION
MEETING DATE AND THE REQUIRED CITY COMMISSION MEETING DATES. THIS WAY, IF THERE IS ANY OPPOSITION, IT WILL SURFACE AT THE PLANNING COMMISSION LEVEL AND MAY EFFECT THEIR (PLANNING COMMISSION) RECOMMENDATION TO THE FULL BOARD OF CITY COMMISSIONERS.
IT IS ALSO TO BE NOTED THAT THE LANDOWNER REQUESTING AN AREA
REZONED OR A SUBDIVISION BUILT IS RESPONSIBLE FOR GETTING THE PLAT
PREPARED (WHETHER BY AN ENGINEER OR OTHER SERVICE), PAYING FOR THE
PLAT INFORMATION, AND TURNING THE APPROPRIATE PLAT DOCUMENTS
OVER TO THE CITY TO BE FILED.
123
124
125
126
APPENDIX I
THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP IS LOCATED AT CITY HALL
127
APPENDIX J
VEHICLE STORAGE YARD REQUIREMENTS
A Vehicle Storage Yard is a temporary storage yard for storing wrecked, abandoned or dismantled motor vehicles that maybe returned to the owner or sold for recycled metal or parts to a junk and/or salvage yard within sixty (60) days of the towing date, an Vehicle Storage Yard does not include Salvage or Junk Yards.
Vehicle Storage Yards, incident to the operation of an Automotive Tow Business, or any type of auto service, repair, body or dealership may be established within Highway Commercial, Light Industrial, or Heavy Industrial Districts, pursuant to the zoning laws of the City of Mobridge for the storage of vehicles and subject to the following requirements:
1. Any Vehicle Storage Yard located in the Highway Commercial District must have a minimum lot of half (1/2) an acre and shall hold a maximum of ten (10) vehicles. Any business subject to the Vehicle Storage Yard requirements located in the Highway Commercial District that wishes to hold more than ten (10) vehicles shall have a separate, off-site, Vehicle Storage Yard in either the Light Industrial or Heavy Industrial District subject to the applicable requirements. Exceptions will be reviewed for approval by the Planning and Zoning Board.
2. Any Vehicle Storage Yard located in the Light Industrial District or the Heavy Industrial District must have a minimum lot of half (1/2) an acre and shall hold a maximum of twenty (20) vehicles. For each additional half (1/2) an acre added after the first half (1/2) acre, an additional twenty (20) vehicles per half (1/2) acre may be added. Exceptions will be reviewed for approval by the Planning and Zoning Board.
3. Vehicle Storage Yards and the area surrounding the yard shall be kept in compliance with all nuisance and zoning ordinances and shall be regularly maintained.
4. Vehicle Storage Yards located in the Light Industrial or Heavy Industrial Zones shall be completely enclosed by a solid fence having a minimum height of six (6) feet up to a maximum height of eight (8) feet.
5. Vehicle Storage Yards located in the Highway Commercial Zone do not need to be enclosed by a fence. However, if the property owner wishes to enclose a Vehicle Storage Yard located in the Highway Commercial Zone, the fence shall be a minimum height of six (6) feet up to a maximum height of eight (8) feet with a minimum of one (1) side of the fence being chain link leaving the Vehicle Storage Yard open to public view. This, Section 5 of Appendix J, is also subject to Section 10 of Appendix J.
6. Vehicle storage yards shall be used for the temporary storage of vehicles from which major parts have not been removed, and which are capable of being made fully operable or sold to a Salvage or Junk Yard.
7. Vehicle parts shall not be stored, kept or sold within Vehicle Storage Yards.
8. Vehicle parts shall not be taken or sold from vehicles stored within a Vehicle Storage Yard.
128
9. Vehicles stored in a Vehicle Storage Yard must be parked neatly in rows and meet or exceed all City, County, State and Federal laws governing the same.
10. Any Vehicle Storage Yard located in the Highway Commercial Zone that abuts residentially zoned property shall have a solid fence with a minimum height of six (6) feet up to a maximum height of eight (8) feet along the Vehicle Storage Yard’s property line abutting the residentially zoned property.
11. No traffic shall be generated by a tow or vehicle repair business in greater volumes than would normally be expected.
12. No equipment or process shall be used in a tow or vehicle repair business which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot.
13. Vehicle Storage Yards shall comply with all Local, State, and Federal environmental regulations.
129
APPENDIX K - VEHICLE REPAIR BUSINESS REQUIREMENTS
A Vehicle Repair Business is any land, building, structure, or premises used for repair, alteration, restoration, painting, cleaning, finishing of automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, boats, and other vehicles. The term “repairing” shall not include the rebuilding, dismantling or storage of wrecked or junked vehicles. A repair shop does not include a junkyard/salvage yard, an impound lot, or an automobiles gas/service station, or a business whose main income is derived from the sale of vehicles. Parking and/or storage of repairable motor vehicles on property shall not exceed ten (10) spaces per every one thousand square feet of Net Assignable Square Feet (NASF).
Vehicle Repair Businesses, incident to the operation of an automotive repair business, may be established within the following zoned districts: General Commercial, Highway Commercial, Light Industrial, and Heavy Industrial pursuant to the zoning laws of the City of Mobridge for Vehicle Repair Business under the following conditions and requirements:
1. Parking or storage of repairable vehicles on property shall not exceed ten (10) spaced per every one thousand square feet (10002ft.) of Net Assignable Square Feet (NASF).
2. All active outdoor vehicle repair work shall be completed within one (1) year from documented repair estimate or the vehicle shall be removed from the property. Temporarily taking the vehicle indoors for repair does not reset the one-year timeframe.
3. All vehicle repair businesses shall comply with the following:
a. Shall have a repair or estimate bill per vehicle;
b. Only twenty-five percent (25%) of allowable vehicles can remain on the property for a period longer than forty-five (45) days and no vehicle shall remain on property for a period exceeding one (1) year.
4. No abandoned or junk vehicles may be kept on the property as defined under Mobridge Municipality Code 9.12.1.
5. Vehicle repair work shall not include:
a. The dismantling or wrecking of any vehicles; or
b. The storage or keeping of inoperable, damaged or wrecked vehicles, other than those awaiting immediate repair.
6. All fluids, including but not limited to, oil, gasoline, transmission flue, windshield washer fluid, hydraulic oil, and brake fluid, as well as batteries from vehicles shall be stored, disposed, or recycled according to state and federal regulations.
7. No traffic shall be generated by such repair businesses in greater volumes than would normally be expected.
8. No equipment or process shall be used in such repair businesses which created noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the premises.